SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



U< s v»at. it 

My ' Pis *es. Carded 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOLUME 107 

NUMBERS 3378-3390 




UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

WASHINGTON : 1959 



ADVERTISEMENT 

The scientific publications of the National Museum include two 
series,, known, respectively, as Proceedings and Bulletin. 

The Proceedings, begun in 1878, are intended primarily as a medium 
for the publication of original papers, based on the collections of the 
National Museum, that set forth newly acquired facts in biology, 
anthropology, and geology, with descriptions of new forms and 
revisions of limited groups. Copies of each paper, in pamphlet form, 
are distributed as published to libraries and scientific organizations 
and to specialists and others interested in the different subjects. 

The dates at which these separate papers are published are recorded 
in the tables of contents of each of the volumes. 

The present volume is the hundred and seventh of this series. 

The Bulletin, the first of which was issued in 1875, consists of a 
series of separate publications comprising monographs of large 
zoological groups and other general systematic treatises (occasionally 
in several volumes), faunal works, reports of expeditions, catalogs of 
type specimens, special collections, and other material of similar 
nature. The majority of the volumes are octavo in size, but a quarto 
size has been adopted in a few instances in which large plates were 
regarded as indispensable. In the Bulletin series appear volumes 
under the heading Contributions from the United States National 
Herbarium, in octavo form, published by the National Museum since 
1902, which contain papers relating to the botanical collections of the 
Museum. 

Remington Kellogg, 
Director, United States National Museum. 



CONTENTS 



Pages 

Bowman, Thomas E. A new species of Calanopia (Cope- 
poda : Calanoida) from the Caribbean Sea. Three figures. 
No. 3382, published September 4, 1957 39-45 

New species: Calanopia biloba. 

Bowman, Thomas E. A new species of Mysidopsis (Crus- 
tacea : Mysidacea) from the southeastern coast of the 
United States. Two figures. No. 3378, published Febru- 
ary 18, 1957 1-7 

New species : Mysidopsis furca. 

Cooke, C. Wythe. Rhynobrissus cuneus, a new echinoid 
from North Carolina. One plate. No. 3379, published 
June 18, 1957 9-12 

New species: Rhynobrissus cuneus. 

Henderson, Edward P., and Perry, Stuart H. Studies 
of seven siderites. Six figures and twenty- two plates. 
No. 3388, published January 31, 1958 339-403 

Henry, Dora Priaulx. Some littoral barnacles from the 
Tuamotu, Marshall, and Caroline Islands. Three plates. 
No. 3381, published October 21, 1957 25-38 

Illg, Paul L. North American copepods of the family 
Notodelphyidae. Nineteen figures. No. 3390, published 
April 28, 1958 463-649 

New genera: Pygodelphys, Pomphopygus, Scolecodes, Pholeterides. 

New species: Notodelphys affinis, Notodelphyopsis perplexa, Doro- 
pygus bayeri, D. fernaldi, D. hummi, D. mohri, D. profundus, D. 
schellenbergi, D. seclusus, Pygodelphys aquilonaris, Pachypygus 
macer, Pomphopygus pinguis, Gunenotophorus curvipes, Phole- 
terides furtiva. 

Kellogg, Remington. Two additional Miocene porpoises 
from the Calvert Cliffs, Maryland. Thirty plates. No. 
3387, published December 9, 1957 279-337 

New genus: Araeodelphis. 

New species: Araeodelphis natator. 

Ill 



IV CONTENTS 



Loeblich, Alfred R., Jr. The foraminiferal genus Holy- 
physema and two new tropical Pacific species. One plate. 
No. 3385, published January 9, 1958 123-126 

New species: Haly physema bayeri, H. harryi. 

Muesebeck, C. F. W. New Neotropical wasps of the family 
Braconidae (Hymenoptera) in the U.S. National Museum. 
Four figures. No. 3389, published January 27, 1958 . . 405-461 

New genera: Leurinion, Dasylagon. 

New species: Microctonus audax, M. berryi, Meteorus eaclidis, M. 
kraussi, Centistes epicaeri, Microgaster jocarae, M. diaphaniae, 
Promicrogaster miranda, P. munda, P. polyporicola, Dasylagon 
aegeriae, D. simulans, Microplitis minutalis, Fornicia bailout, F. 
surinamensis, Apanteles cofteellae, A. lipomeringis, A. alius, A. 
ornatricis, A. politiventris, A. irnpiger, A. croceicornis, A. mat- 
thacae, A. concinnus, A. stenomae, A. dentatus, A. hedyleptae, A, 
conformis, A. megastidis, A. paradoxus, A. schini, A. kraussi, 
Opius capsicola, 0. toxotrypanae, 0. aldrichi, 0. auripennis, 0. 
zeteki, 0. divergens, Phaenocarpa anastrephae, Leurinion primum, 
Oncophanes mexicanus, Percnobracon secundus. 

Schultz, Leonard P. The frogfishes of the family Anten- 
nariidae. Eight figures and fourteen plates. No. 3383, 
published November 1, 1957 47-105 

New genera: Kanazawaichthys, Nudiantennarius, Abantennarius, 

Antennatus. 
New subgenera: Triantennatus, Antennatus, Xenophrynichthys, 

Uniantennatus, Plumantennatus. 
New species: Kanazawaichthys scutatus, Abantennarius analis, 

Phrynelox zebrinus, P. atra, Antennarius bermudensis, A. 

pauciradiatus. 

Weld, Lewis H. New American cynipid wasps from oak 
galls. One plate. No. 3384, published October 23, 
1957 107-122 

New species: Synergus magnificus, Ceroptres montensis, Neuro- 
terus floricomus, N. lamellae, N. fiorulentus, Liodora dumosae, 
Amphibolips murata, Andricus mendocinensis, Disholcaspis 
edura, D. prehensa, D. mellifica, D. spissa, D. mamillana, Antron 
tepicana, A. magdalenae, Loxaulus beutenmuelleri, Callirhytis 
balanella, C. floripara, C. glomerosa, C. intersita, C. manni, C. 
medularis, C. perobscura. 



CONTENTS V 

Pages 

Young, David A., Jr. The leaf hopper tribe Alebrini 
(Homoptera : Cicadellidae) . Thirty-nine figures. No'. 
3386, published December 4, 1957 127-277 

New genera: Albera, Blarea, Relaba, Osbornulus, Lareba, Law- 
sonellus, Omegalebra, Erabla, Abrela, Beamerulus, Barela. 

New species: Paralebra keiferi, P. decurvata, Trypanalebra balli, 
T. blantoni, Blarea brasiliensis, Relaba williamsi, Protalebra 
haywardi, Balera caraguatae, B. pusilla, Habralebra panamensis, 
H. williamsi, H. bifasciatella, H. willinki, H. gillettei, H. cruciata, 
Omegalebra blantoni, 0. bailout, 0. morrisoni, 0. ogloblini, 0. 
matogrossana, 0. barbata, Rabela australis, Elabra morrisoni, 
E. costaricensis, Rhabdotalebra jamaicensis, R. monrosi, R. 
hambletoni, R. ornata, Beamerulus uniceratus, B. beameri, 
B. morelosensis, Diceratalebra sola, D. quadricerata, Protalebrella 
iris f P. parana, P. panamensis, Barela parvisaccata. 

New subspecies: Elabra rnorrisoni morrisoni, E. morrisoni 
isthmusi, Rhabdotalebra brunnea colorata. 

Zimmerman, Elwood C. Formosan cossonine weevils of 
bamboo (Coleoptera : Curculionidae : Cossoninae). Two 
figures. No. 3380, published March 5, 1957 13-23 

New species: Rhinanisus bambusae, Pseudostenoptrupis orientalis. 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



by the 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Vol. 107 Washington: 1957 No. 3378 



A NEW SPECIES OF MYSIDOPSIS (CRUSTACEA: MYSIDACEA) 
FROM THE SOUTHEASTERN COAST OF THE UNITED 
STATES 



By Thomas E. Bowman 



Until now, only one species of Mysidopsis, M. bigelowi W. Tattersall 
(1926), has been recorded from the Atlantic coast of the United States. 
This species occurs in shallow water from New England to Louisiana, 
commonly in association with Metamysidopsis munda (Zimmer) 
(W. Tattersall, 1951, p. 142). Mysidopsis mortenseni W. Tattersall 
(1951) was reported from St. Croix, Virgin Islands, and may yet be 
found in Atlantic coastal waters. Of the remaining twelve species, 
three are European (Tattersall and Tattersall, 1951); four are known 
from the southwestern and southern coasts of Africa (Zimmer, 1912; 
O. Tattersall, 1955); two were reported from the coasts of California 
and Peru (W. Tattersall, 1932; Coifmann, 1937); two were taken in 
Indian waters (W. Tattersall, 1922); and one is known from South 
Georgia, the Falkland Islands, and the adjacent coast of South America 
(Hansen, 1913; O. Tattersall, 1955). 

Mysidopsis f urea, new species 

Figures 1, 2 

Description. — Body slender. Carapace produced anteriorly into 
bluntly triangular rostrum; anterolateral angles squared; posterior 

1 

405646—57 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM Vol. 107 




Figure 1. — Mysidopsis furca, new species: a, Anterior end, dorsal view, female; b, first 
maxilla, female; c, second maxilla, female; d, antenna 1, male; e y antenna 2, female; /, 
mandible, female; g, mandibular palp, female; h, fifth thoracic leg, female; i, genital 
appendage, male, b and/, same scale; d and e, same scale. 



NEW SPECIES OF MYSIDOPSIS — BOWMAN 6 

margin emarginate, leaving last two thoracic somites exposed in dorsal 
view. Abdomen tapering very gradually posteriorly, in lateral view 
usually sigmoid in female, straight or curved downward in single 
curve in male; first five somites subequal, sixth somite about 1.7 times 
as long as fifth. Eyes rather large, extending beyond lateral margins 
of carapace; no process on dorsal surface of eyes talk. Peduncle of 
first antenna more robust in male than in female; male lobe very 
hirsute, with indentation on medial margin. Scale of second antenna 
about four times as long as wide, lanceolate, setose all around, with 
a short distal segment separated by an incomplete suture. Mandible 
with molar process reduced to a rounded knob bearing a number of 
minute, blunt setae; incisor process of right mandible with eight teeth, 
lacinia with six teeth; incisor process of left mandible with nine teeth, 
lacinia with six teeth; spine row with six spines, the two nearest the 
molar process shorter and separated from the others. First maxilla: 
Outer plate with eight spines at tip; inner plate bearing two setae, the 
inner one much longer. Second maxilla typical for the genus. 
First thoracic leg (maxilliped) with short and stout endopod seg- 
ments, very similar to that of M.bigelowi W. Tattersall. Endopod of 
second thoracic leg stout; fifth segment 1.6 times as long as sixth; 
seventh segment about half as long as sixth, ending in a strong claw 
longer than the segment. Endopods of remaining legs characteristic 
for the genus. Pleopods of male with quadrangular lobes at the bases 
of the endopods; each lobe bearing five spines, four of them with bulb- 
ous bases; exopod of fourth pleopod as long as endopod, ending in a 
very strong spine. Genital appendage of male eighth thoracic leg 
blunt, subquadrangular, armed at the tip with two long naked setae 
and two shorter, more slender, plumose setae. Uropod: Outer ramus 
five times as long as broad ; outer margin straight ; inner margin convex. 
Inner ramus five-sixths as long as outer ramus, tapering distally ; inner 
margin armed with 35-40 longer and shorter spines from the level of 
the statocyst nearly to the distal end. Telson very distinctive, 
especially in female. In female it is slightly longer than wide, bearing 
about 10 short spines on the concave lateral margin; distal end bearing- 
two pairs of long, heavy spines, the outer pair curved inward, the 
inner pair straight, about half the length of the telson. Distal end 
with shallow concavity between the inner pair of spines. Male telson 
three-fourths as wide as long; lateral margins less concave than in 
female; inner pair of distal spines only about one-fifth the length of 
the telson; outer pair about half as long as inner pair. 

Length. — Measured from tip of rostrum to end of distal spines of 
telson: Females, 4.6-5.8 mm.; males, 4.7-6.1 mm. 

Color. — In preserved specimens pigment is absent from the dorsal 
surface except for a single pair of chromatophores at the base of the 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM Vol. 107 






\ 1 






- 


U- w -j z 


o 


J 



■ 



' .' 




Figure 2. — Mysidopsis furca, new species: a, Telson, male; b, telson, female; c, outer ramus 
of uropod, female; d, inner ramus of uropod, female; e, first thoracic leg (maxilliped), 
female; /, second thoracic leg, female; g, first pleopod, male; h, fourth pleopod, male. 
a-d, g-h, same scale; e-f, same scale. 



NEW SPECIES OF MYSIDOPSIS — BOWMAN 5 

telson. One chromatophore is present on the mid ventral surface of 
each of the first five abdominal somites. On the ventral surface of 
the thorax are two pairs, and a single median chromatophore lies 
anterior to them. A single chromatophore is present on the base of 
each posterior oostegite. 

Types. — Holotype, female with fully developed oostegites, 5.6 mm. 
in length, USNM 99219; allotype, male, 6.1 mm., USNM 99220; 
and 21 paratypes, all from Theodore N. Gill cruise 2, station 57, 
33°33.7' N., 78°24.6' W., off North Inlet, S. C, May 8, 1953, 
depth of water, 20.1 meters. 

Remarks. — M. furca can readily be distinguished from other 
species of Mysidopsis by the shape and armature of the telson. In 
some of the other species of Mysidopsis the apical spines are abruptly 
longer than the lateral spines, but in none of them except M. acuta 
is the inner uropod armed with spines along most of the length of its 
inner margin. M: bigelowi has only five spines in the region of the 
statocyst and further differs from M. furca in the very robust second 
thoracic legs. In M.&mpiW. Tattersall, from the Gulf of Manar, the 
inner margin of the inner uropod has 10 spines, all in the region of the 
statocyst. M. didelphys (Norman) has one long spine near the 
statocyst. The telson of M. acuta is about twice as long as wide, 
and the scale of the second antenna is very narrow (about five times 
as long as broad) and sharply pointed. 

In none of the other species of Mysidopsis are the apical spines of 
the telson as strongly developed as in the female M. furca. The 
sexual dimorphism of the telson found in the new species is most 
unusual, and, to my knowledge, unique among mysids. 

The specific name is taken from the Latin noun, "furca," a pitch- 
fork, and refers to the appearance of the female telson. 

The following key, taken mostly from the literature, is offered here 
with the hope that it will facilitate identification of specimens of 
Mysidopsis. 

Key to the species of Mysidopsis 

1. Inner margin of inner uropod bearing none or a few (1-10) spines limited to 

the region of the statocyst 2 

Inner margin of inner uropod with many (24-75) closely packed spines ex- 
tending along much of the margin 8 

2. Distal spines of telson abruptly longer than lateral spines 3 

Distal spines of telson as long as or only slightly longer than lateral spines. 4 

3. Inner uropod with 5 spines on inner margin; second thoracic leg strongly 

developed bigelowi W. Tattersall 

Inner uropod with 10 spines on inner margin; second thoracic leg normally 
developed kempi W. Tattersall 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM Vol. 107 

4. Inner uropod without spines on inner margin inermis Coifmann 

Inner margin of inner uropod with one spine on inner margin 5 

Inner uropod with 5 spines on inner margin; carapace with 2 humps on dorsal 

surface 7 

5. Telson about 1.1 times as long as wide; 2 spines on each lateral margin. 

indica W. Tattersall 
Telson 1.4-1.6 times as long as wide; 8-20 spines on each lateral margin . 6 

6. Apex of telson truncate didelphys (Norman) 

Apex of telson with small V-shaped notch angusta Sars 

7. Dorsal part of first abdominal somite produced posteriorly into a broad, 

rounded process camelina O. Tattersall 

Dorsal part of first abdominal somite not produced posteriorly . gibbosa Sars 

8. Distal spines of telson abruptly longer than lateral spines 9 

Distal spines of telson as long as or only slightly longer than lateral spines. 

10 

9. Distal spines of female telson about half as long as telson. furca , new species 
Distal spines of telson about one-eighth as long as telson . . acuta Hansen 

10. Scale of second antenna lanceolate, 6.5-9 times as long as wide .... 11 
Scale of second antenna oval, about 3.5 times as long as wide 13 

11. Rostrum very short, broadly rounded californica W. Tattersall 

Rostrum pointed 12 

12. Spines of inner endopod more spaced, reaching to apex; rostrum not reaching 

distal end of first segment of peduncle of antenna 2 . schultzei (Zimmer) 

Spines of inner uropod very dense, extending along about seven-eighths of 

its total length. Rostrum acute, reaching distal end of first segment of 

peduncle of antenna 2 major (Zimmer) 

13. Spines of inner endopod usually extending only to about middle of endopod; 

telson nearly twice as long as wide similis (Zimmer) 

Spines of inner endopod extend nearly to distal end; telson about 1.5 times 
as long as wide mortenseni W. Tattersall 

Literature cited 

Coifmann, Isabella 

1937. Misidacei raccolti dalla R. corvetta Vettor Pisani negli anni 1882-85. 
Ann. Mus. Zool. Univ. Napoli, newser., vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 1-14, 7 figs. 
Hansen, Hans Jacob 

1913. Report on the Crustacea Schizopoda collected by the Swedish Ant- 
arctic Expedition 1901-1903 under the charge of Baron Otto Nord- 
enskjold, pp. 1-44, pis. 1-6. 
Norman, Alfred M. 

1863. Report of the dredging expedition to the Dogger Bank and the coasts 

of Northumberland. Trans. Tyneside Nat. Field Club, vol. 5, 
pp. 263-280, pis. 12-14. 
Sars, Georg Ossian 

1864. Beretning om en i Sommeren 1863 foretagen zoologisk Reise i Chris- 

tiania Stift. Nyt. Mag. Naturv, vol. 13, pp. 225-260. 
Tattersall, Olive S. 

1955. Mysidacea. In Discovery Reports, vol. 28, pp. 1-190, 46 figs. 
Tattersall, Walter M. 

1922. Indian Mysidacea. Rec. Indian Mus., vol. 24, pp. 445-504, 28 figs. 
1926. Crustaceans of the orders Euphausiacea and Mysidacea from the 
western Atlantic. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 69, art. 8, 31 pp., 2 pis. 



NEW SPECIES OF MYSIDOPSIS — BOWMAN 7 

1932. Contributions to a knowledge of the Mysidacea of California, I: On a 

collection of Mysidae from La Jolla, California. Univ. California 

Publ. Zool., vol! 37, pp. 301-314, 38 figs. 
1951. A review of the Mysidacea of the United States National Museum. 

U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 201, 292 pp., 103 figs. 
Tattersall, Walter M., and Tattersall, Olive S. 
1951. The British Mysidacea. 460 pp., 116 figs. 
Zimmer, Carl 

1912. Sudwestafrikanische Schizopoden. Jena Denkschr. Med. Ges., vol. 

17, pp. 1-11, 2 pis. 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1957 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



by the 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Vol. 107 Washington: 1957 No. 3379 



RHYNOBRISSUS CUNEUS, A NEW ECHINOID FROM 
NORTH CAROLINA 



Bv C. Wythe Cooke 



The U. 8. National Museum has recently received, as accession 
No. 201,828, two lots of a spatangoid echinoid collected by Miss 
Maureen Downey at Fort Macon Beach, near Beaufort, N. C. The 
first lot consists of two small and one larger nearly perfect yellowish 
individuals; the other, found about Jan. 15, 1956, includes fragments 
of one small and three larger white tests. Most of the specimens 
retain some of the spines. This species is particularly interesting 
because it represents a very rare genus known in collections by only a 
few individuals and now reported for the first time from the Atlantic 
Ocean. 

Order Spatangoida L. Agassiz, 1840 

Family Spatangidae Gray, 1825 
Genus Rhynobrissus A. Agassiz, 1872 

Rhynobrissus A. Agassiz, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 3, p. 58, 1872; Mem. 

Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 3, p. 590, 1873.— H. L. Clark, Mem. Mus. Comp. 

Zool., vol. 46, p. 213, 1917; Carnegie Inst. Washington Publ. 566, p. 373, 

1946. 
Rhinobrissus A. Agassiz. Pomel, Classification methodique et genera des echinides, 

p. 33, 1883. — Duncan, Journ. Linnean Soc. London, Zool., vol. 23, p. 246, 

1889. — Lambert and Thicry, Essai de nomenclature raisonnee des echinides, 

fasc. 6, p. 491, 1924. — Mortensen, Monograph of the Echinoidea, vol. 5, 

pt. 2, p. 486, 1951. 

405643—57 9 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 

Type species: Rhynobrissus pyramidalis A. Agassiz, 1872, from 
China, by monotypy. Agassiz (1873, p. 590, pi. 23a, figs. 4-6) 
shows excellent photographs, somewhat reduced, of the top, bottom, 
and side of the type but does not figure the posterior end; the anal 
and subanal fascioles are shown only in profile. According to his 
description the anal fasciole is not connected with the subanal fasciole, 
and it extends some distance above the anal system. The posterior 
end of the test slopes backward to such an extent that the subanal 
plastron projects beyond the periproct. 

The genus has been reviewed in Mortensen's "Monograph of the 
Echinoidea." Besides the type species, there are three species from 
the Pacific. Of these, Rhynobrissus placopetalus A. Agassiz and H. L. 
Clark, from the Hawaiian Islands, is suspected by Mortensen to be 
merely the young of R. pyramidalis. Little is known about Rhynob- 
rissus macropetalus H. L. Clark, from West Australia, which seems to 
be difficult to distinguish from R. pyramidalis. Rhynobrissus 
hemiasteroides A. Agassiz, from Tahiti, the Hawaiian Islands, and 
Australia, is easily distinguishable from other species by its anterior 
apex. 

A young echinoid from Cuba, originally named Rhynobrissus 
micrasteroides by A. Agassiz, later became the type of Neopneustes 
Duncan (1889). 

Rhynobrissus cuneus Cooke, new species 

Plate ] 

Description. — The horizontal outline is ovate, rounded in front, 
widest at the midline, bluntly pointed behind. The longitudinal 
outline is wedge-shaped (whence the specific name cuneus, a wedge), 
with the base line nearly flat; the profile of the upper surface is 
slightly arched, the highest point near the posterior end, thence 
steeply sloping forward to the acutely rounded ambitus; the profile 
of the posterior end is gently convex, slightly overhanging. The 
transverse outline is nearly semicircular, convex above. 

The nearly central apical system is ethmolytic, i. e., the madreporite 
extends between and beyond the posterior ocular plates. The 
mature test has four large genital pores, the anterior pair 
circular and close together, the posterior pair larger, oval, diverging. 
One young test has only three genital pores. 

The anterior ambulacrum is flush, not petaloid, the pores small, 
far apart, and inconspicuous. The paired ambulacra have rather 
long, nearly equal, straight, sunken petals, the anterior pair widely 
separated, diverging at an angle of approximately 137°. The 
posterior petals are much closer together, diverging at an angle of 
approximately 39°. The poriferous zones are wider than the inter- 
poriferous zones, with oval, conjugate pores. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS,. VOL. 107 



COOKE. PLATE 1 




Rhynobrissus cuneus, new species. 1-4, Holotype, USNM E-8032: 1, right side; 2, top; 
3, bottom; 4, posterior end. 5, 6, Paratype, USNM E-8033: 5, bottom; 6, posterior end. 
All X V/>. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 

The posterior paired interambulacra do not reach the peristome. 
The odd interambulacrum includes a straight-sided amphisternous 
plastron extending from the labrum to the posterior truncation, 
where it adjoins a circular subanal plastron surrounded by the 
subanal fasciole. The anal fasciole touches the subanal fasciole; 
and it extends upward and nearly encloses the periproct in a vertically 
elongated ellipse, which is not quite closed at the top. The area 
within the anal fasciole and around the periproct differs little in 
decoration from that outside the fasciole. 

A weakly scalloped elliptical peripetalous fasciole touches the ends 
of the petals. 

The strongly reniform peristome is covered by many movable 
plates. The mouth is arched over by the projecting, bluntly pointed 
labrum. The phyllodes are conspicuous. 

The bilunate or pyriform periproct is set high up on the narrow 
posterior end of the test and is covered with movable plates. 

A granulation of small, close-set tubercles covers the entire upper 
surface except the peripetalous fasciole. The granulation extends 
down over the sides, but the ambulacra on the lower surface are bare. 
The tubercles on the plastrons are somewhat larger. 

Most of the surface is covered with long, hairlike, silky spines, 
many of which have flat, spatulate ends. 

The dimensions of the holotype are: Length, 37 mm.; width, 
37 mm.; height, 23.5 mm. A smaller test measures 25 by 25.3 by 
15.5 mm. 

Occurrence. — Cast up by the waves at Fort Macon Beach, X. C. 

Type.— U. S. National Museum E-8032; paratype, E-8033. 

Comparisons. — The horizontal outline of this species is similar 
to that of Bhynobrissus pyramidalis, but the petals are proportion- 
ately longer. The two species are markedly different in vertical 
profile, the posterior end of the Chinese species sloping backward, 
whereas that of the American species is nearly vertical, even slightly 
overhanging. This difference in slope is caused by the much shorter, 
nearly equilateral lower surface of R. cuneus. 

According to Agassiz (1873, p. 592), the anal fasciole of Rhynobris- 
sus pyramidalis begins immediately above the subanal plastron but 
is not connected with it. In R. cuneus the two fascioles are in 
contact and separate the anal area from the subanal plastron. 

The sloping upper surface and wedgelike shape distinguish Rhy- 
nobn'ssiis cuneus from R. hemiasteroides as figured by Mortensen 
(1951, p. 490, pi. 28, figs. 3, 4, 7-9, 13, 14). The upper surface in 
R. hemiasteroides is almost flat in vertical profile. Mortensen's 
figure 13 also shows a wide separation between the anal fasciole and 
the subanal fasciole, which are in contact in R. cuneus. 

U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1957 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued i^vfVvl 0?l|i by the 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Vol. 107 Washington : 1957 No. 3380 



FORMOSAN COSSONINE WEEVILS OF BAMBOO 1 
(COLEOPTERA: CURCULIONIDAE: COSSONINAE) 



By El wood C. Zimmerman 



Miss Rose Ella Warner, of the U. S. Department of Agriculture, 
Entomology Research Branch, Washington, D. C, has asked me to 
study and report upon a collection of weevils assembled by K. S. 
Kung, of the College of Agriculture, Taichung, Taiwan (Formosa). 
Mr. Kung reports that these weevils are "pests of the sheath of 
bamboo (Bambusa stenostachyta Hackel) which is usually used to 
pack the banana for export. ..." 

In the collection sent for study there are five species, two of them 
new to science. Some of these insects have become widely distributed, 
and they are all liable to be spread far and wide by commerce and 
may become pests in various localities. The specimens on which this 
paper is based are in the U. S. National Museum (USNM), except 
as noted. 



1 Research for this paper was completed at the British Museum (Natural History) during the tenure of 
a grant from the National Science Foundation. The author expresses gratitude to the Foundation and to 
the Museum. 

2 British Museum (Natural History), London, England. 

405642—57 13 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The five species sent from Formosa are Rhinanisus bambusae 
Zimmerman, Pseudostenotrupis orientalis Zimmerman, Pseudocossonus 
planatus (Marshall), Conarthrus ferruginineus (Wollaston), and 
C. cylindricus Wollaston. These species may be distinguished by 
the following key: 

1. Antennal funicle 5-segmented (length, excluding head and rostrum, 2-2.5 mm.) 

Rhinanisus bambusae Zimmerman, new species 
Antennal funicle 7-segmented (length, less than 2 mm. to more than 4 mm.) . 2 

2. Very small, slender species, length (excluding head and rostrum) less than 2 

mm.; antennal scape reaching only to about middle of eye; postocular 
constriction of head strongly marked on sides, head narrowed behind and 
in front of the constriction; fore tibiae rather evenly arcuate on dorsal edge. 

Pseudostenotrupis orientalis, new species 

Medium sized species, longer than 4 mm.; antennal scape reaching to or 

passing hind margins of eyes; postocular constriction of head moderate or 

slight, head broader behind the constriction than in front of it; dorsal margin 

of fore tibia sinuous 3 

3. Dorsally flattened species; fourth tarsal segment transversely convex beneath 

and broadest distad; rostrum comparatively slender, obviously longer than 
head, lateral outlines as viewed from above obviously sinuous. 

Pseudocossonus planatus (Marshall) 

Sub tubular species, convex above; fourth tarsal segment transversely flattened 

or concave basad beneath and wider basad than distad; rostrum heavy, 

stout, nearly straight on sides, only about as long as head 4 

4. A bicolored species, basically reddish brown, with elytra darker apically and 

head and rostrum darker; scutellum only slightly tilted; striae 9 and 10 
above fifth ventrite appearing to occupy the same depression, the interval 
between them rather indistinct or not well formed. 

Conarthrus ferrugineus (Wollaston) 
A black or nearly black species; scutellum slanting strongly downward and 
forward; striae 9 and 10 remaining distinct and separate above fifth ventrite, 
the interval between them distinct, convex and well formed. 

Conarthrus cylindricus Wollaston 

Genus Rhinanisus Broun, 1883 

Rhinanisus Broun, New Zealand Journ. Sci., vol. 1, p. 489, 1883. 

Fifteen or more species of this genus have been reported from New 
Zealand, and about six species are listed from Central and South 
America. It remains to be determined if the two groups of species 
are congeneric. 

Rhinanisus bambusae, new species 

Figures 1,6; 2,b 

Color: Reddish chestnut brown, variably somewhat darker apically 
on pronotum, eyes black; derm moderately shiny (when clean). 

Head with all setae minute and inconspicuous; length from fore 
edge of pronotum to front of an eye (measured from side, not from 
above) not as long as distance across eyes (ratio, measured from 
front, 11:12 or 11:13); postocular constriction subcontiguous to 



COSSONESTE WEEVILS — ZIMMERMAN 15 

posteroventro corner of eye, but rapidly diverging from eye dorsad 
and rather broadly and distinctly impressed across dorsum; area 
posterior to the constriction reticulate, almost impunctate and con- 
trasting with the closely punctured interocular area, the sculpture 
of which is continuous with that of rostrum, the punctures mostly 
slightly closer to each other than distances between them; interocular 
area subequal in breadth to length of an eye; eyes not round, the 
posterodorsal contour flattened; underside transversely wrinkled. 

Rostrum evenly arcuate with contour flattened basad to interocular 
area, three-fifths as long as pronotum (measured from side), sides as 
seen from above, narrowed from eyes to a point above the "false 
scrobe" behind point of antennal insertions, thence slightly roundly 
expanded above antennal insertions, thence evenly expanded to apex 
which is a little broader than interocular area; antennae inserted at 
one-third the length from base, scrobe strongly formed, the upper 
margin abrupt and strong, its posterior end contiguous with lower 
margin of eye, a short "false scrobe" above and behind antennal 
insertion; ventral surface strongly bisulcate and further substrigate; 
two long, stiff setae at base of oral cavity, but setae short behind 
that point. 

Antenna with scape strongly clavate, extending back to middle of 
eye, about as long as f unicle plus nearly one-third of club ; first funicular 
segment as long as third plus fourth, second about as broad as long, a 
little longer than third, the third, fourth, and fifth each somewhat 
shorter and broader; club about as long as the preceding four funicular 
segments combined. 

Prothorax shaped as illustrated, four-fifths as broad as long, broadest 
at about basal third; subapical constriction well marked on sides, 
shallowly continued across dorsum; setae not evident; reticulate 
microsculpture conspicuous, rather coarse; punctures on disc medium 
sized, mostly closer to each other than diameters of punctures. 

Scutellum well developed; bare; microsculpture fine. 

Elytra shaped as illustrated, more than twice (60:25) as long as 
pronotum; setae, except for some short ones on declivity, not, or 
hardly, discernible; outer (tenth) stria complete, striae 1-3 continued 
to elytral apex, 4 and 5 ending on the declivital callus, 6-8 coalescing 
at the apex of the callus and thence running as a common stria to 
apex; intervals 1-4 and 9 moderately costate on declivity and running 
to apex, the others not reaching elytral apical margin ; striae evidently 
mostly as broad or broader than intervals on disc, their punctures 
close, somewhat larger than those on pronotum; intervals each with 
a row of small punctures. 

Legs with fore femora when extended forward reaching to a point 
below anterior edges of eyes, middle femora when extended backward 



16 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



reaching a point midway between middle parts of midcoxa and hind 
coxa, hind femora reaching to two-thirds the length of second ven trite ; 
tibiae rather rapidly expanding from base to apex, uncus well de- 
veloped, mucro moderate but conspicuous in adequate light; third 
tarsal segment (as seen with fourth removed) deeply emarginate and 
bilobed, ventral setae very long. 

Sternum with prosternum twice as long in front of coxae as behind 
coxae; distance between fore coxae subequal to breadth of a coxa; 




Figure 1.— Outlines of some Formosan Cossoninae. Length, excluding head: a, Pseudo- 
stenotrupis orientalis Zimmerman, holotype male, 1.5 mm.; b, Rhinanisus bambusae Zim- 
merman, allotype female, 2.2 mm.; c, Conarthrus cylindricus Wollaston, female, 4.5 mm.; 
d, Conarthrus Jerrugineus (Wollaston), male 4.2 mm.; e, Pseudocossonus pla?iatus (Mar- 
shall), male, 4.3 mm. Not to same scale. 

derm rather irregularly roughened or wrinkled and punctures not, 
or only a few, individually evident; anterior margin truncate, subapical 
constriction impressed across venter, posterior margin arcuate, area 
in front of coxae with short setae; mesosternum continuous with 



COSSONINE WEEVILS — ZIMMERMAN 



17 




Figure 2. — Outlines of lateral views of head of: a, Pseudostenotrupis oHentalis Zimmerman; 
b, Rhinanisus bambusae Zimmerman; c, Conarthrus cylindricus Wollaston; d, Conarthrus 
ferrugineus (Wollaston); e, Pseudocossonus planatus (Marshall). Drawings are from same 
specimens used in figure 1. Not to same scale. All drawings by Arthur Smith. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



metasternum, mesocoxae a little farther apart than fore coxae, and 
equal in separation to hind coxae ; metasternum subequal to length of 
prosternum along median line, a little longer along median line than 
length of ventrites 1 plus 2, broadly, shallowly concave on sides to 
accommodate movement of midfemora; with scattered small punc- 
tures bearing small setae. 

Venter with ventrites 1 and 2 strongly coalesced, the suture 
hardly evident in middle, the combined length along median line equal 
to length of ventrites 3-5 plus 4 and 5 again, sculpture and vestiture 
as on metasternum, and broadly impressed on sides at middle to 
accommodate action of hind femora; ventrites 3 and 4 together 
as long as 5, each with a basal row of strong punctures and a sub- 
apical row of setae; ven trite 5 with a similar basal row of strong- 
punctures and the apical half or more with long, erect setae arising 
from punctures. 

Length (excluding head and rostrum), 2.1-2.5 mm.; breadth, 
0.5-0.6 mm. 

Types: Holotype male (USNM 63219) and allotype female are 
in the U. S. National Museum; paratypes are in the same museum 
and in the British Museum (Natural History). Described from a 
series of 13 specimens collected in 1955 from Bambusa stenostachyta 
at Taichung, Formosa, by K. S. Kung. 

This is the first species of Rhinanisus to be recorded in the Pacific 
outside of New Zealand, where the genus is well developed. The 
absence of long, fine, decumbent hairs at the sides of the pronotum 
will alone separate the new species from the New Zealand species. 
The external sexual characters are poorly defined, and the deter- 
mination of the sexes is difficult. 

Genus Pseudostenotrupis Voss, 1939 
Pseudostenotrupis Voss, Rev. Zool. Bot. Africames, vol. 32, No. 1, p. 75, 1939. 

Voss erected this genus to include Proeces macer Boheman, 1838, 
from Madagascar, and Leurostenus filum Marshall, 1933, from the 
Belgian Congo. Later in 1939, Voss described a third species, parvulus, 
from East Africa. He did not designate a type for the genus. Leuro- 
stenus filum Marshall may be taken as type. 

Pseudostenotrupis orientalis, new species 
Figures l,a; 2, a 

Color: Reddish chestnut brown, darker across front of head, base 
of rostrum, sternum, and first ven trite; eyes black; derm moderately 
shiny; all setae on dorsum very small and inconspicuous. 

Head subequal in length from anterior edge of pronotum to front 
of an eye (measured from side) as breadth across eyes; postocular 



COSSONINE WEEVILS — ZIMMERMAN 19 

constriction very strong on sides, but only slightly or not impressed 
across dorsum (when viewed from side), distinctly impressed across 
underside, the constriction about twice the length of an eye behind 
the eyes, and two-thirds the distance from hind edges of eyes to 
pronotum (as viewed from above); area posterior of constriction 
coarsely reticulate but not punctate, head otherwise reticulate and 
with moderately large punctures which are mostly closer to each 
other than the diameters of the punctures; eyes moderately inter- 
rupting lateral outline of head, distance across them slightly less than 
maximum breadth of crown which is at about two-thirds length 
from eyes to postocular constriction, interocular area one-half as 
broad as greatest postocular breadth of crown. 

Rostrum with sculpture similar to that of interocular area, length 
(measured from side from anterior edge of an eye) about one-fifth 
longer than side of head in female, slightly less in male, gently arcuate, 
contour between front of head to before antennae gently, slightly 
concave; sides strongly narrowed from eyes to antennal insertions, 
over which the sides are arcuately expanded, thence rapidly expanded 
to apex, this expansion less strong in female, greatest subapical 
breadth about equal to interocular distance plus breadth of one eye 
in male, but only slightly broader than interocular area in female; 
ventrolateral apical corners drawn out into prominent processes 
which project beneath mandibles; ventral surface with numerous 
erect setae, the pre-oral ones longer than the breadth of apex of 
antenna! scape; margins of scrobes well defined, upper margin apically 
contiguous with lower ocular margin; ventromedian line cariniform 
behind antennae. 

Antennae inserted slightly behind middle of rostrum; scape reaching 
middle of eye, as long as funicle plus nearly one-half of club; first 
funicular segment as long as next three segments combined, subequal 
in breadth to segment 7, and appearing nearly twice as broad as seg- 
ment 2 ; segment 2 hardly or not longer than segment 3 ; segments 2-7 
each successively broader; club as long as preceding five funicular 
segments combined. 

Prothorax shaped as illustrated, somewhat more than five-sevenths 
as broad as long, broadest just before basal third; subapical constric- 
tion, although conspicuous, not very strong, subequal in development 
to subbasal constriction, not impressed across dorsum; longitudinal 
dorsal contour, as viewed from side, nearly straight from base to apex ; 
microsculpture of dorsum fine; punctures medium-sized, ovate, mostly 
separated from each other by more than their diameters on disc. 

Scutellum bare, shinj^. 

Elytra shaped as illustrated, a little more than twice as long as 
pronotum to nearly 2% times as long; outer (tenth) stria complete, but 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

punctures not evident in it for most of its length, strial punctures 
elsewhere broader than intervals, stria 1 joining stria 10, 2 joining 9, 
3 joining 8, 4-7 thus ending on declivity and enclosed by the others; 
intervals flat, none elevated on declivity; striae and intervals difficult 
to trace without removal of elytra and study in fluid. 

Legs with fore femora capable of reaching forward to or somewhat 
beyond postocular constriction, middle femora when extended back- 
ward to a point nearly midway between middle parts of midcoxa and 
hind coxa, hind femora when extended backward reaching to middle of 
second ven trite, all femora sublenticular in shape; tibiae arcuate on 
outer sides, uncus moderate, mucro small; third tarsal segment 
apically C-emarginate, ventral setae very long. 

Sternum with prosternum twice as long in front of coxae as behind 
coxae, distance between fore coxae subequal to breadth of a fore coxa, 
subapical constriction crossing sternum as a narrow groove about as 
far behind anterior margin as three-fourths the breadth of the inter- 
coxal distance, the punctures scattered and farther apart than their 
diameters; mesosternum continuous with metasternum, intercoxal 
process about 1% times as broad as that between fore coxae; meta- 
sternum with scattered punctures mostly separated by distances equal 
to or greater than diameters of punctures, closer laterad and with 
setae more conspicuous there, metacoxae a little less widely separated 
than mesocoxae, length along median line subequal to prosternum and 
first three ventrites. 

Venter with the suture between the first and second ventrites nearly 
obliterated, length of the two segments along median line equal to 
remaining three ventrites plus segment 5 again, the first two segments 
with scattered setiferous punctures, flattened down middle and with 
longer, overlapping hairs in this flattened area in male, this specialized 
zone absent in female ; ventrites 3 and 4 with setiferous punctures over 
most of their surfaces, the two ventrites together subequal in length 
to ven trite 5; ven trite 5 rather closely punctate over-all, the punctures 
bearing moderately long, fine hairs, convex in female, but with a large, 
rounded, median impression in male. 

Length (excluding head and rostrum), 1.4-1.5 mm.; breadth, 
0.35-0.4 mm. 

Types: Holotype male (USNM 63220) and allotype female in the 
U. S. National Museum; paratypes are in the same museum and the 
British Museum (Natural History). Described from a series of 38 
specimens collected in 1955 from Bambusa stenostachta at Taichung, 
Formosa, by K. S. Kung. 



COSSONINE WEEVILS — ZIMMERMAN 21 

This species somewhat resembles Pseudostenotrupis filum (Marshall) 
from the Belgian Congo, but it is smaller, more shiny, the pronotum, 
head, and rostrum are less densely punctate, the subapical constriction 
of the pro thorax is less well developed, the antennal scape extends only 
to about the middle of the eye instead of to the hind margin as it does 
mfilum, and there are other similar differences of specific importance. 

Genus Pseudocossonus Wollaston, 1873 

Pseudocossonus Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, p. 27, 1873. 
Catolethromorphus Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, pp. 479, 563, 1873. 
(New synonym.) 

Wollaston erected Catolethromorphus for a single example from the 
East Indies (without precise locality) which he named nigripes. I 
am unable to separate this example generically from the type of Pseu- 
docossonus (brevitarsis Wollaston, cited by Marshall, Ent. Monthly 
Mag., vol. 90, p. 232, 1954), and I believe that Catolethromorphus 
should fall as a new synonym of Pseudocossonus, and nigripes may be 
known as Pseudocossonus nigripes (Wollaston), new combination. 

The Formosan collection contains the following representative of 
the genus. 

Pseudocossonus planatus (Marshall) 

Figures l,e; 2,e 

Eutornus planatus Marshall, Arb. Morph. Tax. Ent., Berlin-Dahlem, vol. 5, No. 2, 

p. 161, 1938. 
Oxydema planatus (Marshall) Voss, Beitr. Ent., vol. 1, No. 1, p. 88, 1951. 
Pseudocossonus planatus Marshall, Ent. Monthly Mag., vol. 90, p. 232, 1954; 

Zimmerman, The Entomologist, vol. 89, p. 59, 1956 (synonymy). 
Pseudocossonus planatus (Marshall) Zimmerman, The Entomologist, vol. 89, 

p. 59, 1956. 

By a lapsus, Marshall described this species twice and placed it in 
two genera, and he gave the species the same specific name in each 
description. His first description was based upon material from 
Annam. His second description was of specimens bred from bamboo 
in Formosa by K. S. Kung. There is also in the British Museum a 
series of specimens, under Eutornus planatus, taken in Japan from 
bamboo which had been imported from Formosa. A series of speci- 
mens is in the present collection. 

Marshall (Ent. Monthly Mag., vol. 90, p. 232, 1954) reviewed 
Pseudocossonus, cited brevitarsis as the type, and gave a key to the 
four species recognized by him. Following is a revised key to the 
five species recognized here. 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. lW 

Key to the species of Pseudocossonus 

1. Basal margin of elytra slightly elevated to form a basal carina from scutellum 

to fourth or fifth intervals (scutellum in unique holotype concave). Japan. 

brachypus Wollaston 

Base of elytra without such a carina (scutellum convex on all examples 

seen) 2 

2. Dorsum transversely convex or very slightly flattened and/or punctures on 

sides of prothorax not or hardty larger and not much if any denser than those 

on disc of pronotum 3 

Dorsum obviously somewhat flattened and punctures on sides of prothorax 
obviously much larger and denser than those on disc of pronotum (examine 
area above and behind coxae, especially) 4 

3. Microsculpture of pronotum obvious, the reticulations regular and distinct 

under moderate magnification; lateral outline of prothorax obviously 
arcuate from base to apex and no part of contour straight; subapical con- 
striction of prothorax broad and shallow on sides. Japan. 

brevitarsis Wollaston 
Microsculpture of pronotum extremely fine, visible only under high magnifi- 
cation and even then it is vague and indefinite on disc; lateral margins of 
pronotum with contour nearly straight in middle region, although gently 
converging cephalad, the subapical constriction strong and sharply indented 
on sides. New Guinea dimidiatus Wollaston 

4. Hind angles of pronotum strongly, conspicuously, abruptly, angulately eraar- 

ginate, thus forming a shoulder which fits under elytra; subapical constric- 
tion of pronotum strongly formed and sharply indenting sides of pronotum; 

"East Indies" nigripes (Wollaston) 

Subbasal constriction of pronotum feeble and shallow; subapical constriction, 
although strong, roundly instead of sharply indenting sides of pronotum; 
Formosa, Japan plana tus (Marshall) 

Genus Conarthrus Wollaston, 1873 

Conarthrus Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, pp. 491, 577, 1873; Zimmerman, 

The Entomologist, vol. 89, p. 56, 1956 (synonymy). 
Eutornus Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, pp. 492, 578, 1873; not Clark, 

Catalogue of Halticidae in the . . . British Museum . . . , pt, 1, p. 64, 1860. 
Eutornicus Marshall, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., vol. 13, No. 98, p. 97, 1946. 

Two species of Conarthrus are represented in the Formosan collec- 
tion now at hand, but it is probable that other species occur on 
Formosa. 

Conarthrus ferruginous (Wollaston) 

Figures l,d; 2,d 

Eutornus f err ugineus Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, p. 638, 1873. 
Conarthrus ferrugineus (Wollaston) Zimmerman, The Entomologist, vol. 89, p. 

58, 1956. 
Eutornus congener Wollaston, Cist. Ent., vol. 1, p. 206, 1874; Zimmerman, The 

Entomologist, vol. 89, p. 58, 1956 (synonymy). 

Ill addition to the numerous specimens in the present collection 
from Formosa, I have examined material in the British Museum from 



COSSONINE WEEVILS — ZIMMERMAN 23 

Burma, Assam, Tonkin, Sumatra, Java, Borneo, Malacca, Makian, 
Gilolo, Tondano, Morty, and New Guinea. 

Conarthrus cylindricus Wollaston 

Figures 1,c; 2,c 

Conarthrus cylindricus Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, p. 637, 1873; Zim- 
merman, The Entomologist, vol. 89, p. 57, 1956 (synonymy). 
Conarthrus vicinus Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, p. 637, 1873. 
Eutornus jansoni Wollaston, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, p. 637, 1873. 

In addition to the few Formosan specimens collected by Mr. Kung, 
there are others in the British Museum that were taken from bamboo 
in Cochin China and others that were intercepted at Gisborne, New 
Zealand, in "bamboo strips used for packing jute mats imported from 
India." The species is known also from Ceylon and from Bachan in 
the Moluccus. It is variable and widespread. 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1957 




PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Vol. 107 Washington : 1957 No. 3381 



SOME LITTORAL BARNACLES FROM THE TUAMOTU, 
MARSHALL, AND CAROLINE ISLANDS 1 



By Dora Priaulx Henry 



A small number of barnacles collected by the Pacific Science Board 
expeditions at three localities — Ngarumaoa Island, Tuamotu Islands; 
South Loi Island, Marshall Islands; and Ifaluk Atoll, Caroline 
Islands — was sent to the author for identification. In all, there are 
seven species: three from the Caroline Islands, one from the Marshall 
Islands, and four, including one new species, from the Tuamotu Islands. 
In addition, a few barnacles collected by the Albatross at Makemo, 
Tuamotu Islands, were borrowed from the U. S. National Museum 
(USNM) to compare with the new material. Although the collection 
is small, it is of considerable interest as nothing is known of the 
barnacles of these islands except for Litkoirya nicobarica Reinhardt, 
which was reported from Makemo as Lithotrya pacifica Borradaile by 
Pilsbry (1907). The collection from Ngarumaoa Island contains 
Lithotrya nicobarica Reinhardt, Lithotrya valentiana (Gray), Verruca 
cookei Pilsbry, previously known from the Hawaiian Islands, and a new 
species of Chthamalus, which is of special interest as it is the first 
member of the genus to possess a true calcareous basis. A few small 
specimens of this species were also found on Lithotrya nicobarica from 

1 Contribution No. 210 from the Department of Oceanography, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Wash. 

25 



422203—57 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Makemo. The one species from the Marshall Islands is Tetraclita 
pacijica Pilsbry, originally described by Pilsbry (1928) as Tetraclita 
wireni pacijica from Necker and Wake Islands. The barnacles from the 
Carolines are Chthamalus hembeli (Conrad), Tetraclita squamosa 
squamosa (Bruguiere), and Lithrotrya nicobarica Bernhardt. 

Genus Lithotrya Sowerby, 1822 2 

Sewell (1926), after a detailed study of a large number of specimens 
of Lithotrya nicobarica, lists all the known species and subspecies of 
Lithotrya except L. dorsalis, L. truncata, L. valentiana, and L. rhodiopus 
as synonyms of L. nicobarica Reinhardt. However, at the end of his 
paper, he states that it is his belief that L. dorsalis and L. nicobarica 
cannot be differentiated. Nilsson-Cantell (1933) compared L. dorsalis 
from Bonaire and various museums with L. nicobarica from several 
localities, and he believes that these two species are distinct. Cannon 
(1935) has shown that L. truncata is a synonym of L. valentiana. L. 
rhodiopus is known only from Darwin's (1851) description of imperfect 
specimens so that its position is still doubtful. The valid species in 
the genus Lithotrya are, therefore, L. dorsalis, L. nicobarica, L. val- 
entiana, and possibly L. rhodiopus. 

Lithotrya nicobarica Reinhardt 

Lithotrya nicobarica Reinhardt, 1850, p. 1, pi. 1, figs. 1-3. — Darwin, 1851, p. 359, 
pi. 8, fig. 2.— Gruvel, 1905, p. 99.— Hoek, 1907, p. 122, pi. 9, fig. 9.— Annan- 
dale, 1916, p. 131, pi. 7, fig. 2.— Nilsson-Cantell, 1921, p. 219; 1934a, p. 45 — 
Sewell, 1926, pp. 269-300, 18 figs., pis. 14, 15.— Hiro, 1937, p. 44. 

Lithotrya cauta Darwin, 1851, p. 356, pi. 8, fig. 3. 

Lithotrya pacijica Borradaile, 1900, p. 798, pi. 51, figs. 3, 3a.— Hoek, 1907, p. 126, 
pi. 9, figs. 13, 13a, 14.— Pilsbry, 1907, p. 6. 

Lithotrya dorsalis var. maldivensis Borradaile, 1903, p. 441. 

Lithotrya dorsalis var. rugata Borradaile, 1903, p. 441. 

Lithotrya conica Hoek, 1907, p. 124, pi. 9, figs. 10-12. 

Localities. — Ngarumaoa Island, Karoia Atoll, Tuamotu Islands; 
collected by J. P. E. Morrison, July 11, 1952, on outer reef flats, with 
Chthamalus calcareobasis and Verruca cookei (11 specimens, USNM 
96480). 

Makemo, Tuamotu Islands; collected by the Albatross, Oct. 21 
1899, on the reef, with Chthamalus calcareobasis (7 specimens, USNM, 
32885). 

South end of Falarik Island, Ifaluk Atoll, Caroline Islands; 
collected by F. M. Bayer, Oct. 22, 1953, dug out of large rock just 
inside high reef (2 specimens, USNM 99341). 

' For synonymy, see Darwin (1851, p. 332). 



LITTORAL BARNACLES — HENRY 27 

Remarks: Several of the specimens are larger than the largest 
(greatest carinorostral diameter of the capitulum, 11.5 mm.) examined 
by Sewell (1926). The specimens from Ngarumaoa Island vary in 
carinorostral diameter from 6 mm. to 16 mm.; those from Makemo, 
from 11 mm. to 18 mm.; and the two from the Ifaluk Atoll, from 15 
mm. to 16 mm. Externally, the specimens show most of the varia- 
tions figured by Sewell. The cirri and mouthparts of a specimen with 
a carinorostral diameter of 18 mm. from Makemo are of special 
interest as the specimen was in the last stage before molting. The 
new long spines of the cirri are situated close to each ramus with then- 
ends pointed distally and not "with their upper ends enclosed within 
the old spines, but with their lower ends projecting inwards, beyond 
the bases of the old spines, and inverted like the fingers of a glove 
hastily pulled off" as stated by Darwin (1854, p. 157). The labrum 
has 60 teeth. Sewell found 40 teeth on a small specimen and 42 on 
one of the largest, so he concluded that there is little change in the 
number of teeth with advancing age. The palps have rounded ends 
with doubly serrate spines on the ends and upper margins. In one 
mandible, between the first and second tooth, the new edge has 25 
pectinations and the old edge has 13, some of which are broken off; 
between the second and third tooth the new edge has 9 pectinations 
and the old edge has 3. The other mandible has 19 pectinations on 
the new edge and 12 on the old edge between the first and second 
tooth, and 10 on the new edge and 8 on the old edge between the second 
and third tooth. There is also a greater number of pectinations on 
the new edge of the inferior angle than on the old edge. Sewell has 
pointed out that the ratio of the number of pectinations between the 
first and second tooth to the number between the second and third 
tooth is not a valid diagnostic character as the rate changes with 
advancing age. The number of spines in the middle group on the 
inner maxilla is also greater (17 instead of 10) in this specimen than 
in SewelTs largest specimen, although the number above the notch, 
in the notch, and on the inferior angle is the same. The outer maxilla 
has a slight notch without spines. One caudal appendage has 19 
segments, the other has 11 segments. In a specimen with a carino- 
rostral diameter of 16 mm., one caudal appendage has 27 segments 
and the other has 20 segments. Both specimens have five pairs of 
spines and seven or eight small spines between the pairs on the median 
segments of the sixth cirrus. Sewell found four pairs of spines and 
six or seven small spines in the largest specimen. 

Lithotrya valentiana (Gray) 

Conchotrya valentiana Gray, 1825, p. 102. 

Anatifa truncata Quoy and Gaimard, 1834, p. 636, pi. 93, figs. 12-15. 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Liihotrya valentiana Darwin, 1851, p. 371, pi. 8, fig. 5. — Gruvel, 1902, p. 250. — 
Barnard, 1924, p. 48.— Cannon, 1935, pp. 1-17, 7 figs., 2 pis.— Hiro, 1937, 
p. 42, 1 fig. 

Lithotrya truncata Darwin, 1851, p. 366, pi. 9, fig. 1.— Hoek, 1907, p. 127. — 
Nilsson-CanteU, 1921, p. 213, fig. 34. 

Lithotrya truncata longicaudata Nilsson-CanteU, 1921, p. 216, fig. 35a. 

Locality: Ngarumaoa Island, Raroia Atoll, Tuamotu Islands; 
collected by J. P. E. Morrison, July 8, 1952 (1 specimen, USNM 
96481). 

Remarks: Greatest diameter of capitulum, 5.5 mm., greatest 
height, 6.5 mm. Laterals wanting; one membranous filament on 
one side and two on the other side. 

Genus Verruca Schumacher, 1817 3 

Verruca cookei Pilsbry 

Plate 1, figuees a-j 
Verruca cookei Pilsbry, 1928, p. 308, 2 figs., pi. 25, fig. 9. 

Locality: Ngarumaoa Island, Raroia Atoll, Tuamotu Islands; 
collected by J. P. E. Morrison, July 11, 1952, on outer reef flats; on 
Lithotrya nicobarica; with Chthamalus calcareobasis (2 specimens) . 

Remarks: The specimens, one about 1.8 mm. in carinorostral diam- 
eter, the other 2.2 mm., were situated between two growth ridges on 
the scutum of Lithotrya nicobarica with the long (carinorostral) axis 
parallel to the base of the scutum. These specimens differ somewhat 
from the typical form. Both have the right-hand, instead of the left- 
hand, scutum and tergum fixed, and both are elongate in the cari- 
norostral axis, instead of subcircuiar (pi. l,a,b). In the larger speci- 
men, the upper articular ridge of the movable scutum is about a third 
of the tergal margin, the second articular ridge is a little over two- 
thirds the tergal margin, and the third ridge extends to the base (pi. 
l,c). Internally, the upper part of the valve is hollowed out, the 
tergal margin is slightly inflected in the upper part, and the occludent 
margin is strongly inflected (pi. 1,6). The movable tergum is trian- 
gular in shape instead of quadrangular as in the type; the third artic- 
ular ridge is low in the upper part (pi. \,e). Internally, the occludent 
margin is inflected (pi. l,d). In the fixed scutum (pi. 1,/), the 
adductor ridge, which is narrower than in the type, extends obliquely 
from the base of the narrow rostral margin to the inner part of the 
thick tergal margin. The straight plate of the fixed tergum (pi. l,g) 
is higher than the adductor ridge of the scutum. The rostrum (pi. 
l,i, j) has three teeth on the carinal margin and seven fine ridges on the 



3 For synonymy, see Pilsbry (1916, p. 15). 



LITTORAL BARNACLES — HENRY 29 

upper part of the scutal margin. Plate 1 ,i also shows a crack extending 
from the apex of the plate to the basal margin, and a heavy deposit of 
calcareous material covering the crack can be seen on the inner side 
(pi. 1 ,j). The carina (pi. l,h) has three teeth on the rostral margin and 
several fine ridges on the upper part of the tergal margin. In the 
smaller specimen, a narrow projection of the carinal margin of the 
rostrum fits into a furrow on a slightly broader projection of the 
rostral margin of the carina ; the adductor ridge of the fixed scutum is 
very prominent. 

The mouthparts and cirri agree, for the most part, with Pilsbry 's 
description. The larger specimen, which contained eggs, has 10 seg- 
ments in the caudal appendages and 5 pairs of spines on the posterior 
cirri. The smaller specimen has 6 segments in the caudal appendages 
and 5 pairs of spines on one or two segments of the sixth cirrus and 4 
pairs on the rest. 

Genus Chthamalus Ranzani 

Chthamalus Pilsbry, 1916, p. 293 (synonymy). 

Diagnosis: Compartments six; rostrum and carina with alae; 
rostrolaterals triangular, without alae, the sheath having a narrow pro- 
jection. Carinolaterals wanting. Basis membranous or calcareous; 
sometimes membranous basis covered with a calcareous layer formed 
of the inflected basal edges of the compartments. 

Labrum with concave or straight edge, toothed or spinose. Man- 
dible with lower part pectinated. First two pairs of cirri short, densely 
spinose, the third pair much longer and bearing spines like those of the 
posterior cirri. 

Type: Chthamalus stellatus (Poli). 

Chthamalus hembeli (Conrad) 

Euraphia hembeli Conrad, 1837, p. 261, pi. 20, fig. 13. 

Chthamalus hembeli Darwin, 1854, p. 465, pi. 18, figs. 5a-5e. — Weltner, 1897, p. 

272.— Gravel, 1905, p. 205.— Pilsbry, 1916, p. 324, pi. 76; 1928, p. 310, pi. 26, 

fig. 6.— Nilsson-Cantell, 1921, p. 290, fig. 55. 

Locality: Reef north of northwest end of Falarik Islet, Ifaluk 
Atoll, Caroline Islands; collected by D. P. Abbott, 1953, from big 
rock on outer reef flat 125 ft. in from breaker line (1 specimen, USNM 
99340). 

Remarks: The external surface is corroded, more or less covered 
with worm tubes, and the orifice is worn down. Only one suture, 
which shows interlocking teeth, is discernible on the exterior, but all 
sutures are visible on the inside. The basis is completely covered by 
a nonstriate calcareous layer which is continuous with the inner 



30 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

lamina of the parietes. The opercular valves agree with those figured 
by Pilsbry (1916, pi. 76, fig. 2c) except that the articular ridge of the 
scutum is not as prominent. 

The carinorostral diameter is 50 mm. ; the height of the rostrum is 
15 mm. and height of the carina, 21 mm. 

The cirri and mouthparts agree with the descriptions of Pilsbry 
(1916) except for the labrum, which has both spines and teeth as found 
by Nilsson-Cantell (1921) and one mandible with 2 strong teeth and a 
slight thickening instead of 3 strong teeth. The dentation of the 
mandible is apparently variable in this species as Nilsson-Cantell 
(1921) figures one mandible with a small tooth between the second and 
third teeth. 

Chthamalus calcareobasis, new species 

Plates l,k-n; 2,a-o 

Type specimens: Holotype, USNM 96482; paratypes, USNM 
96483. 

Localities: Ngarumaoa Island, Karoia Atoll, Tuamotu Islands; 
collected by J. P. E. Morrison, July 8, 1952, on Tridacna maxima on 
outer reef flat (3 specimens, USNM 96484); July 9, 1952, on coral 
patches near or on outer reef (Lithothamnion) ridge (about 50 speci- 
mens, USNM 96482, 96483, 96485) ; July 11, 1952, on outer reef flats; 
on Lithotrya nicobarica; with Verruca cookei (7 specimens, USNM 
96480). 

Makemo, Tuamotu Islands, collected by the Albatross Oct. 21, 
1899, on the reef; on Lithotrya nicobarica (6 specimens, USNM 32885). 

Diagnosis: Distinguished from all other species of Chthamalus by 
the calcareous basis. 

Description: Shell (pi. 2, a) shortly cylindric, sometimes with one 
or more compartments spreading, with quadrangular orifice; wall 
rugose or ribbed, moderately thick; epidermis not persistent. Color 
white or white tinged with pink or purple. Radii narrow, longitudi- 
nally striated as is the adjacent part of the adjoining compartment, 
summits oblique. Alae moderately wide, summits oblique. Sutures 
simple; disarticulated radii and alae show prominent interlocking 
denticles on the edges. Sheath purple or tinged with purple; inner 
lamina immediately below sheath purple, rest white. Basal margin 
of parietes (pi. 2,6) with several rows of teeth in shortly cylindric 
specimens; in spreading compartments, basal margin finely denticu- 
late and inner lamina ridged. Basis (pi. 2,c-f) calcareous through- 
out, edge with pits or ridges (pi. 2,c-d), into which the denticles or 
ridges of the basal part of the parietes fit; flat (pi. 2,e) or, more usually, 



LITTORAL BARNACLES — HENRY 31 

irregularly elongate (pi. 2,d) or cupshaped (pi. 2,f); the depth of 
deepened bases may be greater than the height of the walls. Basis 
calcareous but thin in young specimens (carinorostral diameter about 
5 mm.). 

Carinorostral diameter, 24 mm.; height carina, 16 mm., rostrum, 14 
mm. Carinorostral diameter, 12 mm.; height carina, 6 mm., rostrum 
3 mm.; depth basis, 6 mm. Carinorostral diameter 5 mm.; height, 
2.5 mm. 

Opercular valves (pi. 2,g-o) not cemented together, lined with 
purplish black membrane. Scutum with basal margin about same 
length as tergal and shorter than occludent margin. Externally, 
white or white with purple splotches near tergal margin, moderate 
growth ridges, and, in young or noncorroded specimens, 1 to 3 shallow 
radial furrows, middle furrow usually deeper, may indent edge (pi. 
2,l-n). Internally, color varying from white with purple splotches to 
purple with narrow white bands on the margins; tergal margin bisin- 
uate with slightly reflexed articular ridge in the middle ; adductor ridge 
wanting; adductor pit moderate; valve above pit usually roughened; 
pit with crests for lateral depressor muscle prominent; 3-4 crests for 
rostral depressor muscle close to occludent basal margin; occludent 
margin thick, alternate growth ridges forming somewhat oblique teeth 
on inner side. 

Tergum with convex carinal margin thinner than rest of valve and 
a short wide spur (pi. 2,g,i,o). Spur united to the basiscutal margin 
and occupying about one-half the basal margin; longitudinal furrow 
wide and shallow. Externally, white or white with splotches of purple ; 
growth ridges fine in main part of valve, wider in the spur furrow, 
usually obliterated on the thin carinal portion of the valve; fine 
longitudinal lines crenulate growth ridges in middle of valve; scutal 
margin inflected on the spur; crests prominent, projecting below basal 
margin, not denticulate. Internally, white with purple at apex and 
extending down the middle of valve ; scutal margin with wide articular 
furrow below articular ridge, narrower above; articular ridge short 
and narrow, slightly reflexed in young and noncorroded specimens; 
middle part of valve roughened. 

Labrum (pi. l,k) with low teeth and spines along entire concave 
margin. Palp (pi. 1,&) with rounded end and pectinated spines, 
decreasing in size proximally, on the upper margin. Mandible (pi. 1,1) 
with three strong teeth and a lower pectinated point; pectinations 
between teeth; upper and lower margins spinose. First maxilla (fig. 
l,w) with 1 large pair of spines and 7 or 8 small spines above upper 
notch, 7 or 8 pairs intermediate-sized spines on middle of valve, fol- 
lowed by a second notch and about 10 pairs of finer spines set on a 



32 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

protuberance; upper and lower margins spinose. Second maxilla 
(pi. l,n) with notch; spines absent in notch, elsewhere pectinated. 

Cirrus 1 with 9 segments in anterior ramus, 7 in posterior; anterior, 
2 segments longer than posterior; long spines pectinate on both 
rami, plumose on pedicel. Anterior ramus with short thick spines 
on the anterior and posterior borders of the basal 5 segments and 
similar but shorter spines on the distal sutures of all segments. Cirrus 
11 with subequal rami of 7 and 9 segments ; both rami with long pecti- 
nate spines and fine, multifld spinules on the distal sutures; anterior 
ramus with a few short thick spines on the posterior distal angles of 
the basal 3 segments. Cirrus in with subequal rami of 14 and 17 
segments with 3 pairs of spines on the anterior borders and multifid 
spinules on the distal sutures. Posterior cirri with 3 pairs of spines 
and a small spine between each pair on the anterior borders, one or 
two long spines and several short thicker ones on the posterior distal 
angles, and multifid spinules on the distal sutures. Kami of cirrus 
iv with 18 and 19 segments, cirrus v, 20 and 17 segments, and cirrus 
vi, 20 and 19 segments. Penis with 2 tufts of terminal spines and a 
few fine spines scattered on the segments. 

Discussion: This species is very closely allied to Chthamalus 
hembeli (Conrad) as shown especially by the similarity of the scuta, 
the sutures, and the mandible. The main difference between the two 
species is the presence of a true calcareous basis in C. calcareobasis. 
Darwin (1854) examined E^ve old specimens and three separated 
valves of a young specimen of C. hembeli. The old specimens had flat, 
wide, calcareous bases which were continuous with the inner laminae 
of the parietes, but in the young specimen (basal diameter about 18 
mm.) he states: "there was no appearance of any tendency in the 
parietes thus to grow inflected. " He believed that in a series of 
specimens some would be found with a flat narrow ledge as in C. 
intertextus and some with increasingly wider ledges until the edges 
met in the middle and coalesced into a continuous plate. 

Pilsbry (1916) examined two large specimens and three opercular 
valves and the body of another specimen. He describes the basis as 
follows: " 'Basis membranous, but surrounded by a ledge formed by 
the inflected basal edges of the parietes,' or in old individuals the 
inflected edges of the compartments cover the whole base with a 
strong whitish calcareous layer. The false basis does not, of course, 
show radial furrows or lines, but is quite smooth." Pilsbry does not 
identify the source of his quotation, which is undoubtedly from 
Darwin (1854), but for another barnacle. Darwin (1854, p. 467) 
in the diagnosis of C. intertextus states: l 'basis membranous, but sur- 
rounded by a ledge formed by the inflected basal edges of the parietes." 
As seen in the paragraph above, Darwin believed that C. hembeli goes 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



HENRY. PLATE 




□ □□ECS 




n 



a—j, J'erruca cookei Pilsbry, X 20. a, Apical view; b, basal view, same specimen; c, d, 
internal views of movable scutum and tergum; <?, external view of movable tergum; /, g, 
internal views of fixed scutum and tergum; h, external view of carina; ij, external and 
internal views of rostrum, k-n, Chthamalus calcareobasis, new species, X 62. k, Labrum 
and palpi; /, mandible; m, first maxilla; n, second maxilla. All photographs by Eugene E. 
Collias. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS.. VOL. 107 



HENRY. PLATE 2 




Chthamalus calcareobasis, new species, a. Apical view of holotype (specimen on right 
side), X 2; b, basal view of rostrum and rostrolateral, X 10; c, internal view of edge of basis 
(shown in d), X 10; d, internal view of basis, X 2; e, basal view, showing part of basis, X 3; 
f, internal view of cup-shaped basis, X 2; g-j, internal and external views of opercular plates 
of holotype, X 3; k, I, external views of tergum and scutum of a young specimen, X 10; 
vi-n, internal and external views of scuta of another young specimen, X 10; o, internal 
view of scutum and tergum, X 3. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS, VOL. 107 



HENRY, PLATE 3 




i !U *-* 



A 






n i 

Tetraclita pacifica Pilsbry. a, Basal view, X 2; b, internal view of outer lamina, X 10; 
c, lateral view of spines, X 7; d, longitudinal section of outer lamina, X 20; e, f, external 
views of scutum and tergum, X 3; g, first maxilla, X 62; h, mandible, X 62; i, second 
maxilla, X 62. 



LITTORAL BARNACLES — HENRY 33 

through this stage before the continuous plate found in old individuals 
is formed, but so far no one has seen the earlier stages in the forma- 
tion of the basis. Nilsson-Cantell (1921) examined 3 specimens, one 
of which was only 25 mm. in diameter, but he does not mention whether 
this specimen had a continuous basis or not. 

Another striking difference between C. calcareobasis and C. hembeli is 
the prominent spur on the tergum of C. calcareobasis; in fact, the spur 
is much more prominent than is usual for the genus. Further differ- 
ences are found in the maxillae, palpi, and the cirri. In C. calcareobasis 
the spines of the first maxilla are differentiated by size into 3 groups 
and the notches are prominent, whereas, in C. fiem,beli, the spines, 
which are very numerous, vary much less in size and the notches are 
insignificant. The second maxilla of C. calcareobasis has a small notch 
without spines, but in C. hembeli there is no notch. The rami of the 
second cirrus of C. calcareobasis are subequal instead of very unequal as 
found for C. hembeli by both Pilsbry (1916) and Nilsson-Cantell 
(1921), and the sixth cirrus has 3 pairs of spines instead of 4 and 
does not have the bunches of short spines between the paired spines 
as found in C. hembeli. 

Genus Tetraclita Schumacher! 

Teiracliia Pilsbry, 1916, p. 248 (synonymy). 

Tetraclita squamosa squamosa (Bruguiere) 

Balanus squamosa Bruguiere, 1789, p. 170. 

Tetraclita porosa viridis Darwin, 1854, p. 329. — Kruger, 1911, p. 61, pi. 4, fig. 

41b.— Nilsson-Cantell, 1921, p. 364; 1930, p. 17; 1931, p. 115; 1934a, p. 71; 

1934b, p. 61, 1938, p. 76. 
Tetraclita squamosa squamosa Pilsbry, 1916, p. 251. 
Tetraclita squamosa viridis Broch, 1922, p. 337. — Hiro, 1937, p. 66, figs. 13a, 13b; 

1939, p. 271. 

Locality: Ifaluk Atoll, Caroline Islands; collected by F. M. 
Bayer, Sept. 20, 1953, on the outer reef of Ella Island (4 specimens, 
USNM 99342). 

Tetraclita pacifica Pilsbry emend. 
Plate 3,a-i 
Tetraclita wireni pacifica Pilsbry, 1928, p. 312, pi. 26, figs. 1-5. 

Locality: South Loi Island, Kwajalein Atoll, Marshall Islands; 
collected by F. S. McNeil, 1951-52 (11 specimens, USNM 96486). 

Supplementaky diagnosis: This species differs from all other 
species of Tetraclita by a combination of the following characteristics : 
the small number of tubes in the parietes, the presence of calcareous 
spines in the parietal tubes, and the inconspicuous adductor ridge of 
the scutum. 



34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Supplementary description: Shell conical with small or moder- 
ately large orifice; wall finely ribbed in young, rugose and often 
corroded in adult. Color white or white tinged with Prussian red. 
Radii narrow, transversely grooved in young, inconspicuous or oblit- 
erated in adults. Sheath Prussian red, usually long; inner lamina 
faintly ribbed internally. Tubes in parietes arranged in a row of 
large quadrangular tubes, radially elongate, and a varying number 
of small triangular or round tubes near the outer lamina. In a speci- 
men with a carinorostral diameter of 18 mm. (pi. 3, a), the number 
of large tubes is 1 1 in the rostrum, 8 in one lateral and 9 in the other, 
and 6 in the carina; the number of small tubes is 6 in the rostrum, 

5 in one lateral and 7 in the other, and 2 in the carina. In specimens 
with maximum diameters of 21 mm., 26 mm., and 30 mm., some plates 
have a third series of tubes formed by the bifurcation of the septa 
of the second series of tubes. In a specimen with a carinorostral 
diameter of 26 mm., the number of large tubes is 12 in the rostrum, 

6 in one lateral and 7 in the other, and 8 in the carina. The number 
of small tubes in the second series is 9 in the rostrum, 1 in one lateral 
and 2 in the other, and 5 in the carina. The number of tubes in the 
third series is 3 in the rostrum, 2 in the carina, and none in either 
lateral. Large tubes not filled up even at apex of shell; many of tubes 
with calcareous spines in 1 to 6 rows extending nearly to apex of tubes 
on the inside of the outer lamina and less frequently scattered on the 
sides of the septa and the outside of the inner lamina; small tubes 
occasionally with 1 to 2 rows of spines. Spines straight or curved 
with pointed, single or double ends (pi. 3,6,c). The spines, which 
are hollow, extend from the outer edge of the outer lamina to the inner 
edge where they project into the cavity of the tube; maximum length 
of free part of spine, 1.3 mm. Figure 3,d, a section through the 
outer lamina, shows the cavity in the upper spine and the surface 
of the spine below it. Outer lamina often ridged at base, occasionally 
ridges extend short way up tube; septa sometimes finely denticulate 
near outer lamina. The two smallest specimens with carinorostral 
diameters of 2.5 mm. and 6.0 mm. have a single row of tubes without 
spines. The next largest specimen, with a carinorostral diameter of 
15 mm., has 14 secondary tubes near the outer lamina. Basis 
calcareous, radially ridged internally near outer edge. 

Carinorostral diameter of type, 21.1 mm. Carinorostral diameter of 
largest specimen from the Marshall Islands, 21 mm., lateral diameter, 
30 mm. ; height of rostrum, 20 mm., height of carina, 10 mm. 

Scutum (pi. 3,6) with occludent margin longer than basal. Ex- 
ternally, white with narrow growth ridges, alternate ones forming 
oblique teeth on occludent margin, faint longitudinal striations, and 
either a shallow longitudinal furrow or translucent area in middle of 



LITTORAL BARNACLES — HENRY 35 

valve. Internally, white with Prussian red at apex and sometimes 
extending down middle; articular ridge low, slightly reflexed, about 
half the length of tergal margin; articular furrow narrow; adductor 
ridge short, very low or represented by mere thickening of the valve; 
crests for lateral depressor prominent, 4 in number; crests for rostral 
depressor finer, more numerous. 

Tergum (pi. 3,/) narrow, beaked. Spur narrow with rounded end, 
one side united with basiscutal angle and other side sloping gradually 
to the slightly oblique basal margin. Externally, white with shallow 
depression running to spur. Internally, articular ridge extremely 
narrow and low; articular furrow moderately wide; scutal margin 
slightly inflected; crests for depressor prominent. 

Labrum with concave, spinose margin bearing 7 to 10 teeth. Palp 
concave above and convex below with rounded end; spines on end 
and upper margin pinnate, decreasing in length but increasing in width 
proximally. Mandible (pi. 3, h) with 4 teeth or sometimes with a 
rudimentary fifth tooth close to the spinate inferior angle ; second and 
third teeth double; the smaller of each double tooth and the fourth 
tooth with either serrate edge or thickened edge if projections have 
been worn down. Lower margin of mandible spinose; upper margin 
with small tuft of spines. First maxilla (pi. 3,g) with small notch 
filled with small spines below upper large pair, about 7 pairs of medium- 
sized spines below notch, followed by small spines on lower fourth of 
valve; upper and lower margins spinose. Second maxilla (pi. 3,i) with 
slight notch, without spines; spines shorter above and below notch 
than on rest of margin. 

Cirrus i with anterior ramus nearly twice as long as posterior, long 
spines and a few short spines on distal sutures finely pinnate on ends ; 
pedicel with plumose spines. Cirrus n with subequal rami, spination 
like cirrus i. Cirrus III with very unequal rami, posterior about a 
third longer than anterior ramus; spines on upper segments pinnate; 
spines on lower segments slender and pinnate or thicker and serrate; 
pedicel with plumose spines on anterior borders of both segments and 
a tuft of plumose spines on the posterior distal angle of the lower 
segment. Posterior cirri with 3 pairs of spines, some pinnate, a few 
fine spines on the anterior border of each segment, and a tuft of short 
spines on the posterior distal sutures. Penis with a few spines en- 
circling the orifice and scattered over the segments. 

Number of segments in the cirri 



Diameter 


i 


ii 


in 


IV 


V 


VI 


25 mm. 


18, 9 


10, 9 


19, 24 


20, 19 


21, 22 


23, 22 


26 mm. 


16, 8 


9,9 


12, 21 


- 


- 


24, 23 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Remarks: Pilsbry (1928, p. 313) states that the wall of Tetraclita 
wireni pacifica has "a single series of square or squarish tubes, in 
most of them some laminae and often slender spines projecting from 
the outer layer of the wall"; and yet his figure of the type specimen 
(pi. 26, fig. 1) clearly shows several small secondary tubes near the 
outer lamina. The specimens from the Marshall Islands also show 
one or two series of secondary tubes. Therefore, Pilsbry 's subspecies 
cannot be a subspecies of Tetraclita (Tesseropora) wireni, which has a 
single row of tubes, and it is proposed to raise it to specific rank in the 
subgenus, Tetraclita, in which the wall has several rows of tubes. 

Tetraclita pacifica may be considered the connecting link between 
these two subgenera, showing the first step in the formation of a 
multilayer wall; in other species of the subgenus Tetraclita, this stage 
occurs in very young individuals. The structure of the wall, with the 
exception of the development of secondary tubes, is very similar to 
that of T. rosea and T. wireni, the two species in the subgenus Tesse- 
ropora. The tubes in the first row are similar in size and shape to 
those in the single row in T. rosea and T. wireni, and calcareous spines 
and laminae instead of laminae alone have been developed to 
strengthen the outer wall. 

Literature cited 

Annandale, Nelson 

1916. Three plates to illustrate the Scalpellidae and Iblidae of Indian seas, 
with synonymy and notes. Mem. Indian Mus., vol. 6, pp. 127-131, 
pis. 5-8. 
Barnard, K. H. 

1924. Contributions to the crustacean fauna of South Africa. No. 7, Cirri- 
pedia. Ann. South African Mus., vol. 20, pp. 1-103, pi. 1. 

BORRADAILB, LANCELOT ALEXANDER 

1900. On some crustaceans from the South Pacific. Part 5. Arthrostracans 
and barnacles. Proc. Zool. Soc. London (1900), pp. 795-799, pi. 51. 
1903. Marine crustaceans. Part 7: The barnacles (Cirripedia) . In Gardiner, 
The fauna and geography of the Maldive and Laccadive Archipel- 
agoes, pp. 440-443, 2 figs. 
Broch, Hjalmar 

1922. Studies on Pacific cirripedes. Vid. Medd. Naturh. Foren. Kj0benhavn, 
vol. 73, pp. 215-358, 77 figs. 
Bruguiere, Jean Guillaume 

1789. Histoire naturelle des Vers, vol. 1, Encyclopedic Methodique . . . 
Zoology. 
Cannon, H. Graham 

1935. On the rock-boring barnacle, Lithotrya vaientiana. In, Scientific 
reports of the Great Barrier Reef Expedition, 192&-29. Vol. 5, 
No. 1, 17 pp., 7 figs., 2 pis. 
Conrad, T. A. 

1837. Descriptions of new marine shells from Upper California. Journ. 
Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 7, pp. 227-268, pis. 17-20. 



LITTORAL BARNACLES — HENRY 37 

Darwin, Charles 

1851. A monograph on the sub-class Cirripedia . . . The Lepadidae; or, 

pedunculated cirripedes. xi-f-400 pp., 10 pis. 
1854. A monograph on the sub-class Cirripedia . . . The Balanidae (or 
sessile cirripedes); the Verrucidae, etc. viii-f-684 pp., 30 pis. 
Gray, J. Edward 

1825. A synopsis of the genera of Cirripedes arranged in natural families, with 
the description of some new species. Ann.' Philos., new ser., vol. 10, 
pp. 97-107. 
Gruvel, Abel 

1902. Revision des Cirrhipedes appartement a la collection du Museum 
d'Histoire Naturelle. Nouv. Arch. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, ser 4, 
vol. 4, pp. 215-312, 18 figs., 8 pis. 
1905. Monographic des Cirrhipedes, ou Theocostraces. xii+472 pp., 427 figs. 
Hiro, Fujio 

1937. Cirripeds of the Palao Islands. Palao Trop. Biol. Sta. Studies, vol. 1, 

pp. 37-72, 14 figs., 1 pi. 
1939. Studies on the cirripedian fauna of Japan. IV. Cirripeds of Formosa 

(Taiwan), with some geographical and ecological remarks on the 

littoral forms. Mem. Coll. Sci., Kyoto Imp. Univ., ser. b, vol. 15, 

pp. 245-284, 16 figs. 
Hoek, Paulus Peronius Cato 

1907. The Cirripedia of the Siboga Expedition, a. Cirripedia Pedunculata. 

In Weber, Siboga-Exipeditie . . . , No. 31a, pp. 1-127, 10 pis. 
1913. The Cirripedia of the Siboga Expedition. b. Cirripedia Sessilia. 

In Weber, Siboga-Expeditie . . . , No. 31b, pp. 129-275, 2 figs., 

17 pis. 
Kruger, Paul 

1911. Beitrage zur Cirripedienfauna Ostasiens. In Dofiein, Beitrage zur 

Naturgeschichte Ostasiens. Abh. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Phys., suppl. 

2, pt. 6, pp. 1-72, 132 figs., pis. 1-4. 
Nilsson-Cantell, Carl August 

1921. Cirripeden-Studien. Zur Kenntnis der Biologie, Anatomie und 

Systematik dieser Gruppe. Zool. Bidr. Uppsala, vol. 7, pp. 75-395, 

89 figs., 3 pis. 

1930. Cirripedes. Resultats scientifiques du voyage aux Indes Orientales 

Neerlandaises de LL. AA. RR. le Prince et la Princesse Leopold de 
Belgique. Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Belgique, hors ser., vol. 3, fasc. 3, 
pp. 1-24, 7 figs. 

1931. Revision der Sammlung recenter Cirripedien des naturhistorischen 

Museums in Basel. Verh. Naturf . Ges. Basel, vol. 42, pp. 103-137, 

8 figs., 1 pi. 
1933. Cirripeds from Bonaire. Zool. Jahrb. (Abt. Syst. . . . ), vol. 64, 

pp. 503-508, 2 figs. 
1934a. Indo-Malayan cirripeds in the Raffles Museum, Singapore. Bull. 

Raffles Mus., No. 9, pp. 42-73, 7 figs., pi. 5. 
1934b. Cirripeds from the Malay Archipelago in the Zoological Museum of 

Amsterdam. Zool. Meded. Leiden, vol. 17, pp. 31-63, 12 figs. 

1938. Cirripedes from the Indian Ocean in the collection of the Indian 

Museum, Calcutta. Mem. Indian Mus., vol. 13, pp. 1-81, 28 
figs., 3 pis. 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Pilsbry, Henry Augustus 

1907. The barnacles (Cirripedia) contained in the collections of the U. S. 
National Museum. U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 60, x+122 pp., 36 figs., 
11 pis. 
1916. The sessile barnacles (Cirripedia) contained in the collections of the 
U. S. National Museum; including a monograph of the American 
species. U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 93, xi + 336 pp., 99 figs., 76 pis. 
1928. Littoral barnacles of the Hawaiian Islands and Japan. Proc. Acad. 
Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 79, pp. 305-317, 4 figs., pis. 24r-26. 
Quoy, J. R. C, and Gaimard, P. 

1834. Zoologie, vol. 3, Mollusques. In Voyage . . . de L' Astrolabe. 
Reinhardt, J. T. 

1850. Om Slaegten Lithotryas Evne til at bore sig ind i Steenblokke. Vid. 
Medd. Naturh. Foren., Kj0benhavn, vol. 1, pp. 1-8. 
Sewell, R. S. Seymour 

1926. A study of Lithotrya nicobarica Reinhardt. Rec. Indian Mus., vol. 28, 
pp. 269-330, 18 figs., pis. 14, 15. 
Weltner, Wilhelm 

1897. Verzeichnis der bisher beschreibenen recenter Cirripedienarten. Mit. 
Angabe der im berliner Museum vorhandenen species und ihrer 
Fundorte. Arch. Naturg., vol. 1, pp. 227-280. 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Issued i^lNvVV. \|®1 by the 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Vol. 107 Washington: 1957 No. 3382 

A NEW SPECIES OF CALANOPIA (COPEPODA: CALANOIDA) 
FROM THE CARIBBEAN SEA 



By Thomas E. Bowman 



The genus Calanopia (family Pontellidae) consists principally of 
Indo-Pacific species. Of the eight species now known, four have been 
reported only from Indo-Pacific localities: C. aurivillii Cleve, C. 
herdmani A. Scott, C. sarsi C. B. Wilson, and C. thompsoni A. Scott. 
C. media Gurney (1927) is known only from the Suez Canal. Al- 
though reported by C. B. Wilson (1950, p. 174) from Albatross Station 
5186, off Panay Island, Philippines, C. americana Dahl appears to be 
restricted to the Atlantic Ocean. I have examined the Philippine 
specimens and have found them all to be C. elliptica (Dana). 

Prior to the publication of Wilson's Carnegie (1942) and Albatross 
(1950) papers, C. minor A. Scott and C. elliptica (Dana) were known 
only from the Indo-Pacific. Wilson (1942) listed both species as 
present at Albatross Station 2396 (lat. 28°34' N., long. 86°48' W., 
Gulf of Mexico). The species of copepods in the sample from Station 
2396 are entirely different from those in Wilson's list. No specimens 
of Calanopia are present in this sample, and none of the specimens of 
Calanopia in the U. S. National Museum collections were taken from 
this sample. Dr. Abraham Fleminger, who has made an extensive 
survey of the calanoid copepods of the Gulf of Mexico, informs me 

425742—57 39 



40 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

(in litt. Aug. 3, 1955) that C. americana is the only species of Calanopia 
he has seen in plankton collections from the Gulf of Mexico. 

Wilson also recorded C. elliptica from Carnegie Station 32. Ex- 
amination showed these not to be C. elliptica but a new species, which 
is described below. Thompson and Scott (1903) found C. elliptica in 
samples collected in the Suez Canal and in the Mediterranean near 
Port Said (Station 37). Gurney (1927) did not find it in the Suez 
Canal, and its presence in the Mediterranean needs to be confirmed. 

C. elliptica and C. minor, then, must be added to the list of species 
limited to the Indo-Pacific, while only two species, C. americana and 
the species from Carnegie Station 32 inhabit the Atlantic Ocean. 

Illustrations of all species except C. media and C. sarsi are provided 
by A. Scott (1909) in his Siboga Expedition report. Pesta (1912) has 
provided a key to the females of these species. 

Calanopia biloba, new species 

Figures 1-3 
Calanopia elliptica (Dana), C. B. Wilson, 1942, p. 172 (Caribbean specimens only). 

Specimens examined: 53 females, 46 males, 10 juveniles, collected 
in surface plankton tow, Carnegie cruise No. 7, Station 32, Oct. 5, 
1928. Caribbean sea, lat. 15°18' N., long. 68°11' W., surface tem- 
perature 28.0° C, surface salinity 35.9 °/ 00 , bottom depth 4566 m. 

Types: Holotype male, 1.55 mm., USNM 99506; allotype female, 
1.67 mm., USNM 99507; 107 paratypes, USNM 80076. 

Diagnosis: Female closely resembling C. elliptica in most particu- 
lars, but the right and left fifth legs are of equal length (in C. elliptica 
the left leg is longer) . Male urosome with two processes on right side 
of second segment. A conical process extends posteriad from the 
posterior margin ; slightly anterior and dorsal to this arises an auricu- 
lar process directed laterad. Fifth legs similar to those of C. elliptica, 
but left leg not reaching distal end of second segment of right leg 
(in C. elliptica left leg reaches well beyond distal end of second seg- 
ment of right leg) . 

Additional Description: Female: Total length, excluding caudal 
setae, 1.65-1.67 mm. Metasome about 3.3 times length of urosome. 
Genital and anal segments nearly equal in length. Caudal rami 
about three-fourths as long as anal segment, more than three times 
as long as wide. First antenna 17-segmented, reaching back to about 
the middle of genital segment. Mouthparts and swimming legs 1-4 
identical in number and arrangement of setae with those illustrated 
by Giesbrecht (1892) for C. elliptica. 

Male: Total length, 1.45-1.55 mm. Metasome 2.0-2.1 times 
length of urosome. First two segments of urosome subequal, third 



A NEW SPECIES OF CALANOPIA — BOWMAN 



41 




Figure 1. — Calanopia biloba, new species, a-d, Female: a, lateral view; b, last metasomal 
segment and urosome, lateral; c, same, dorsal; d, head, lateral, e-g, Male: *, last metasomal 
segment and urosome, dorsal; /, second urosomal segment, dorsal; g, same, from right 
side. Scales in mm., same for b, c, and e; same for d, f, and g. 



42 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 




Figure 2. — Calanopia biloba, new species, a, Right antenna 1 of male, b-g, Female: 
by antenna 1; c t antenna 2; d, mandible, with detail of gnathal lobe; e, ma>illa 2;f, maxil- 
liped; g, maxilla 1. Scales in mm., same for a, b, and e; same for c and/; and same for 
d (detail) and g. 



A NEW SPECIES OF CALANOPIA -BOWMAN 



43 




Figure 3. — a-g, Calanopia biloba, new species, a-c, Male: a, fifth legs, posterior surface; 
b, distal segments of right fifth leg, anterior surface; c, distal segment of left fifth leg. d- 
g, Female: d, second leg; e, fourth leg; /, first leg; g, fifth leg. h, Calanopia americana 
Dahl, fifth leg, female; i, Calanopia elliptica (Dana), distal segment of left fifth leg, male. 
Scales in mm., same for a, b, c, g } h, and i; same for d, e, and /. 



44 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

segment slightly longer. First segment bearing a pair of setae on 
the posterior part of the right side, one of them slightly posterior and 
dorsal to the other. First antenna reaching back to middle of 
second segment of urosome. Relative lengths of last five segments 
(from distal end), 27,27,31,49,38. Right fifth leg like that of C. 
elliptica; opposing margins of chela toothed. Left fifth leg shorter 
than that of C. elliptica; terminal segment ends in a seta-like prolonga- 
tion at the base of which is situated a thin seta about half its length; 
in C. elliptica the seta is heavier and slightly longer than the pro- 
longation, the two having the appearance of a chela (fig. 3,-i). 

The specific name, derived from the Latin "hi-" and "lobus," 
refers to the double process on the second segment of the male 
urosome. 

Remakks: The closest affinities of C. biloba are with its Indo- 
Pacific relative, C. elliptica. The principal differences between the 
two species are given in the foregoing account. The only species 
which might be expected to occur in company with the new species 
is C. americana, and these two Atlantic species can be easily dis- 
tinguished. The male of C. americana has no process on the second 
segment of the urosome, and the fifth legs are quite different (Scott, 
1909, pi. 48, fig. 15). The fifth legs of the female (fig. S,h) are unlike 
those of any other species of Calanopia. 

Literature cited 

GlESBRECHT, WlLHELM 

1892. Systematik und Faunistik der pelagischen Copepoden des Golfes von 

Neapel und der angrenzenden Meeresabschnitte. Fauna und Flora 

des Golfes von Neapel, Monogr. 19, 831 pp., 54 pis. 
Gurnet, Robert 

1927. Cambridge Expedition to the Suez Canal, 1924: Copepoda and 

Cladocera of the plankton. Trans. Zool. Soc. London, pt. 2, pp. 

139-172, figs. 15-28. 
Pesta, Otto 

1912. Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse der Expedition nach Mesopotamien. 

Crustaceen. I. Teil. Copepoden aus dem Golf von Persien. Ann. 

k. k. naturhist. Hofmuseums, Wien, vol. 26, pp. 39-62, 26 figs., 1 map. 
Scott, Andrew 

1909. The Copepoda of the Siboga Expedition in the Dutch East Indies 

1899-1900. Monogr. 29a, pt. 1, Free-swimming, littoral and 

semiparasitic Copepoda. 323 pp., 69 pis. 
Thompson, Isaac C, and Scott, Andrew 

1903. Report on the Copepoda collected by Professor Herdman, at Ceylon, 

in 1902, Report to the Government of Ceylon on the Pearl Oyster 

Fisheries of the Gulf of Manaar, Supplementary report VII, pp. 

237-307, pis. 1-20. 



A NEW SPECIES OF CALANOPIA — BOWMAN 45 

Wilson, Charles Branch 

1942. The copepods of the plankton gathered during the last cruise of the 

Carnegie. Carnegie Inst. Washington Publ. 536, Sci. Res. Cruise 7 

of the Carnegie during 1928-1929 under the command of Capt. 

J. P. Ault. Biology-I, v + 237 pp., 16 charts, 136 figs. 
1950. Copepods gathered by the United States fisheries steamer Albatross 

from 1887 to 1909, chiefly in the Pacific Ocean. U. S. Nat. Mus. 

Bull. 100, vol. 14, pt. 4, 441 pp., pis. 2-36. 






D. f. 80VERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1957 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued WplvsSL. sJt^ by the 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Vol. 107 Washington : 1957 No. 3383 



THE FROGFISHES OF THE FAMILY ANTENNARIIDAE 



By Leonard P. Schultz 



In my attempt to identify fishes for inclusion in the report on "The 
Fishes of the Marshall and Marianas Islands," I find it impossible to 
place confidence in the literature describing marine reef fishes of the 
tropical Indo-Pacific regions unless the genus or the family in which 
they belong has been revised. Ichthyologists or fishery biologists 
who have not attempted a revision of a genus of widely ranging marine 
fishes cannot possibly assess the untrustworthiness of most current 
faunal lists. To correctly identify as to genus and to species, tropical 
Indo-Pacific fishes must be considered on a world-wide basis. Those 
few individuals who have attempted revisions of genera have found a 
disturbing percentage of the scientific names currently applied to be 
unreliable. Even a serious attempt at revision of a genus may not 
clarify the nomenclatorial status of more than 95 percent of the 
species. The doubtfully identified 5 percent results mostly from the 
inaccessibility to the author of those types of species preserved in 
the scattered museums of the world. 

The problems of classification and analysis of species and genera 
encountered in one family are the same as found in many other fami- 
lies that I have studied. In general, there are three such problems. 

(1) The characters used in distinguishing species or genera in each 
family must be carefully evaluated. Only in a general way are the 
characters of one family reliable for use in another family. It is im- 
portant to determine for each character its variability, and what 
reliance can be placed on it for each genus. Frequently this cannot 
be established until all species have been studied in the family. 

Another problem encountered is, (2) what constitutes a genus in the 
family being revised? Those who have studied many complex fish 
families know that the limits of a genus are variable. The characters 

47 



48 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

used for defining genera in one family usually do not apply equally 
and in the same way in a related family. The genus is partly a sub- 
jective category in taxonomy and no doubt will remain of that nature 
because (a) different values are attributed to distinguishing charac- 
ters; (b) there is a practical need of relatively more genera in a com- 
plex family, composed of very numerous species more or less closely 
related, than in a less complex family; and (c) in the practice of 
taxonomy there is brought together under a group name few to many 
closely related species, which are thought to represent a phyletic line, 
but whether this line is to be assigned generic or subgeneric level may 
be decided more or less subjectively. 

The characters used in establishing phyletic lines should not be con- 
fined to morphological ones. They may be physiological or involve 
habits and life history, such as are encountered in breeding behavior. 
The behavior of a species is usually reflected in its morphology. As 
species diverged in their evolution, the change in behavior probably 
preceded the morphological change; for example, artificially land- 
locked races of red salmon have a slower rate of growth, and when 
maturity is reached they are of a dwarf size. Should this change 
become inherited we would be dealing with a morphological step in 
evolution. 

The evaluation of generic characters and recognition of genera is 
possible only when a comprehensive study is made of a family on a 
world-wide basis and when there is established the nature of the 
similarities and differences among groups of species. Sometimes 
fin ray counts (table 1) are useful for this purpose. 

To me, a genus is a concept for distinguishing a phyletic line, and 
it may be represented by one or more species. When a genus includes 
many species, some of which are a little different from others but 
agree among themselves and it is difficult to comprehend or to deal 
with the various smaller phyletic lines, then the genus should be 
broken into lesser phyletic lines represented by full genera or sub- 
genera, depending on the nature and amount of the variability. The 
use of subgenera, however, cannot reduce or increase the number of 
natural phyletic lines. If these occur, and are definable, there is little 
one can do but recognize them in our system of naming. Thus, it is 
possible to have a small family overdivided into genera or a large 
family underdivided into genera. Whatever is done, the nomen- 
clature should serve as a tool for the benefit of other biological dis- 
ciplines; it should serve as a means of expressing, by names, the 
groups of species that are closely related and in the same phyletic line. 

The problem (3) of how far to progress nomenclatorially in recog- 
nizing generic categories must be resolved in a practical manner so 
that biologists are not presented with a confusion of ill-defined genera. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 49 

Usually this confusion and lack of agreement among ichthyologists 
and fishery biologists results from inadequate studies of a family. 
Obviously, no dependable solution is possible on how many genera 
and subgenera to recognize in a family until the zoological relation- 
ships of all its species have been adequately compared morphologically, 
physiologically, and as to habits. No doubt, after this work has been 
done, a middle of the road or even a conservative attitude on the 
number of phyletic lines to name would meet with general acceptance. 
Too often in ichthyology there is a tendency either to unite genera 
without adequate study or to establish new genera without any 
attempt to review the family as a whole. The least confusion results 
if the present status of each genus in a family is retained until such 
time as it is thoroughly studied. 

Let us examine a few current problems as a practical application in 
recognizing natural phyletic lines for the basis of a genus or subgenus. 
According to the discussion, a group of closely related species, all of 
which have one or more common characteristics (morphological, 
physiological or life history), represents a generic category. Where 
one phyletic line has two or more such species but a third species 
differs in one or more tested characters, then I would recognize two 
full genera or two subgenera, depending on the amount of divergence 
in the characters tested. Thus, one must evaluate all characters 
used for each family. 

The family Salmonidae illustrates the confusion and diverse thinking 
on problems of evaluating generic levels. Two well known groups 
of species are currently referred to the genus Salmo in Europe. One 
group consists of the rainbow trout Salmo gairdneri, cutthroat trout 
S. clarki, and Atlantic salmon S. solar, among others which may be 
omitted here. The life history of these trout are much the same; they 
migrate upstream to spawn in gravel riffles, returning year after year 
to spawn, and, normally, they do not die after spawning. 

The other group of several species is known as the North Pacific 
salmon, referred to the genus Oncorhynchus by North Americans but 
to Salmo by Europeans. Although there are a few minor mor- 
phological characters that distinguish these two groups of species, 
all die after spawning only once. Even if there were no easily observ- 
able anatomical features, I would recognize the two distinct phyletic 
lines as full genera on the basis of the profound genetic differences in 
the two types of life history. 

Another example of current interest involves morphological differ- 
ences, not life histories. Morton and Miller (Copeia, No. 2, pp. 116— 
124, pis. 1, 2, 1954) proposed that Cristivomer (the lake trout) be 
considered a synonym of or a subgenus under Salvelinus. Although 
a genus may be originally established on a character that later proves 



50 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.107 

valueless, such a genus may be adequately distinguished at a later 
date on the basis of characters not even considered by the original 
author. That appears to be the case with Cristivomer. Morton and 
Miller have demonstrated very beautifully that Salvelinus and 
Cristivomer cannot be generically distinguished by the crested vomer, 
after which the genus was named. However, they clearly state (p. 
122): "We agree with Kendall (1919) that the lake trout represents 
a line of development distinct from the other chars. Three characters 
of Salvelinus namaycush that are not known to overlap with those of 
other species of Salvelinus are coloration, the position of the dorsal 
fin and the number of pyloric caeca." In their summary (p. 123) 
the authors state: "A number of characters readily distinguish 
S. namaycush from all other members of the genus. The best of these, 
we believe, are color pattern, dorsal-fin position, the deeply forked 
caudal fin, and the large number of pyloric caeca.' ' Therefore, by 
the authors own conclusions there are established two phyletic lines, 
one for Salvelinus, with three or more species, and another for the 
monotypic Cristivomer. The remarkably distinct color pattern between 
the two phyletic lines alone is sufficient to justify subgeneric categories, 
but with four well established characters generic rank is justified in 
my opinion. 

One of the shortcomings of some generic changes made by authors 
is the lack of a comprehensive study on a world-wide basis. Actually, 
the evaluation of generic characters for the Salmonidae must involve 
Old World genera and species. Had this been done, Morton and 
Miller's conclusions as well as mine might have been different. This 
is an example of how the introduction of nomenclatorial changes 
without a detailed revision of the family leads to confusion. 

This discussion bears on my immediate problems: (1) How shall I 
evaluate the characters observed for the numerous species of Antenna- 
riidae, and (2) what level of generic interpretation should I give to 
each phyletic line? I believe that in evaluating each important 
character I should consider the evolutionary trend toward its more 
specialized condition. 

Important characters for the Antennariidae are as follows: 

1. The skin varies from highly dentigerous to almost naked, and in 
the most naked species some embedded prickles can be detected 
microscopically. Naked skin is assumed to be the most specialized 
condition. 

2. The most specialized condition of the gill filaments on the first 
gill arch is that of greatest reduction, where only one-half the lower 
part of the first gill arch bears filaments. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 51 

3. The most primitive condition of the bait or lure at the tip of 
the first dorsal spine may be represented by a simple filament. The 
next step would be the development of a tuft of filaments, followed 
by specialization into bifid or trifid tentacles. 

4. The more numerous and most complex development of dermal 
cirri all over the body would represent the more specialized condition. 
These cirri even replace the dermal denticles in one genus. 

5. Fin rays present somewhat of a problem but, in general, branched 
soft rays are assumed to be a more specialized condition than simple 
soft rays. 

6. The more posterior position of the gill opening is considered to 
represent specialization. 

7. The most movable condition of the dorsal spines should repre- 
sent the more generalized condition, whereas embedded dorsal spines 
should represent the most specialized. 

8. The distinct caudal peduncle is considered more primitive than 
when the median fins are membranously attached to the base of the 
caudal fin. 

9. Adult antennariids in general have a sedentary habitat. Histrio 
has a sedentary habitat in seaweed but often the seaweed floats 
peiagically in the ocean. Thus, I consider Histrio to be more spe- 
cialized in its "sedentary" pelagic habitat than the other antennariids. 

Using the above characters I have prepared a diagram (fig. 1) 
suggesting the more important phyletic lines of evolution among the 
antennariids. Under each generic or subgeneric category are the 
abbreviations of the anatomical characters showing relationships. 
Definitions of the abbreviations used are given on page 52, facing 
figure 1. 

The frogfishes, family Antennariidae, may be recognized by their 
globular-shaped bodies, more or less rough skin caused by minute 
denticles; pectoral fin limblike; gill opening restricted to a pore near 
or a little behind the pectoral "elbo"; first dorsal spine, if free, with 
"bait" or lure at its distal end; second and third spines separate, 
sometimes embedded or partly covered with skin ; a fourth free dorsal 
spine, completely embedded, followed by the soft dorsal fin; caudal 
fin rays usually all divided, occasionally one of the outer rays may 
be simple, and number 4+5; gill rakers poorly developed on first 
gill arch; gill filaments on first arch greatly reduced on dorsal part of 
arch or lacking; mouth almost vertical; small conical teeth in rows 
on jaws, vomer, palatines, and tongue. 

In general frogfishes are carnivorous, voracious, and mostly of a 
sedentary nature. However, Histrio will pursue its prey but usually 



52 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



waits quietly for a fish to swim close enough in a head-on approach, 
then the attack occurs quickly. The victim is sucked into the big 
mouth of the frogfish almost instantly, at least quicker than the 
eye can follow. Often a fish as large as the frogfish is engulfed. 

As far as known, frogfishes liberate their eggs in a single long 
ribbonlike gelatinous mass, which floats like a raft of logs on the way 
to a sawmill. This gelatinous mass is enormous in proportion to 
the fish that deposited it. 

Before deposition the egg mass lies closely packed in the ovaries, 
"like a banknote tightly rolled up from its two ends." 

Frogfishes have been observed by Drs. Waldo Schmitt and W. H. 
Longley to inflate their stomachs with air or water, which swells 
them into an enormous size. A few specimens in the collections of 
the National Museum are distended with liquid. 

The following scientific names are unidentifiable: 

Chironectes pavoninus Cuvier and Valenciennes, vol. 12, p. 421, 1837; C. chloro- 

stygma Cuvier and Valenciennes, vol. 12, p. 426, 1837. 
Lophius spectrum Gray, Catalogue of fish collected and described by Laurence 

Theodore Gronow, p. 49, 1854 (type locality, Antilles). 
Antennarius vulgaris "Cuvier and Valenciennes" in Osorio, Jorn. Sci. Math. 

Phys. Nat. Lisboa, ser. 2, vol. 5, No. 19, p. 198, 1898 (name only; nomen 

nudum; St. Thomas Island). 
Chironectes barbatulus Eydoux and Souleyet, Voyage autour du Monde . . . 

La Bonite, Zool., vol. 1, pt. 2, Poissons, p. 184, pi. 5, fig. 1, 1842 (locality not 

known but undoubtedly the Pacific) . 

Photographs of specimens and drawings used in this paper were 
made by the Smithsonian Institution Photographic Laboratory. 



Explanation of abbreviations used in figure 



ads - All dorsal spines long and slender. 

ba - Bait absent. 

bb - Bait bifid. 

bf - Bait filamentous and bulbous. 

bs - Bait simple. 

bt - Bait trifid. 

cpa - Caudal peduncle absent. 

cpa-d - Caudal peduncle absent or dis- 
tinct. 

cpd - Caudal peduncle distinct. 

dse - All spines embedded. 

dsf - Dorsal spines free, movable. 

dll-14 or dlS-16 - Number of soft dorsal 
rays. 

fds - First dorsal spine long and slender. 

gf \i - Gill filaments on }i of first gill arch. 

gf % - Gill filaments on % of first gill arch. 

gn - Gill opening normal in position. 



gp - Gill opening posterior in position. 

pel - Pelagic habitat. 

p7 or p8-14 - Number of pectoral fin rays. 

sc - Bony scutes present. 

sed - Sedentary habitat. 

sfd - All soft dorsal rays divided. 

sfds - All soft dorsal rays simple. 

sf0-2d - Any of last two soft dorsal rays 

may or may not be divided, 
sfpd - Soft rays of pectoral all divided, 
sfps - Soft rays of pectoral all simple, 
sfvd - Soft rays of pelvic all divided, 
sfvs - Soft rays of pelvic all simple, 
skc - Skin profusely covered with cirri, 
skd - Skin denticulate, 
skn - Skin naked, 
skvd - Skin with long upstanding denticles 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 



53 



ANTENNARIUS 

cpa-d;bf;sfO-2d 

sfvd-l 



PLUMANTENNARIUS 

c pa;bf;sfvs; sf p s; sf d 



XENOPHRYNICHTHYS 
cpa;ba;dse 



ANTENNATUS 
cpcrsfds 



LOPHIOCHARO 
sfdd;cpd 



UNIANTENNAT 
sfO-2d;cpd 



ABANTENNARIUS 
9P;bf;skd;cpa 



FOWLERICHTHYS 
stpd;hf;sfvd 

KANAZAWAICHTHYS 
sc 



TRIANTENNATUS 
bt 



TRICHOPHRYNE 
skd;cpd;fds;bf 



TATHICARPUS 
ads;p7;skud 
bs;cpd 




PHRYNELOX 
bb 



RHYCHERUS 

bf;sfvs;ads 



skc ECHINOPHRYNE 

cpd;skd 



HISTIOPHRYNE 
skn;cpa 



NUDIANTENNARIUS 
skn;cpa,*bf 



HISTRIO 
gn;gf3/4 
pel 



HISTRiONINAE 
skn 



ANTENNARIINAE 

skd;gf 1/4; sed 

Antennariid stock 

Figure 1. — Presumed phylogeny of the Antennariidae. Explanation of abbreviations on 

facing page. 

Artificial key to the genera, subgenera, and species of the Antennariidae 

la. Dorsal part of first gill arch without filaments, ventral part with only anterior 

half bearing filaments; no dermal cirrus at tip of chin nor on snout in front 

base of first dorsal spine; a small flaplike cirrus at symphysis of premaxil- 

laries between dentigerous parts . . . (Subfamily Antennariinae.) (p. 62) 

2a. Occipital region of head with a thickened and raised bilaterally symmetrical 

bony armor that extends anteriorly along dorsal edge of orbits; these two 

scutes are fused along the middorsal line except around the third dorsal 

spine and its membrane; a similar bony plate below each eye; none of 

dorsal spines embedded; tip of first dorsal spine consists of a nonfilamen- 



54 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Table 1. — Counts recorded for species of Antennariidae 



VOL. 10T 





Number of fin rays 


Genera, subgenera, 


Soft dorsal 


Anal 


Pectoral 


and species 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


7 


8 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


Kana zawakhthys 
scutatus 






4 












3 


1 
















8 




Tathicarpus 

butleri* 


3 

1 












3 
1 

1 




3 
2 














butleri 


































Trichophryne 

rosaceus 


2 












1 
2 










4 

1 










mitchelli*. 




1 


2 








1 










2 








Nudiantennarius 
subteres - 




1 

2 
1 








1 

2 
1 








2 
4 








Abantennarius 

duescus 


































analis 
























2 










Rhychems 

filamentosus* 




3 










3 

3 
3 

2 
1 












3 








Histiophryne 

bougain.UH*- 








3 
3 

1 














3 












scortea* 
























1 
1 


2 

2 

1 








Echinophryne 

crassispina* 










1 
1 


1 
1 


1 

1 

10 

39 

1 
5 
3 
3 
32 

6 
6 

2 

6 

1 


1 


1 














glauerti* 






















Phrynelox 
Phrynelox 
striatus* 




1 

2 

10 

38 

1 
6 
3 
3 

30 

4 
6 


1 
















2 
2 
2 
3 

1 
10 

6 

1 








melas*. 






























nuttingi 
























14 
59 








scaber 


1 


1 










1 


















Triantennatus 
cunninghami 


















1 








zebrinus 












1 












1 








atra 






























nox 


























5 
53 

12 








tridens _.. 




1 
3 






















2 






Antennatus 
Antennatus 
bigibbus 












1 












2 

9 






strigatus 




















1 








Xenophrynichthys 
cryptacanthus 




1 
5 


















2 










Lophiocharon 
Lopkiocharon 
caudimaculatus.-- 


1 


















8 


2 
1 










Uniantennatus 
campylacanthus*.. 










































1 
3 












2 
2 












2 












1 










1 
1 
2 


1 






tenebrosus* 












1 

1 














tenebrosus 


































Antennarius 
Fowlerichthys 




75 

22 

1 

17 

2 


6 








79 
23 

1 
17 
















99 

44 
1 
3 


5 


avalonis 






























sarasa* 
































ocellatus 




























3 


26 




Plumantennatus 














2 

1 

4 










4 






Antennarius 
























1 
8 














3 
2 
5 










































2 

5 












2 
9 






















































1 














1 

?1 
13 
11 
2 
2 










?1 
1 
1 
1 












?1 
































1 
1 


6 

5 

2 

1 

5 

15 

19 

2 

1 

3 

2 

2 

16 

12 

22 

30 


















































phymatodes* - 
































































7 
1 










2 












11 
7 
1 


3 

18 










15 
21 

3 
2 
2 

18 
13 
22 

32 






















1 














1 












2 
2 
1 
3 
3 


38 
2 
































































notophthalmus* .. 
























1 
1 










notophthalmus 




















































4 












1 










3 

1 










33 
21 


5 

1 

34 

72 


























2 
























4 
4 








Histrio 

histrio 


3 


2 










2 










2 









♦From literature. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 55 

tous bulbous "bait." (Gulf of Mexico; probably pelagic.) (Kanaza- 

waichthys, new genus.) scutatus, new species (p. 63) 

2b. Head without bony armor as above. 

3a. First, second, and third dorsal spines embedded, covered over with 
granular skin; bait not externally visible; soft dorsal and anal fins 
membranously attached to base of caudal fin; all fin rays simple 
except those of caudal fin; soft dorsal rays 12 or 13; anal 7; pectoral 8. 
(East Indies, Karakelang and Rotti Islands) (Genus Antennatus, 
Xenophrynichthys, new subgenus.) (p. 81). 

cryptacanthus (Weber) (p. 82) 
3b. First dorsal spine not embedded, but freely movable, usually bearing 
bait at its distal tip. 
4a. Second dorsal spine slender, elongate, its length contained fewer than 
2.8 times in length of base of soft dorsal fin. 
5a. Pectoral rays 7; first dorsal spine long, slender, hairlike, smooth, 
bearing at its tip a simple bannerlike tentacle; third dorsal spine 
very elongate and slender, much longer than second; unusually 
elongate upstanding denticles on skin even on fins; all soft dorsal, 
pelvic, and pectoral rays simple; anal rays all divided; caudal 
peduncle distinct; all fin rays notably elongate; dorsal soft rays 
11; anal 7. (Genus Tathicarpus.) (p. 64) 

butleri Ogilby (p. 64) 
5b. Pectoral rays 9 to 11; first dorsal spine not as above, third dorsal 
spine robust, shorter than or same length as second. 
6a. (See 6b and 6c.) Skin prickly or covered with granules; caudal 
peduncle distinct; first dorsal spine very slender, almost hair- 
like, about as long as or longer than second dorsal spine; first 
spine bristly and with filamentous tip. (Genus Trichophyrne.) 
(P. 65) 
7a. Soft dorsal rays 12; ocellate dark spot basally at second third of 
length of soft dorsal fin. (Philippines.) 

rosaceus (Smith and Radcliffe) (p. 65) 
7b. Soft dorsal rays 13 or 14, skin covered with upstanding spiniform 

bristles. (Australia.) mitchelli (Morton) (p. 65) 

6b. Skin smooth, at most with only scattered microscopic size denti- 
cles; caudal peduncle absent or nearly so; first dorsal spine short 
with bulbous tip ; dorsal soft rays 12; anal 7, pectoral 9. (Philip- 
pines.) (NudiantennariuSf new genus.) (p. 66) 

sub teres (Smith and Radcliffe) (p. 66) 
6c. Skin without denticles but these are replaced by a profusion of 
fleshy tentacles or cutaneous appendages everywhere; bait 
trifid, two large tentacles with a stubby one basally between 
them; last pelvic ray simple; soft dorsal rays 13; anal 8; pectoral 
11. (Southern Australia.) Genus Rhycherus.) 

filamentosus (Castelnau) (p. 68) 
4b. Second dorsal spine robust like the third, short, its length contained 3 
or more times in the length of base of soft dorsal fin. 
8a. Gill opening behind pectoral fin "elbo" by a distance equal to or 
greater than least depth of the indistinct caudal peduncle; soft 
dorsal rays 12; anal 7. (Abantennarius, new genus.) (p. 66) 
9a. Gill opening about halfway between pectoral fin base and anal 
fin origin, pectoral rays^9. (Hawaiian* Islands.) v -; 

duescus (Snyder) (p. 66) 



56 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.107 

9b. Gill opening adjacent to anal fin origin; pectoral rays 10. 
(Hawaiian Islands.) . . . analis Gosline, new species (p. 67) 
8b. Gill opening adjacent to pectoral fin "elbo." 
10a. Soft dorsal rays 15 or 16. 

11a. Skin smooth, at most with only microscopic size spicules; 
caudal peduncle absent; none of soft rays of dorsal or anal 
fins divided. (Genus Histiophryne.) (p. 69) 
12a. Pectoral rays 8; second and third dorsal spines not movable, 
covered with thick skin. (Southern Australia.) 

bougainvilli (Cuvier and Valenciennes) (p. 69) 
12b. Pectoral rays 10 or 11; second and third dorsal spines 
movable. (Southern Australia.) 

scortea McCulloch and Waite (p. 69) 

lib. Skin everywhere covered with bristles; caudal peduncle 

distinct or nearly so; anal rays 8 to 10; pectoral 10 or 11. 

(Genus Echinophryne.) (p. 70) 

13a. First dorsal spine stout, covered with prickles; body covered 

with upstanding bristles; none of soft dorsal or anal rays 

divided. (Southern Australia.) 

crassispina McCulloch and Waite (p. 70) 

13b. First dorsal spine slender, smooth, with simple tentacle, 

last few soft dorsal rays and anal rays divided. (Western 

Australia.) glauerti Whitley (p. 70) 

10b. Soft dorsal rays 11 to 14. 

14a. Fleshy tip of first dorsal spine consists of distinct bifid or 
trifid tentacles, often with filaments, but usually without 
basal filaments, anal rays 6 or 7; last 2 or 3 rays of soft 
dorsal divided; all anal rays divided; all pectoral rays simple; 
caudal peduncle distinct. (Genus Phrynelox.) (p. 71) 
15a. Bifid tentacles at tip of first dorsal spine; dorsal soft rays 
usually 11 or 12, rarely 13; pectoral 10 or 11. (Subgenus 
Phrynelox.) (p. 71) 
16a. Bony part of first dorsal spine almost twice length of 
second dorsal spine. 
17a. Body striped with brown markings more or less resem- 
bling a zebra. (Tropical Western Pacific and Indian 

Ocean.) striatus (Shaw) (p. 71) 

17b. Body with ocellate spots and somewhat mottled or 
plain blackish. (Tropical Western Pacific and 

Indian Ocean.) melas (Bleeker) (p. 72) 

16b. Bony part of first dorsal spine only slightly longer or about 
same length as second dorsal spine. 
18a. Color plain black or dark brown. (Western Atlantic.) 

mittingi (Garman) (p. 72) 

18b. Body striped with dark brown markings resembling a 

zebra; fins with dark brown spots. (Western 

Atlantic.) scaber (Cuvier) (p. 73) 

15b. Trifid tentacles at tip of first dorsal spine (rarely is one of 
r . these tentacles missing from injury); dorsal soft rays 
usually .12. (Triantennatus, new subgenus.) (p. 74) 
19a. Pectoral rays 10, occasionally 9 or 11. 

20a. Body striped with dark brown markings on a pale back- 
ground, more or less zebralike. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 57 

21a. About 4 to 6 dark stripes on soft dorsal fin, and other 
widely spaced ones on body; pectoral rays 9 or 10. 
(Hawaii.) .... cunninghami (Fowler) (p. 74) 
21b. Dark stripes on fins and body very numerous and 
closely packed; pectoral rays 10, occasionally 11. 
(Australia.) .... zebrinus, new species (p. 75) 
20b. Color black; fin rays notably black, not white-tipped, 
except pectorals are slightly pale. (Sydney, Aus- 
tralia.) atra, new species (p. 76) 

19b. Pectoral rays 11, occasionally 10. 

22a. Color black, or dark brown; pectoral rays white-tipped. 

(Japan.) nox (Jordan) (p. 78) 

22b. Color mottled or striped with dark brown; fins and 
belly dark-spotted. (Japan; Mauritius.) 

tridens (Temminck and Schlegel) (p. 79) 
14b. Fleshy tip of first dorsal spine consists of a simple tentacle or 
is filamentous or bulbous with or without filaments or a 
combination of any of these. 
23a. Bony part of first dorsal spine notably slender, its fleshy tip 
consisting of a nonfilamentous simple slender tentacle, 
sometimes somewhat lanceolate. 
24a. Caudal peduncle absent, or indistinct. 

25a. All rays of soft dorsal simple; skin thick and firm, 

covered with shagreenlike denticles; third dorsal 

spine bound down with skin; no naked area behind 

second or third dorsal spines; body mottled with 

brown or a very coarse network of brown; usually a 

dark bar across anal fin and basally across caudal fin. 

(Antennatus, new genus and new subgenus.) (p. 80) 

26a. Pectoral rays 11, occasionally 10; first dorsal spine 

notably longer than second dorsal spine. (Central 

and Western Pacific and Indian Ocean.) 

bigibbus (Lacepede) (p. 80) 

26b. Pectoral rays usually 10, occasionally 9; first dorsal 

spine about same length as second .dorsal spine. 

(Eastern Pacific.) . . . strigatus (Gill) (p. 81) 

25b. Dorsal soft rays all divided; no pelvic ray divided; 

body rather profusely covered with dark specks and 

irregularly shaped dark and light marks; pectoral 

rays usually 9, occasionally 10; anal 7. (Eastern and 

Western Pacific and Indian Ocean.) (Genus and 

subgenus Lophiocharon.) 

caudimaculatus (Riippell) (p. 82) 
24b. Caudal peduncle distinct; third dorsal spine movable; 
last 2 or 3 or none of the soft dorsal rays divided; 
pectoral rays 10 to 12. (JJniantennatus, new sub- 
genus.) (p. 83) 
27a. Bony part of first dorsal spine shorter than second dorsal 
spine; dorsal soft rays 11; pectoral 10; anal 7; median 
fins with several large ocellate spots; 3 large ocellate 
spots on each side of the body; last 3 soft dorsal rays 
divided. (Guinea, West Africa.) j|p 

campylacanthus (Bleeker) (p. 85) 



58 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

27b. Bony part of first dorsal spine as long as or longer than 
second dorsal spine; dorsal soft raj^s 12 or 13; pec- 
toral rays 10 to 12; only last 2 or 3 soft dorsal rays 
divided. 
28a. Anal rays 8 or 9; color dark brown, spotted with 
blackish; some ocellate spots present. (Tropical 
Central and Western Pacific.) 

horridus (Bleeker) (p. 84) 

28b. Anal rays 7; color brownish, marbled with bright 

yellow when alive; pectoral, dorsal, anal, and 

caudal fins with several distinct ocellate spots 

(Western Atlantic.) .... tenebrosus (Poey) (p. 83) 

23b. Fleshy tip of first dorsal spine consists of a group of filaments 

or a ribbonlike tentacle with filaments or tentacles or a 

bulbous tip or combination of these. (Genus Anten- 

narius.) (p. 85.) 

29a. All or at least last 8 of the soft dorsal rays divided. 

30a. All of the pelvic soft rays divided; caudal peduncle 
distinct, bait consists of a tuft of tentacles or a bulb- 
ous-like bait; soft dorsal rays usually 13; anal 8. 
(Subgenus Fowler ichthys.) (p. 86.) 
31a. Bony part of first dorsal spine longer than second 
dorsal spine; pectoral rays 13 or 14, undivided; 
soft dorsal fin rays all divided; an ocellate spot 
basally a little behind middle of length of soft 
dorsal fin; bulbous tip of bait usually very small. 
(Western Atlantic.) . . . radiosus Garman (p. 87) 
31b. Bony part of first dorsal spine shorter than or about 
as long as second dorsal spine; all pectoral rays 
divided except possibly in sarasa. 
32a. Pectoral rays 13. 

33a. Soft dorsal rays all divided except possibly first 
2 or 3 in small specimens; an ocellate spot 
posterobasally on soft dorsal fin; scattered 
brown spots on fins and body. (Catalina 
Island; Mexico; Panama^ Peru.) 

avalonis Jordan and Starks (p. 87) 

33b. First 5 soft dorsal rays may be undivided, at 

least the last 8 are divided; no ocellate spot on 

soft dorsal; coloration consists of dark brown 

background overlaid with reticulations and 

dark streaks. (Japan.) . sarasa Tanaka (p. 88) 

32b. Pectoral rays usually 12, occasionally 11 or 13; a 

large ocellate spot basally on middle of soft dorsal 

fin and one below it on midside of body; usually 

tiny dark brown spots scattered on body; caudal 

fin with or without a large ocellate spot; all of 

soft dorsal, pelvic, and pectoral rays branched. 

(Western Atlantic.) 

ocellatus (Bloch and Schneider) (p. 89) 

30b. Pelvic rays all simple or undivided; caudal peduncle 

absent; pectoral rays 9; dorsal 'soft 'rays '."13; bod} r 

profusely marked with small brown spots or blotches 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 59 

on a pale background, some of these dark blotches 
have pale centers on caudal fin or color is plain black 
with tips of rays white; median fins distally broadly 
margined with white. (Australia, Singapore.) (Plum- 
antennatust new subgenus.) (p. 89) 

asper Macleay (p. 89) 

29b. None or only last 2 or 3 rays of soft dorsal are divided; 

none or only last pelvic ray divided; pectoral rays all 

simple. (Subgenus Antennarius.) (p. 90) 

34a. Some "warts" on skin; none of the anal, dorsal or 

pelvic rays are branched or divided; dorsal rays 11 

or 12; anal 7; pectoral 10. (Western Pacific.) 

phymatodes Bleeker (p. 90) 

34b. No "warts" on skin; all anal rays divided except possibly 

the first. 

35a. None of the soft dorsal rays are branched or divided; 

last pelvic ray probably divided; bony part of first 

dorsal spine slightly longer than second dorsal 

spine and bearing a tuft of tentacles at its distal 

tip; dorsal rays 11 or 12; anal 7; pectoral 9 or 10. 

36a. Dorsal rays usually 11; caudal peduncle distinct; 

body and fins with several black ocellate spots; 

body, including abdomen, with numerous small 

blackish spots; background color reddish brown. 

(West coast of Africa.) 

partialis (Cuvier and Valenciennes) (p. 92) 
36b. Dorsal rays 12; caudal peduncle almost absent; a 
single large ocellate spot at beginning of last 
third of length of soft dorsal base, this spot more 
on body than on dorsal fin; body and fins 
speckled with tiny dark spots. (Bermuda.) 

bermudensis, new species (p. 98) 
35b. Last 2 or 3 soft dorsal rays divided, except none may 
be divided in multiocellatus. 
37a. Bony part of first dorsal spine longer than second 
dorsal spine. 
38a. Body without "warts" on skin. 

39a. Body striped with black or brown marks, more 
or less zebralike; bony part of first dorsal 
spine about same length as second dorsal 
spine, the fleshy tip consists of an elongate 
filamentous tentacle; an ocellus may occur 
basally in soft dorsal fin; dorsal rays 13; 
anal 7; pectoral 10. (Philippines, East 
Indies, Japan.) 

hispidus (Bloch and Schneider) (p. 90) 
39b. Body not striped like a zebra. 

40a. Dorsal soft rays 13; anal 8; pectoral 11; 
large adults have a profusely black 
spotted and reticulated color pattern, or it 
may be mottled light and dark with 
scattered tiny black specks; small speci- 
mens have a few ocellate spots on fins and 



60 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

body; no smooth pit behind second dorsal 
spine. (Tropical Pacific.) 

moluccensis Bleeker (p. 91) 

40b. Dorsal soft rays 11 or 12; anal 6 or 7; 

pectoral 10. 

41a. Color white or nearly so, finely peppered 

with dark dots on body and fins. 

(Western Pacific.) 

leucosoma Bleeker (p. 92) 
41b. Color not as above; two color phases 
occur or a combination of these may 
occur; one is black with tips of rays of 
paired fins white; the other color phase 
is usually mottled light brownish and 
marked with ocellate spots; occasion- 
ally ocellate spots are visible in the 
black color phase; bait usually consists 
of a ribbonlike tentacle with filaments, 
or a tuft of filaments. 
42a. Abdomen with scattered but numerous 
small blackish ocellate spots in pale 
color phase; naked area behind the 
second dorsal spine becomes denticu- 
late on the large adults of this species ; 
no dark spot each side of third 
dorsal spine. (Indo-Pacific.) 

chironectes Lacepede (p. 93) 
42b. Abdomen unspotted in pale color phase, 
a black spot basally each side of 
third dorsal spine; in black color 
phase a whitish spot on dorsal edge 
of caudal peduncle just behind rear 
of basef of soft dorsal. (Western 
Atlantic.) 

multiocellatus (Cuvier and 
Valenciennes) (p. 94) 
38b. Body with some warts; last 3 soft dorsal rays di- 
vided; caudal peduncle distinct, longer than deep; 
dorsal 12; anal 7; pectoral 10; no pelvic ray 
branched. (Western Pacific and Indian Ocean.) 
oligospilos Bleeker (p. 95) 
37b. Bony part of first dorsal spine about as long as or 
shorter than second dorsal spine. 
43a. Body striped with dark brown, more or less 
zebralike; dorsal rays 12 or 13; anal 7; pectoral 
10, rarely 11 (Western Pacific and Indian 
Ocean.) . hispidus (Bloch and Schneider) (p. 90) 
43b. Body not striped like a zebra; anal rays 7 or 8. 
44a. Soft dorsal rays 13; pectoral 11 or 12; anal 
7 or 8; belly with scattered blackish or dark 
brown spots (absent in young) notably 
much larger than dark spots elsewhere if 
latter were present; fleshy tip of first dorsal 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ [ 61 

spine with some blackish tentacles; only last 
2 or 3 soft dorsal and last pelvic rays branch- 
ed; caudal peduncle scarcely present. (East- 
ern Pacific.) .... sanguineus Gill (p. 95) 
44b. Soft dorsal rays normally 11 or 12, rarely 13; 
anal rays normally 7, occasionally 8. 
45a. Caudal peduncle absent or scarcely present, 
dorsal and anal fins join at or very close 
to base of caudal fin rays; dorsal rays 12; 
last two or three rays of soft dorsal 
divided; last pelvic ray divided. 
46a. No ocellate spot in soft dorsal. 

47a. Pectoral rays 11 or 12; median fins 
finely brown spotted; background 
color brownish to light brownish, 
mottled or finely spotted. (Hawaii; 
Cocos Island.) 

drombus Jordan and 

Evermann (p. 96) 

47b. Pectoral rays 10, occasionally 9 or 11; 

body sometimes profusely peppered 

with dark dots. (Central and West 

Pacific and Indian Oceans.) 

coccineus (Lesson) (p. 97) 

46b. A single large occellate spot at beginning 

of last third of length of soft dorsal, 

this spot more on body than on dorsal 

fin; body and fins speckled with tiny 

dark spots; pectoral 9 or 10. (Bermuda.) 

bermudensis, new species (p. 98) 

45b. Caudal peduncle present, distinct. 

48a. Color black; body with minute white 
specks; no ocellate spot; dorsal 12; anal 
7; pectoral 9; last pelvic ray undivided. 
(Western Pacific.) 

dorehensis Bleeker (p. 97) 
48b. Color not as above. 

49a. Last pelvic ray simple or undivided; 
pectoral rays 9, rarely 10; ocellate 
spot on soft dorsal fin. blackish bar 
on body below area between third 
dorsal spine and origin of soft dorsal. 
(Western Pacific.) 

notophthalmus Bleeker (p. 99) 
49b. Last or fifth pelvic ray divided. 

50a. Pectoral rays 11; color pattern con- 
sisting of brown streaks and 
blotches, some of which have pale 
centers. (Western Atlantic.) 

verrucosus Bean (p. 99) 
50b. Pectoral rays normally 9 or 10. 
51a. Pectoral rays usually 9, occa- 
sionally 10. 



62 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

52a. General coloration dark brown 
and somewhat dark spotted 
but cirri on body are usually 
white; median fins notably 
dark brown except distally 
with broad white or pale edges; 
a pale bar across caudal fin 
basally. (Western Pacific.) 

altipinnis Smith and 
Radcliffe (p. 99) 
52b. General coloration light brown 
with a very small ocellate spot 
at about beginning of last 
third of length of soft dorsal 
base, this spot more on dorsal 
fin than on body. (Florida 
and Cuba.) 

pauciradiatus, new species 
(p. 100) 
51b. Pectoral rays normally 10, occa- 
sionally 11; usually an ocellate 
spot basally on soft dorsal fin at 
about beginning of last third of 
its length; background color 
light tan to dark brown, usually 
somewhat mottled; a smooth pit 
or area behind second dorsal 
spine. (Central and Western 
Pacific; Indian Ocean.) 

nummifer (Cuvier) (p. 102) 
lb. Dorsal part of first gill arch with the posterior half only bearing filaments; 
ventral part of first gill arch with gill filaments along its entire length; two 
dermal cirri on middorsal line of snout in front of base of first dorsal spine; 
dermal flap at symphysis of premaxillaries absent or represented by a low 
fold of skin. (Subfamily Histrioninae; genus Histrio pelagic in Atlantic, 
Pacific, and Indian Oceans.) histrio (Linnaeus) (p. 103) 

Family ANTENNARIIDAE 
Subfamily Antennariinae 
XCanazawaichthys, new genus 

Genotype: Kanazawaichthys scutatus, new species. 

This new genus of antennariid differs from" all other genera in the 
family by having two pairs of bony plates on the head. The largest 
pair covers all of the dorsoposterior part of the head behind and 
above orbits. A small v plate is below each eye. Otherwise this 
genus has the characters of Antennarius. 

The genus is named in honor of Kobert H. Kanazawa, museum 
aide in the Division of Fishes, U. S. National Museum (USNM), 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 63 

who observed three unique specimens^while sorting specimens from 
the Oregon collections and kindly brought them to my attention. 

Kanazawaichthys scutatus, new species 
Plate 14,a 

Holotype: USNM 157919, from Gulf of Mexico, Oregon Station 
1273, long. 87°51' W., lat. 28°10' N., Mar. 9, 1955. Probably 
picked up in a dipnet near surface. Standard length 28.5 mm. 

Paratypes: USNM 157920, collected with holotype and bearing 
same date, two specimens, 15.8 and 29.5 mm.; USNM 174946, Gulf 
of Mexico, Oregon Station 1370, long. 88°00' W., lat. 28°55 / N., 
Aug. 20, 1955, taken from stomach of yellowfin tuna, standard 
length 17 mm. 

Description: Certain counts are recorded in table 1 (p. 54). 

The bony part of the first dorsal spine, slightly shorter than the 
second, bears at its tip the fleshy bait which consists of a nonfila- 
mentous bulb; the second and third spines are movable but mem- 
branously connected to the head; all soft rays of anal, caudal, and 
pelvic are branched; last 10 to 12 soft dorsal rays branched; pectoral 
rays all simple; gill opening close to pectoral fin base; caudal peduncle 
distinct, deeper than long; skin with tiny denticles somewhat em- 
bedded; dermal cirri scattered on body and head. 

Detanedhneasurements were made on the holotype and two para- 
types and these data, expressed in thousandths of the standard length, 
are recorded respectively. Standard length 28.5, 29.5 and 15.8 
millimeters. Greatest depth of body 592, 572 and 634; length of 
bony part of first dorsal spine 202, 190 and 165; of second 158, 167 
and 146, of third 173, 190 and 158; longest soft dorsal ray 271, 248 
and 215; longest middle caudal ray 394, 404 and 462; length of head 
from snout tip to middle of gill opening 611, 596, and 620; length 
of maxillaries 252, 228 and 203; least depth of caudal peduncle 128, 
114 and 127; length of caudal peduncle 94, 86 and 64; length of base 
of soft dorsal fin 518, 500 and 506; diameter of eye 128, 133 and 
127; bony width of interorbital space 99, 95 and 108. 

Color in alcohol: Fins, head, and body fight strawf colored; 
body with scattered dark pigment spots; fins probably pink when 
alive as there are traces of that color still evident. 

Remarks: This remarkable new species of frogfish is unlike any 
other antennariid known to me by having the remarkable bony scutes 
or armor on the head. I suspect this species is pelagic and that 
these thickened bony plates act as a floating mechanism. Consider- 
ation was given to the possibility ^that this species might represent 
the young stage of some known species of frogfish and that at a later 
stage these plates might be lost. 

416279—57 2 



64 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.107 

The four species referred to the subgenus Fowlerichthys are closest 
to Kanazawaichthys scutatus in regard to most characters except 
the lack of bony plates. Anal, dorsal, and pelvic soft rays all divided, 
and also identical in number. A. avalonis and A. sarasa are from 
the Pacific, but A. radiosus and A. ocellatus are from the Western 
Atlantic. Our large series of A. radiosus includes the sizes of the 
types of K. scutatus, and no bony armor is present on the head even 
though pectoral rays are of same number. 

A. ocellatus, with the usual number of 12 pectoral rays occasionally 
11 or 13, differs from K. scutatus, which has 13. Furthermore, speci- 
mens of A. ocellatus from the Gulf of Mexico measuring 22 and 26 mm. 
show no sign of any bony plate. Other specimens of A. ocellatus 
ranging in size from 15.5 mm. and longer^show no trace of the plates 
which characterize K. scutatus. 

We conclude, therefore, that this new genus and species represents 
a phyletic line differing from all other genera in the family. 

The species is named scutatus in reference to the bony scutes on the 
head. 

Genus Tathicarpus Ogilby 

Tathicarpus Ogilby, Proc. Roy. Soc. Queensland, vol. 20, p. 19, Jan. 2, 1907 
(genotype, Tathicarpus butleri Ogilby). 

This genus is characterized by having a simple tentacle at tip of 
first dorsal spine in combination with a distinct caudal peduncle, 
none of the soft dorsal or pelvic rays branched, and seven pectoral 
fin rays. 

Tathicarpus butleri Ogilby 

Plate 1,a 

Tathicarpus butleri Ogilby, Proc. Roy. Soc. Queensland, vol. 20, p. 20, Jan. 2, 
1907 (type locality, Port Curtis, east coast of Queensland). 

Tathicarpus mucosum Ogilby, Proc. Roy. Soc. Queensland, vol. 20, p. 22, 1907 
(type locality, Port Curtis, Queensland). 

Tathicarpus appeli Ogilby, Mem. Queensland Mus., vol. 7, pt. 4, p. 303, pi. 19, 
fig. 2, 1922 (type locality, Wide Bay, South Queensland). 

This is the only known species of antennariid with only seven 
pectoral rays. A. butleri is characterized by the unusually elongate 
denticles of the skin, which even occur as spinules on the fins; all fin 
rays are unusually elongate for an antennariid, especially the second 
and third dorsal spines, which are elongate and slender; the first dorsal 
spine is long and threadlike, bearing at its tip a simple slender tentacle; 
these somewhat extreme characters no doubt were the reason Ogilby 
established the genus Tathicarpus for this species. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 65 

The only specimen that I have studied (USNM 164195 from 
Jarape, north coast of Groote Eylandt, North Australia, collected 
by Kobert R. Miller) has the soft dorsal fin damaged, but all rays 
appear to be simple; none of the pelvic or pectoral rays are divided; 
anal rays all divided; no naked area behind second dorsal spine; the 
length of the latter contained 2% times in base of soft dorsal; caudal 
peduncle distinct. 

Genus Trichophryne McCulloch and Waite 

Trichophryne McCulloch and Waite, Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 1, No. 1, p. 68, 
1918 (genotype Antennarius mitchelli Morton). 

This genus is characterized by the long slender second dorsal spine, 
the length of which is contained 2.8 or fewer times in the length of the 
base of the soft dorsal fin. In most species of antennariids the 
second dorsal spine is embedded or short and robust and contained 
more than 3K times in length of base of soft dorsal fin. 

Trichophryne rosaceus (Smith and Radcliffe) 

Plate 1,b 
Antennarius rosaceus Smith and Radcliffe, in Radcliffe, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 42, p. 203, pi. 17, fig. 2, 1912 (type locality, Romblon, Philippine Islands; 
holotype, USNM 70266). 

This distinctive species may be recognized by the long slender rough 
second dorsal spine and the still longer threadlike first dorsal spine 
with a bulbous tuft of filaments at its tip. It differs from its closest 
relative, A. mitchelli, in having 12 dorsal soft rays instead of 13 or 14, 
last 2 or 3 soft dorsal rays divided, last pelvic ray divided, and all anal 
rays divided. 

Two specimens of this species are known — the holotype, and 
another specimen measuring 13.5 mm. in standard length from Bikini 
Atoll, USNM 113991. 

Trichophryne mitchelli (Morton) 

Plate 1,c 

Antennarius mitchelli Morton, Papers Proc. Roy. Soc. Tasmania 1896, p. 98, July 
1897 (type locality, East Coast, Tasmania). 

Trichophryne mitchelli McCulloch and Waite, Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 1, No. 1, 
p. 68, pi. 6, fig. 1, 1918 (Brighton Beach, South Australia; off Wilson's Promon- 
tory, Victoria).— Waite, The fishes of South Australia, p. 211, fig. 303, 1923 
(South Australia). 

I have not seen a specimen of this species. It is known from the 
records listed in the synonymy. 

The figure by McCulloch and Waite shows none of the dorsal, anal, 
pectoral, or pelvic rays divided; caudal peduncle distinct; first dorsal 
ray long, slender, spinate, with dermal tentacles at its tip. 



66 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Nudiantennarius, new genus 

Genotype: Antennarius subteres Smith and Radcliffe . 

This new genus is characterized by having naked skin or almost 
naked skin with only microscopic sized embedded denticles scattered 
on head and body in combination with a long slender second dorsal 
spine; short first dorsal spine with bait consisting of a tuft of tentacles. 

The genus is named in reference to an antennariid with naked skin. 

Nudiantennarius subteres (Smith and Radcliffe) 

Plate 1,d 

Antennarius subteres Smith and Radcliffe, in Radcliffe, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 42, p. 205, pi. 17, fig. 1, 1912 (type locality, Lingayen Gulf, Philippines; 
holotype, USNM 70268). 

This species is characterized by having an almost naked skin, with 
only microscopic size denticles scattered in the skin; first dorsal 
spine short, the bait consisting of a tuft of tentacles; last three soft 
dorsal rays divided; anal rays divided; pelvic and pectoral rays all 
simple; second dorsal spine long and slender, covered with numerous 
denticles, its length a little over twice in base of soft dorsal; third 
dorsal spine with free tip, but mostly bound down with skin, denticles 
only present on free portion; caudal peduncle present; background 
color brown, mottled with darker brown; tips of rays of median fins 
white; pectoral rays with distal half free or excerted beyond mem- 
branes (drawing of holotype is in error in regard to that character) . 

This species is known only from the holotype, which I have studied. 

Abantennarius, new genus 

Genotype: Antennarius duescus Snyder. 

This new genus is characterized by having the gill opening remote 
from the "elbo" of the pectoral fin. The gill opening is considerably 
behind the usual position. Other characters are indistinct caudal 
peduncle, no pelvic or pectoral ray divided, last two soft dorsal rays 
divided, and all anal rays divided. The bait consists of a tuft of 
filaments. 

The genus is named in reference to an antennariid with the gill 
opening remote from or away from its usual position near the base of 
pectoral fin. 

Abantenriarius duescus (Snyder) 

Plate 2, a 

Antennarius duescus Snyder, Bull. U. S. Fish Comm., vol. 22, p. 537, pi. 13, fig. 24, 
1904 (type locality, Albatross Station 3872, Auan Channel, 32 to 43 fathoms, 
between Maui and Lanai; holotype, USNM 50884; paratype, USNM 126597, 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 67 

Albatross Station 4128, near Kauai in 75 fathoms) ; ibid., vol. 23, p. 522, pi. 
65, fig. 2, 1905 (channel between Maui and Lanai; Kauai). 

This species has the gill opening on the side of the body remote from 
the "elbo" of the pectoral fin; the first dorsal spine is about same 
length as second dorsal spine and bears a tuft of filaments; no naked 
area behind second dorsal spine; caudal peduncle scarcely present; 
third dorsal spine movable. 

I have studied the holotype and paratype. 

Abantennarius analis Gosline, new species 

Figure 2 

Holotype: USNM 164419, Oahu, Waikiki reef, Dec. 31, 1952, 
Gosline and Randall, standard length 44 mm. 

Description: The following counts were made on the only known 
specimen: Dorsal 1-1-1,12; anal 7; pectoral 10 in both fins. 

The following measurements are recorded in thousandths of the 
standard length: Greatest depth of body 586; length of bony part of 
first dorsal spine 202; of second dorsal spine 136; of third 159; longest 
soft dorsal ray 257; longest (middle) caudal ray 230; length of mamil- 
laries 180; least depth of caudal peduncle 91 ; length of caudal peduncle 
or distance between vertical lines thru caudal fin base and rear bases 
of anal fin 34 ; length of base of soft dorsal fin 530 ; fleshy eye diameter 
86; fleshy interorbital space 105; tip of snout to center of gill opening 
898. 

The bony part of the first dorsal spine is notably longer than the 
second, and bears at its tip the fleshy bait which consists of one large 
fleshy tentacle with a tuft of cirri on opposite side basally; skin 
behind base of second dorsal spine naked; second dorsal spine movable, 
but third is bound down with skin of body; soft dorsal rays all simple 
except last two, which are divided; none of pelvic or pectoral rays 
divided; anal rays divided; gill opening just above origin of anal fin; 
caudal peduncle very short, only a little distinct, much deeper than 
long; skin everywhere thickly covered with the usual bifid and trifid 
prickles; dermal cirri along lateral line and others on head. 

Color in alcohol: Background color brown, overlaid with numer- 
ous small darker brown flakelike marks somewhat reticulated ven- 
trally; there is a tiny black spot about an eye diameter behind eye 
and another on the midside a little in front ^and above pectoral fin 
base; a less distinct black spot occurs on thelback near base of first 
soft dorsal ray; caudal, pelvic, and pectoral fins barred; edges of 
dorsal and anal fins pale. 

Remarks: This new species differs from the only other member of 
the genus, A. duescus, in having 10 pectoral rays instead of 9; thefgill 
opening is opposite the anal origin instead of halfway between pectoral 



68 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 





r v-V,.. - "- -- '",...-■■ ,;'■';' ■.-": ' .' -■ ■wMr'; 















Figure 2. — Abantennarius analis Gosline, new species. Drawing by Mrs. D. B. Schultz of 
holotype, USNM 164419, from Waikiki, Oahu Island, Hawaii. 

base and anal origin; first dorsal spine or "bait" is longer than second 
dorsal instead of same length; and there is a naked area behind base of 
second dorsal spine instead of prickly skin. 

The species is named analis in reference to the location of the gill 
opening at origin of anal fin. 

This species was recognized as new by Dr. Gosline, who kindly 
permitted me to include and describe it in this revision. 

Genus Rhycherus Ogilby 

Rhycherus Ogilby, Proc. Roy. Soc. Queensland, vol. 20, p. 17, 1907 (genotype, 
Rhycherus wildi Ogilby = Chironectes filamentosus Castelnau). 

This genus is characterized by the absence of denticles in the skin, 
these are replaced by a profusion of fleshy tentacles or cutaneous 
appendages everywhere; the bait consists of two fleshy tentacles with 
a third small one between basally; all other antennariids with trifid 
tentacles forming the bait have the skin profusely denticulate and the 
last pelvic ray divided, but in this genus it is undivided. 

Rhycherus filamentosus (Castelnau) 

Plate 2,b 

Chironectes filamentosus Castelnau, Proc. Zool. Acclim. Soc. Victoria, vol. 1, p. 

244, 1 872 (type locality, St. Vincent Gulf, southern Australia) . 
Chironectes bifurcatus McCoy, Prodr. Zool. Victoria, vol. 2, dec. 13, p. 87, pi. 

123, 1886 (type locality, Brighton Shore, Victoria). 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 69 

Rhycherus wildi Ogilby, Proc. Roy Soc. Queensland, vol. 20, p. 18, 1907 (type 

locality, "Southern Australia" [Victoria]). 
Rhycherus filamentosus McCulloch and Waite, Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 1, No. 1, 

p. 70, fig. 31, pi. 6, fig. 3, 1918 (Kangaroo Island; St. Vincent Gulf; Corny 

Point, and Palmerston, South Australia); Waite, The fishes of Southern 

Australia, p. 208, fig. 299, 1923 (South Australia). 

This species is characterized by the profusion of fleshy tentacles, 
tubercles, or cutaneous appendages on head, body, and fins, along with 
the absence of the usual denticles in the skin; first dorsal spine long, 
slender, much longer than second dorsal spine, the bait consisting of 
two fleshy tentacles, with a small knob between them basally; second 
and third dorsal spines long, slender, and covered with tentacles; last 
soft rays of dorsal divided; anal rays probably all divided; pelvic and 
pectoral rays all simple; caudal peduncle distinct. 

I have not seen a specimen of this species. 

Genus Histiophryne Gill 

Histiophryne Gill, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 1, p. 222, 1879 (genotype, Chiro- 
nectes bougainvilli Cuvier and Valenciennes.) 

This genus is characterized by having smooth skin or at most only 
microscopic size denticles; caudal peduncle absent, the dorsal and anal 
membranously attached to base of caudal fin; none of the dorsal, anal, 
pelvic, or pectoral rays divided; and with 15 or 16 soft rays in dorsal 
fin. 

Histiophryne bougainvilli (Cuvier and Valenciennes) 

Plate 2,c 

Chironectes bougainvilli Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 431, 1837 (type locality not known). 
Histiophryne bougainvilli, McCulloch and Waite, Rec. South Australian Mus., 

vol. 1. No. 1, p. 72, pi. 7, fig. 1, 1918 (St. Vincent Gulf, South Australia); 

Waite, The fishes of South Australia, p. 209, fig. 300, 1923 (South Australia). 

This species has a tiny short naked first dorsal spine with a tiny 
bulbous "bait"; second and third dorsal spines bound down with skin; 
all rays of soft dorsal, anal, pelvic, and pectoral fins simple; soft 
dorsal and anal fins membranously attached to base of caudal fin rays; 
skin with microscopic sized denticles or almost smooth; the presence of 
15 soft dorsal rays distinguishes this species from all antennariids 
except two other species, scortea and crassispina, which have smooth 
skin without prickles. 

I have not seen a specimen of this species. 

Histiophryne scortea McCulloch and Waite 

Plate 2,d 

Histiophryne scortea McCulloch and Waite, Pi.ec. South Australian Mus. vol. 1, 
No. 1, p. 74, pi. 7, fig. 2, 1918 (type locality, Stansbury, St. Vincent Gulf, 



70 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

South Australia) ; Waite, The fishes of South Australia, p. 209, fig. 301, 1923 
(South Australia). 
Histiophryne scortea inconstans McCulloch and Waite, Rec. South Australian 
Mus., vol. 1, No. 1, p. 75, 1918 (St. Vincent Gulf; Kingscote, Kangaroo 
Island, South Australia). 

This species has a slender short first dorsal spine with a small 
bulbous tip ; first and second dorsal spines with tips free, but enveloped 
in skin; all rays of soft dorsal, anal, pectoral, and pelvic fins simple; 
soft dorsal and anal fins membranously attached to caudal peduncle. 

Color brownish with a white patch behind second dorsal spine, three 
other white marks dorsally on side of body. 

I have not seen a specimen of this species. 

Genus Echinophryne McCulloch and Waite 

Echinophryne McCulloch and Waite, Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 1, No. 1, p. 66, 
1918 (genotype, Echinophryne crassispina McCulloch and Waite). 

This genus is characterized by having 15 or 16 soft dorsal rays along 
with the skin covered with denticles, and a distinct caudal peduncle. 

Echinophryne crassispina McCulloch and Waite 

Plate 3,a 

Echinophryne crassispina McCulloch and Waite, Rec. South Australian Mus., vol. 
1, No. 1, p. 67, pi. 6, fig. 2, 1918 (type locality, Spencer Gulf, South Aus- 
tralia) ; Waite, The fishes of South Australia, p. 210, fig. 302, 1923 (South 
Australia). 

This species is one of only four known antennariids with 15 or 16 
soft dorsal rays. It is distinguished from two, bougainvilli and 
scortea, by the distinct caudal peduncle and by the stubby first dorsal 
spine being covered with prickles and ending in a small fleshy pro- 
cess; second and third dorsal spines movable, the third somewhat 
bound down by skin to body. All fin rays simple except caudal fin 
rays, which are divided. 

I have not seen a specimen of this species. 

Echinophryne glauerti Whitley 

Plate 3,b 

Echinophryne glauerti Whitley, Australian Zool., vol. 10, pt. 3, 272, 1944 (type 
locality, Cottesloe Beach, Western Australia); Proc. Roy. Zool. Soc. New 
South Wales (1944), p. 28, fig. 5, 1944 (Cottesloe). 

This species has not been well defined, but it may be recognized by 
its short simple first dorsal spine, last few rays of soft dorsal divided, 
along with 16 soft dorsal rays, and all 8 anal rays divided; pectoral 
11, all rays simple; caudal peduncle not distinct; background color 
pale with widely scattered ocellate spots on head and body. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 71 

I have not seen a specimen of this species and refer it to this genus 
with some doubt. 

Genus and subgenus Phrynelox Whitley 

Phrynelox Whitley, Australian Zool., vol. 6, pt. 4, p. 328, 1931 (genotype, Lophius 
striatus Shaw 1794). 

This genus is characterized by the bait consisting of bifid or trifid 
tentacles. The bifid tentacles forming the bait distinguishes the 
subgenus Phrynelox from the subgenus Triantennatus, which has three 
tentacles. 

Phrynelox striatus (Shaw) 

Plate 3,c 

Lophius striatus Shaw, Naturalists miscellany, vol. 5, p. ?, pi. 175, 1794 (type 
locality, New Holland); Shaw, General zoology, vol. 5, pt. 2, p. 385, 1804 
(Southern Seas). 

Antennarius pinnaceps Bleeker (on Comnierson), Acta. Soc. Sci. Indo-Neerland- 
icae, vol. 1, p. 49, 1856; Atlas ichthyologique . . ., vol. 5, p. 15, pi. 197, fig. 
5, 1865 (Bali, Amboina) ; Cuvier and Valenciennes (Histoire naturelle des 
poissons, vol. 12, p. 410, 1837) use the names "antennarius" and "pinnaceps" 
of Commerson as common names). No valid scientific name as listed bj' 
Giinther (Catalogue of the fishes in the British Museum, vol. 3, p. 190, 1861) 
occurs in Cuvier and Valenciennes (vol. 12, p. 410, 1837). 

Antennarius lacepedei Bleeker, Acta. Soc. Sci. Indo-Neerlandicae, vol. 1, p. 50, 
1856 (type locality, Amboina). 

Antennarius pinnaceps var. fasciata Steindachner, Sitzb. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 
53, p. 457 (p. 34 in reprint), 1866 (type locality, Port Jackson, Australia). 

Antennarius striatus Smith, The sea fishes of Southern Africa, p. 431, pi. 98, fig. 
1240, 1949 (south to Port Alfred). 

First dorsal spine much longer than second, bearing bifid tentacles 
at its tip; second and third dorsal spines movable; last 2 or 3 soft 
dorsal rays divided; anal rays all divided; pectoral and pelvic rays 
all simple; caudal peduncle distinct. 

I have not examined a specimen of this species. It is distinguished 
by having bifid tentacles forming the bait along with 10 pectoral fin 
rays. In color pattern striatus resembles tridens, but the latter has 
trifid tentacles forming the bait and 11 pectoral fin rays. Doubt has 
been cast by authors that the character of the bait is reliable since 
it is possible that a fish might nip off one or more tentacles. I find 
no damage to the bait involving complete loss of these tentacles on 
specimens of related species studied. There are a few specimens in 
the National Museum collections in which the bait and spine are com- 
pletely missing, but there is no way of knowing now whether this 
bait was broken off before preservation or afterward. The damaged 
base indicates loss of spine during collection or in preservation. 



72 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Phrynelox melas (Bleeker) 

Plate 4, a 

Antennarius melas Bleeker, Acta Soc. Sci. Indo-Neerlandicae, vol. 2, p. 70, 1857 

(type locality, Amboina); Atlas ichthyologique . . ., vol. 1, p. 20, pi. 199, 

fig. 6, 1865 (Amboina). 
? Antennarius giintheri Bleeker, Ned. Tijdschr. Dierk., vol. 2, p. 275, 1865 (type 

locality, Amboina); Atlas ichthyologique . . ., vol. 1, p. 10, pi. 199, fig. 4, 

1865 (Amboina). 
Antennarius horridus (non Bleeker), Zatzow and Lenz, Abhandl. Senckenb. 

Naturf. Gesellsch., vol. 21, pt. 3, p. 511, pi. 35, fig. 7, 1898 (Zanzibar). 

I have not seen a specimen of this species. It is the species in 
the Indo-Pacific with blackish coloration along with the bait con- 
sisting of bifid tentacles. Antennarius nuttingi in the Western Atlantic 
represents its closest relative. 

First dorsal spine longer than second dorsal and bearing bifid 
tentacles at its tip; last 2 or 3 soft dorsal rays divided, last pelvic ray 
divided; pectoral rays all simple; anal rays all divided; caudal pe- 
duncle distinct. 

Antennarius guniheri Bleeker, with bifid tentacles forming the bait, 
may belong here. The presence of "warts" on the skin may be a 
pathological condition (see pi. 4,b; also A. phymatodes, p. 90). With- 
out specimens I am unable to determine if A. giintheri is distinct 
from Phrynelox melas. 

Phrynelox nuttingi (Garman) 

Plate 3,d 

Antennarius nuttingi Garman, Bull. Lab. Nat. Hist., State University of Iowa, 
vol. 4, p. 83, pi. 2, 1876 (type locality, Great Bahama Bank) ; Barbour, Proc. 
New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, pp. 25, 36, pi. 15, pi. 17, fig. 4, 1942 (Puerto 
Rico; Bermuda; Haiti; Great Bahama Bank). 

This black species, with bifid tentacles (usually whitish) as bait, 
has a naked area behind base of second dorsal spine, last two or three 
soft dorsal rays and last pelvic ray divided; pectoral rays all simple; 
anal rays all divided; caudal peduncle distinct; tips of rays of paired 
fins usually not white, although in a few specimens there is a tendency 
for lighter tips to these rays. 

While this manuscript was in press Dr. Louis A. Krumholz brought 
to the National Museum for identification two specimens of Phrynelox 
that he saw spawning together. One, the male, was the characteristi- 
cally colored P. scaber, whereas the other, the female, was the typically 
black colored P. nuttingi. Dr. Krumholz had both males and females 
with the zebralike color pattern which is typical of P. scaber. Three 
black specimens examined by him were females. His observation 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 73 

may indicate that the black "species" currently known as P. nuttingi 
represents mature females. 

I have observed sexual dichromatism to be of rather common 
occurrence in several families of reef fishes; for example, the parrot- 
fishes, family Scaridae. This problem needs special study in the field 
in the areas where the black "color phase" occurs, as it does with 
several other members of this family. 

I have studied 11 specimens. From the U. S. National Museum 
(number of specimens in parentheses following the museum catalog 
number) : 73115(1), Florida; 50199(1) and 25927(1), both from Puerto 
Rico. From the Chicago Natural History Museum (CNHM): 1 
from off Texas and 6 from Bermuda. Dr. Louis A. Krumholz loaned 
a female from Bimini. 

Phrynelox scaber (Cuvier) 

Plate 4,c,d 

Chironectes scaber Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 425, pi. 16, 

lower fig., 1817 (type locality, Atlantic); Le regne animal, edition of plates, 

vol. 2, pi. 85, fig. 1, 1839. — Cuvier and Valenciennes, Historie naturelle des 

poissons, vol. 12, p. 412, 1837 (Martinique). 
? Chironectes furcipilis Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 429, pi. 17, 

fig. 1, 1817 (no locality). — Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des 

poissons, vol. 12, p. 423, 1837 (Atlantic). 
? Chironectes biocellatus Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 427, pi. 17, 

fig. 3, 1817 (no locality). — Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des 

poissons, vol. 12, p. 417, 1837. 
Chironectes tigris Poey, Memorias sobre la historia natural de la Isla de Cuba, 

vol. 1, p. 217, pi. 17, fig. 2, 1853 (type locality, Cuba). 
Antennarius teleplanus Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 38, fig. 2, 

1912 (type locality, Corson's Inlet, Cape May County, N. J.; type examined) . 
Antennarius cubensis Borodin, Bull. Vanderbilt Oceanogr. [Marine] Mus., vol. 1, 

art. 1, p. 24, pi. 3, fig. 1, 1928 (Puerto Padre, Cuba). 
Antennarius tenebrosus (non Poey), Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, 

vol. 19, p. 28, 1942 (Cuba). 
Antennarius scaber Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, pp. 26, 36, 

pi. 8, pi. 17, fig. 1, 1942 (Cuba; St. Lucia; Panama; Florida, Bermuda; 

Jamaica) . 
Antennarius tigris Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, pp. 26, 37, 

pi. 9, figs. 1, 2, pi. 17, fig. 2, 1942 (Jamaica; Cuba). 

Barbour, in 1942, established a neotype (USNM 37545) for Chiro- 
nectes tenebrosus Poey (Memorias sobre la historia natural de la Isla 
de Cuba, p. 219, pi. 17 (20), fig. 1, 1853) and then referred Poey's 
tenebrosus to the synonymy of A. multiocellatus (Cuvier and Valen- 
ciennes). Upon examination of USNM 37545, I find the specimen to 
be a typical example of Phrynelox scaber, with all the significant char- 
acters such as bait with bifid tentacles, and color pattern of young 
scaber. 



74 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

This species, with bifid tentacles forming the bait, has a zebralike 
color pattern. The young, represented by Antennarius tenehrosus 
(non Poey) Barbour on USNM 37545, neotype, is marked with dark 
spots and blotches not yet formed into zebralike stripes. A naked 
area or pit occurs behind second dorsal spine; last 2 or 3 soft dorsal 
rays and last pelvic ray are divided; pectoral rays all simple; anal 
rays all divided; caudal peduncle distinct; Barbour considers A. 
tigris to be distinct from A. scaber on the differences in robustness 
of the tentacles. I am unable to find support for his observations on 
the numerous specimens available to me. 

In addition to certain types, I have studied 36 specimens. From 
USNM: Neotype, Chironectes tenehrosus Poey, 37545(1), 2699(1), 
37500(1), all from Cuba and all collected by Poey; 38531(1), Curacao; 
41709(1), St. Lucia; 30144(1), Jamaica; 81785(1), Porto Bello, Panama; 
81786(1) and 81780(1), both from Fox Bay, Panama; 126076(1), 
Puerto Rico; 150053(1), Guadaloupe Island; 116762(2), Tortugas, 
Florida. From CNHM: 40296(1), 45698(3), 45699(2), 45700(3), 
46746(1), 46747(1), 46748(1), and 59956(3), Gulf of Mexico ; 17133(1) 
and 50353(1), Florida; 8549(2), Porto Bello, Panama; 4852(1), 
48511(1), 48541(1), 48603(1), 48604(1), 48633(1), and 48682(1), Ber- 
muda. Dr. Louis A. Krumholz loaned a male from Bimini. 

Triantennatus, new subgenus 

Genotype: Antennarius zebrinus, new species. 

This new subgenus is characterized by having three fleshy tentacles 
at the tip of the first dorsal spine. It has the last 2 or 3 soft dorsal 
rays and last pelvic ray divided. As in the subgenus Phrynelox, all 
pectoral rays are simple and all anal rays are divided. 

The subgenus is named in reference to the first dorsal spine being 
provided with three fleshy tentacles. 

Phrynelox cunninghami (Fowler) 

Plate 5, a. 

Antennarius cunninghami Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 93, 
p. 279, fig. 32, 1941 (type locality, Oahu or Maui, Hawaii; holotype, ANSP 
69892, 86 mm. in standard length). 

This species has the first dorsal longer than second dorsal spine, and 
bears at its tip trifid tentacles; last 2 or 3 soft dorsal rays and last 
pelvic ray divided; all of pectoral rays simple; all of anal rays divided, 
caudal peduncle distinct. 

I have studied the holotype of this species. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 75 

Phrynelox zebrinus, new species 

Figure 3 

Anlennarius tridens (non Shaw) Bleeker, Atlas ichthyologique . . ., vol. 1, p. 14, 

pi. 195, fig. 3, 1865 (Amboina). 
Antennarius striatus (non Shaw) Giinther, Journ. Mus. Godeffroy, pt. 11, p. 162, 

pi. 99, fig. b, 1876 (Mauritius; Australian Coast; Solomon Islands). 
Antennarius pinnaceps (non Shaw) Smith, The sea fishes of Southern Africa, 

p. 431, pi. 98, fig. 1239, 1949 (Natal and Delagoa Bay). 

Holotype: USNM 47854, Port Jackson, New South Wales, 
Australia, standard length 96 mm. 

Paeatypes: USNM 47853 and 59948, Port Jackson, New South 
Wales, respectively 89 and 93 mm. in standard length; USNM 28659, 
probably from Australia; CNHM 21560, Sydney, Australia, 92 mm.; 
CNHM 44980, Moreton Bay, South Queensland, Australia, 41.5 mm. 

Description: Certain counts and measurements are recorded in 
tables 1 and 2. 

The bony part of first dorsal spine, about same length as second 
dorsal spine, bears at its tip the fleshy bait, which is composed of three 
fleshy tentacles, the middle one shortest; behind the robust second 
dorsal spine is a naked dermal area; the third dorsal spine is movable, 
about same length as the second ; all of the soft dorsal rays are simple 
except the last two which are divided, as is the last pelvic fin ray; 
caudal fin rays divided or branched; all of anal rays divided; pectoral 




Figure 3. — Phrynelox zebrinus, new species. Drawing by Mrs. A. M. Awl of holotype, 
USNM 47854, from Port Jackson, New South Wales, Australia. 



76 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

rays all simple; gill opening close to pectoral fin base; caudal peduncle 
distinct, a little deeper than long; skin thickly covered with bifid, 
sometimes trifid, prickles, and a few prickles on head are multifid; 
dermal cirri are scattered on body apparently in no definite arrange- 
ment except possibly along what may be a lateral line. 

Color in alcohol: Background coloration light tan; sides and 
dorsally, including dorsal and anal fins, profusely covered with narrow, 
zebralike, dark brown streaks; pectoral, pelvic, and caudal fins barred 
and spotted with dark brown; belly below level of pectoral fin with 
scattered dark brown spots. 

The dark brown, zebralike streaks apparently increase in number 
with increase in size, because the 41.5 mm. specimen has only 7 or 8 
streaks on the dorsal fin and side of body, whereas the larger specimens 
have 15 or 20 such bars; narrow bars form between the wider ones as 
growth proceeds. Gunther's plate 99, figure b, shows the belly 
striped, but all of our specimens have it spotted. 

Remarks : Among the species with three tentacles forming the bait 
and with a zebralike color pattern, A. cunninghami Fowler is most 
closely related. The latter differs in the adult size in having a much 
fewer number of dark brown zebralike markings, only four or five dark 
bars instead of seven (young) to 20 or more on the soft dorsal fin; also, 
the belly of cunninghami is unspotted in the holotype. 

This new species is named zebrinus in reference to the color pattern, 
which resembles that of a zebra. 

Phrynelox atra, new species 

Figure 4 

Antennarius commersonii (non Cuvier; non Shaw) Whitley, Rec. Australian 
Mus., vol. 17, p. 137, pi. 31, fig. 5, 1929 (Port Jackson and Port Hacking, 
New South Wales). 

Holotype: CNHM 21705, from Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia, standard length 73 mm. 

Paratypes: CNHM 21704 and USNM 164245, from Sydney, 
Australia, both 87 mm. in standard length. 

Description: Certain counts and measurements are recorded in 
tables 1 and 2. 

The bony part of the first dorsal spine, about the same length as 
that of the second dorsal spine, bears at its tip the fleshy bait, which 
consists of three robust tentacles, the middle one smallest; skin just 
behind base of second dorsal spine is naked; third dorsal spine movable 
posteriorly, bound down with skin anteriorly, and same length as 
second; soft dorsal rays all simple except last two are divided; only 
last pelvic ray divided; caudal fin rays branched; anal rays divided; 
pectoral rays all simple; gill opening close to base of pectoral fin; 



FROGFISHES — SCHTJLTZ 



77 



a 

H 



a 







i- 


f~ io -h cn t>. o cn 3< t^ £- co t> to tn cn t>» o 

00t^00NOO»"*ON Ot-ITt<lO.-H Sh 
lO t-h i-l CN CN CO CO CN i-H i-nn .-H 1 1 






o 




a 


r>- © 

CN 8* 




"3 


>> 






<; g 


)— 1 




3 


M g 






<} 


£ a 






© 


o 




»o 






*es 


p 


CO O Ci W >C CN CO ->J< t^ t- M^NtNSO 




£ 


-H O 

CN O) 


t>- ■*> CT> 00 00 CN Tf Tt> ^J< CO NHOtOH i-H 
iOHHiHP3M®Nrt i-H »© t-h | I 




63 


,3 


sf 


i s 

1— 1 


e 


3 
o 


Ho 


M 




CQ 


£^ 






© 


o 




o 


I-- IO 00 "* b- CN CO r» ■<*< — 1 W CO t~- CN IN t~- © 






cn a 


00 f~ I— 00 CO 00 "O CO CN CM HNWNrt S 




^ 


"OHHrtlNNeNH T-H-«< l-H I | 




e 


K 






a 


S"8 


•^ 




Ec3 


1-1 




CO 


o 






^rtH 


§ 


U3 






5 P. 


i-i 00 CI Oi 00 t- CM CN CO id CO CO CN t~ CN 1- © 




h»< i-H CN CO 00 CO (N CN CO "*< MON^H r-1 
»© CN H 1-1 CO ■* CO CN i-H l-H »0 l-H | 1 




-iS g to 
2® 3 


._, >> 




^2 
WcS 


w o 




O 3<^ 


o 


M 




^^ 






to 

i-i © 

CN Q, 


NHMONIONIOQOO O •« Ci 00 CN t^ r-> 

Oi !>■ CO 00 -# "3 CN CO — < CO NOHOIOH i-H 




.09 

^5 




>OrtHHNmeNH ,-hi* i-i i i 




© CO 


s§ 


V s 




■9 OT 

>>3 


Bl 


►H 




cq<< 


£a 
O 






CO © 

oo a 

§ c3 


CN i*< "5 CO «5 lO O Q COOOOCOCNOO 

OONIOT1<COO 1-1 Tp l-H ■*! ■"*! i# rt ^H 




c- 




& 


UOrHrH^-ICO CO i-H tH ■«!< i-H | 1 




l 


^ " 




CQ 


co a 




§ 


3 




.g 




13 












SB 


00 

Gi © 
OS Q. 


CO CO CN CO -H 00 »0 t^ t^. — < i-H CN 00 TJ* CN t~ O 






OS HN »0 O >0 OO CO CO CO CO "2 T? »C i-H i-H 




I 


COrti-trHNIMlONlH i-H"* l-H | | 




3 


!§} g 


1 




<i 


& s 


l-H 




S3 
"3 


co a 




00 © 

& a 


CO <* Tf CO O CO -# -^ o i-H a> t-h CN to CN t~ o 

OS OS t» -^ »0 CN -rf O CN K0 OS r-( t*i CO i— 1 tH 

»0 it »-H i-H CO CO CO CN i-H lO t-i I 1 








g 




3 
o 

CO 

[* 

s 

a" 


co^ 


l-H 




t> 




s 


C6NO<ONiONO"3ffl OS 00 CN b- CN t>i o 

00 CO 00 Tf lO r-H CO 3 CN •* CNCO»O"0-H tH 

*a l-H l-H l-H CO CO CO CN l-H l-H TJ< l-H 1 1 




o 


00 © 




M 




1 




A 




s 


co a 






£ 


£> 










Mi 








ine 
ine 
ine 

ance 
udal 
fins. 








^ aa aS"3 

111 5 ^ -51,9 

ft t- t- o o a Y«a 










OT 




length in mm. 
depth of body 
f bony part of 1st d< 
f bony part of 2d do 
f bony part of 3d dc 
soft dorsal ray 
[middle) caudal ray 
out to gill opening) 
f maxillarics 
ith of caudal pedun 
if caudal peduncle 
vertical lines throi 
:d rear bases of anal 
f base of soft dorsal 
leter 
tal space 
ys 

rays 




3 

o 

C3 

.a 
O 
















Standard 
Greatest 
Length o 
Length o 
Length o 
Longest £ 
Longest i 
Head (sn 
Length o 
Least dej 
Length c 
tween 
base ac 
Length o 
Eye dian 
Interorbi 
Dorsal ra 
Anal ray: 
Pectoral 















78 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 




Figure 4. — Phrynelox aira, new species. Drawing of holotype, CNHM 21705, from Sydney- 
Australia. 



caudal peduncle distinct, slightly deeper than long; skin thickly- 
covered with bifid prickles except a few trifid ones and some multifid 
prickles on head; dermal cirri present along what probably represents 
a lateral line, though it is not easy to follow, other cirri scattered on 
body. 

Color in alcohol: Head, body, and fins all plain black; fleshy part 
of bait white or nearly so; tips of rays of pectoral and pelvics a little 
lighter than basally, sometimes almost whitish. 

Remarks: This new species, almost entirely blackish, resembles 
Phrynelox nox of Japan. It differs by having 10 pectoral fin rays in- 
stead of 11, and, in addition, the tips of the pectoral fin rays are 
scarcely lighter than basally. P. nox may have black spots on median 
and paired fins, usually distally, absent in P. atra. The bait is light 
brown in P. nox also. 

This new species is named atra in reference to its black coloration. 

Phrynelox nox (Jordan) 

Figure 5 

Antennarius nox Jordan, in Jordan and Sindo, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 24, 
p. 375, fig. 6, 1902 (type locality, Wakanoura and Nagasaki, Japan; cotype, 
USNM 49819).— Jordan, Tanaka, and Snyder, Journ. Coll. Sci., Tokyo 
Imp. Univ., vol. 33, art. 1, p. 424, fig. 392, 1913 (Japan) .—Jordan and 
Thompson, Mem. Carnegie Mus., vol. 6, p. 313, fig. 87, 1914 (Misaki, Japan). 

Antennarius tridens (non Temminck and Schlegel; in part) Tanaka, Figures and 
descriptions of the fishes of Japan, vol. 47, p. 929, pi. 186, figs. 509, 510, 1930 
(Japan). 

Antennarius fuliginosus J. L. B. Smith, South African Journ. Sci., vol. 53, No. 8, 
p. 222, fig. 5, 1957 (type locality, Durban, South Africa). 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 79 

This species is characterized by its dark brownish to blackish 
coloration, along with trifid fleshy tentacles at tip of first dorsal 
spine; last 2 or 3 soft dorsal rays and last pelvic ray divided; anal 
rays all divided, pectoral rays all simple; caudal peduncle distinct; 
naked area behind second dorsal spine; black spots as large as or larger 
than the eye usually evident on head and body; tips of pectoral rays 
white; black spots may occur distally on all fins; first dorsal spine 
may be barred. 

I have studied three specimens, all from Japan: From USNM: 
49819(1) (the cotype) and 164192(1). From CNHM: 57440(1). 

Phrynelox tridens (Temminck and Schlegel) 

Plate 5,b 

Lophius histrio (non Linnaeus) Lacepede, Histoire naturelle des poissons, vol. 1, 

pp. 302, 321, 1798 (on Commerson; nonbinomial) . 
Chironectes tridens, Temminck and Schlegel, Fauna Japonica, poissons, p. 159, 

pi. 81, figs. 2-5, 1842 (type locality, Japan). 
Antennarius pinniceps bleekeri Giinther, Catalogue of the fishes in the British 

Museum, vol. 3, p. 190, 1861 (type locality, Amboina). 

This species, with trifid tentacles forming the bait, has a character- 
istic pale background overlaid with zebralike dark brown or blackish 
streaks on the body and blackish spots on the median fins; the belly 
has dark brown spots also; there is a naked area behind the second 
dorsal spine, the last 2 or 3 rays of soft dorsal are branched, as is the 
last pelvic ray ; anal rays all divided ; pectoral rays all simple ; caudal 
peduncle distinct ; the color pattern of tridens is almost identical with 




Figure 5. — Phrynelox nox (Jordan) in Jordan and Sindo. Drawing of cotype, USNM 

49819 from Japan. 
416279—57 3 



80 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

cunninghami but the two differ in number of pectoral rays — 11 in 
tridens and 10 in cunninghami. 

I have studied 35 specimens. From USNM: 49821(5), 50759(1), 
57525(1), 59770(1), 59771(3), 72017(1), 72030(2), 75974(1), 76261(9), 
and 152540(1), all from Japan; 143564(4), Mauritius (locality very 
doubtful). From CNHM (loaned by Loren P. Woods): 55397(2), 
55461(1), 58850(1), 57441(2), all from Japan. 

Antennatus, new genus and new subgenus 

Genotype : Antennarius strigatus Gill. 

The new genus and new subgenus are distinguished by the simple 
tentacle at tip of first dorsal spine in combination with the following 
characters: the head, body, and fins basally thickly covered with 
close-set prickles on firm skin; no distinct caudal peduncle; the third 
dorsal spine bound down with skin; and all the rays in soft dorsal and 
pelvic fins simple. 

Antennatus bigibbus (Lacepede) 

Plate 5,c,d 

Antennarius bigibbus Lacepede, Histoire naturelle des poissons, vol. 1, p. 325, pi. 

14 upper fig., 1798 (type locality, "on Commerson"). — Bleeker, Atlas ichthyo- 

logique, vol. 5, p. 21, pi. 199, fig. 3, 1865 (Cocos; Amboina). — Giinther, Journ. 

Mus. Godeffroy, pt. 11, p. 165, 1876; pt. 13, pi. 105, fig. b, 1877 (Huahine).— 

Smith, The sea fishes of Southern Africa, p. 430, pi. 98, fig. 1235, 1949 (Natal). 
? Antennarius bivertex Lacepede, Histoire naturelle des poissons, vol. 1, p. 327, 

1798 (on Commerson) . 
Chironectes tuberosus Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 432, 1817 

(on Commerson; Mauritius). — Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle 

des poissons, vol. 12, p. 428, 1837 (Mauritius). 
Chironectes reticulatus Eydoux and Souleyet, Voyage autour du Monde . . . La 

Bonite, Zool., vol. 1, pt. 2, Poissons, p. 186, pi. 5, fig. 2, 1842 (type locality, 

Hawaiian Islands). 
Chironectes leprosus Eydoux and Souleyet, Voyage autour du Monde . . . La 

Bonite, Zool. vol. 1, pt. 2, Poissons, p. 187, pi. 5, fig. 3, 1842 (type locality, 

Hawaiian Islands). 
? Chironectes subrotundatus Castelnau, Philadelphia International Exhibition 1876; 

Intercolonial Exhibition Essays, No. 2, p. 25, 1876 (type locality, Port 

Walcott, Western Australia). 

This species has a simple threadlike first dorsal spine and bait, the 
latter scarcely distinguishable from the spiny part; the body, head, 
and fins basally are thickly covered with close-set prickles so that 
the skin is firm ; no naked area occurs behind the second dorsal spine ; 
third dorsal spine bound down with skin, thus it is immovable ; none 
of the soft dorsal or pelvic rays are branched ; anal rays all branched ; 
pectoral rays all simple; caudal peduncle absent or nearly so; back- 
ground color pale, mottled or reticulated with brown ; brown bar across 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 81 

caudal, anal, and pelvic fins; pectoral brownish basally, sometimes 
with a series of brown spots distally. 

I have studied nine specimens. From USNM : 65732 (1) , Fakarava, 
Tuamotu Islands; 109396(1), Palmyra Island; 126598(1), Honolulu; 
164206(2), New Georgia Island, Solomons; 167511(1), Oahu. From 
CNHM: 47648(1), Hawaii. Loaned by Dr. R. It. Harry (2): Tua- 
motu Islands in the channel between Geogeo and Kukina islets near 
Garumaoa village (collected by Dr. Harry in 1952). 

Antennatus strigatus (Gill) 

Plate 6,c 

Antennarius strigatus Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 92, 1863 (type 

locality, Cape San Lucas; 2 types, USNM 6267). 
Antennarius tenuifilis Giinther, Trans. Zool. Soc. London, vol. 6, pt. 7, p. 440, 

1869 (type locality, reefs off Panama City, Panama). 
Antennarius reticularis Gilbert, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 14, p. 566, 1892 (type 

locality, Gulf of California; holotype, USNM 48260). 
Antennarius ziesenhennei Myers and Wade, Allan Hancock Pacific Exped., vol. 

9, No. 6, p. 168, pi. 23, fig. 7, 1946 (type locality, James Island, Galapagos). 

This species is the eastern Pacific representative of A. bigibbus, but 
differs mostly in the number of pectoral fin rays being 9 or 10 instead 
of 11; body, head, and fins basally covered by shagreenlike, closely 
packed denticles; the simple first dorsal spine and bait is about as 
long as second dorsal spine, whereas in bigibbus it is longer; all soft 
dorsal, pectoral, and pelvic rays undivided; anal rays all divided; no 
naked area behind second dorsal spine; third dorsal spine bound down 
with skin, immovable ; body mottled with blackish or dark brown, the 
blackish extending on the fins; a dark bar across caudal, anal, pelvic, 
and pectoral fins; membranes between rays distally edged with black- 
ish; underside of head with dark blotches. 

In addition to the types, I have studied 4 specimens. From 
USNM: 120208(1), Galapagos Islands; 101756(2), Gorgona Island, 
Colombia; 101757(1), Secas Island, Panama. 

Xenophrynichthys, new subgenus 

Genotype: Antennarius cryptacanthus Weber. 

This new subgenus differs in having the three dorsal spines com- 
pletely embedded and covered over with skin, whereas the generalized 
antennariids have the first two dorsal spines free and the third covered 
with skin in only a few species, otherwise it is more or less movable, 
sometimes free. 

Named in reference to the unusual or strange embedded nature of 
the dorsal spines of this otherwise normal frogfish. 



82 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Antennatus cryptacanthus (Weber) 

Plate 6,b 

Antennarius cryptacanthus Weber, Die Fische der Si&ogra-Expedition, p. 564, pi. 3, 
fig. 2, 1913 (type locality, Beo, Karakelang Island, and Pepela Bay, Rotti 
Island, East Indies). 

The usual three dorsal spines are completely embedded beneath 
the rough skin in this species, a character not shared with any other 
species in the family. I have not seen this species. It is known 
only from the two type specimens. 

Genus and subgenus Lophiocharon Whitley 

Lophiocharon Whitley, Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 19, p. 104, pi. 15, fig. 1, 1933 
(genotype, Lophiocharon broomensis Whitley »= Chironectes trisignatus Rich- 
ardson) . 

This genus and subgenus are characterized by having a simple 
tentacle at tip of first dorsal spine in combination with an indistinct 
caudal peduncle; all of the soft dorsal rays being branched or divided 
but no pelvic ray branched. 

Lophiocharon caudimaculatus (Riippell) 

Plate 6,a,d 

Chironectes caudimaculatus Riippell, Neue Wirbelthiere zu der Fauna von Abys- 

sinien . . . , p. 141, pi. 33, fig. 2, 1835 (type locality, Red Sea). 
Chironectes trisignatus Richardson, Ichthyology of the voyage . . . Erebus and 

Terror, pi. 9, fig. 1, 1844-1848 (no locality given). 
Antennarius urophthalmus Bleeker, Natuurk. Tijdschr. Nederlandsch-Indie, vol. 

2, p. 488, 1851 (type locality, Riouw). 
Antennarius lindgreeni Bleeker, Natuurk. Tijdschr. Nederlandsch-Indie, vol. 8, 

p. 192, 1855 (type locality, Banka). 
Antennarius caudimaculatus Bleeker, Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 1, p. 15, pi. 197, 

fig. 6, 1865 (Banka; Biliton; Bintang; Singapura). 
Antennarius lithinostomus Jordan and Richardson, Bull. U. S. Bur. Fish., vol. 27, 

p. 286, fig. 12, 1908 (type locality, Cugo Island, Philippines). 
Lophiocharon broomensis Whitley, Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 19, No. 1, p. 104, 

pi. 25, fig. 1, 1933 (type locality, Broome, West Australia). 

This is one of the few species of antennariids with all the soft dorsal 
rays divided; the first dorsal spine is very long and threadlike with 
a simple tentacular-like bait; no naked area behind second dorsal 
spine; third dorsal spine movable; none of the pelvic or pectoral rays 
divided; all anal rays divided; caudal peduncle not distinct; the 
coloration is light gray, everywhere thickly covered with dark specks 
and irregularly shaped small dark blotches; caudal fin dark spots with 
white centers. 

All specimens seen by me are like the one illustrated, USNM 
164243. These have an indistinct caudal peduncle, the caudal fin 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 83 

has white centered dark spots, and a dark blotch basally in soft dorsal 
fin. These specimens are like the figure of Chironectes trisignatus 
Richardson. Ruppell's plate 33, figure 2, of C. caudimaculatus is 
either in error in regard to the distinct caudal peduncle along with 
that of Bleeker's plate 197, figure 6, or two species are involved. 
It is possible that horridus, with a distinct caudal peduncle, was 
confused with caudimaculatus by authors. 

I have studied six specimens. From USNM: 164243(1), Sandakan 
District, North Borneo; 164360, the Philippines. From CNHM 
(loaned by Loren P. Woods): 51865(1), 51866(2), 51874(1), all from 
Sandakan District, North Borneo. 

Uniantennatus, new subgenus 

Genotype: Antennarius horridus Bleeker. 

This new subgenus is characterized by having a simple tentacle at 
tip of first dorsal spine in combination with a distinct caudal peduncle, 
and with only the last two or three soft dorsal rays branched or divided. 

Named in reference to the tip of first dorsal spine being provided 
with a simple tentacle. 

Lophiocharon tenebrosus (Poey) 

Plates 7, a, 14,b 

Chironectes tenebrosus Poey, Mem6rias sobre la historia natural de la isla de 
Cuba, p. 219, pi. 17, fig. 1, 1853 (type locality, Cuba). 

Herewith is a redescription of this species based on a specimen 
kindly given to the National Museum by Dr. C. Richard Robins. 
The following counts were made: Dorsal I-I-I, 12; anal 7; pectoral 
10-10; pelvics 5-5 (last ray divided); caudal 4+5. 

The following characters are recorded in thousandths of the stand- 
ard length, 78 mm. Greatest depth 635; length of bony part of first 
dorsal spine 269; of second dorsal spine 105, of third 231; longest 
soft dorsal ray 231; longest (middle) caudal ray 295; length of head 
(tip of snout to gill opening) 638; length of maxillaries 263; least 
depth of caudal peduncle 155; length of caudal peduncle (distance 
between vertical lines thru caudal fin base and rear of membranous 
base of anal and dorsal fins) 68; length of base of soft dorsal 481; 
eye diameter 73; interorbital space 106. 

The bony part of first dorsal spine is 2% times length of second 
dorsal spine; no filaments occur at tip of first dorsal spine, which is 
simple, slender, hairlike; second dorsal spine short, curved; third 
dorsal spine longer than second, curved, movable, but bound to body 
with skin; area behind base of second dorsal spine, partly naked; 
all soft rays of dorsal simple except last 2 are divided; anal and caudal 



84 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

rays all divided; pectoral rays all simple; last pelvic ray divided; 
others simple; caudal peduncle present; body, head, and fins finely 
denticulate; skin firm. 

Color in alcohol: Background light brown, mottled with yellow 
(bright yellow when alive) ; scattered ocellate black spots on body and 
median fins; small ocellate spots on pectoral fin; pelvics plain white; 
caudal peduncle yellow; tips of pectoral, caudal, soft dorsal and anal 
fins white; soft dorsal and anal with a broad yellow band submarginally 

Dr. C. Eichard Robins, University of Miami, Florida, kindly sent 
this specimen to me for identification and gave permission for its 
inclusion in this review. It was assigned USNM 174940 and 
has the following data: Miami, Key Biscayne, ocean side, north of 
lighthouse, Oct. 15, 1956, collector Durbin Tabb, standard length 
78 mm., total length 100 mm. 

Barbour (Proc. New England Zool. Cldb, vol. 19, p. 28, 1942) 
designated USNM 37545 as the neotype of Chironectes tenebrosus 
Poey and then referred it to the synonymy of A. multiocellatus (Cuvier 
and Valenciennes). Both of these actions were in error zoologically. 
USNM 37545 is a typically young specimen of A. scaler (Cuvier). 

Furthermore, Barbour's action was unsound nomenclatorially be- 
cause neotypes were without official standing until the "Copenhagen 
decisions on Zoological Nomenclature/ ' 1953. Since Barbour's desig- 
nation of the neotype does not fulfill the provisions established for 
neotypes, I herewith reject it. 

Poey's figure shows first dorsal spine longer than second; all fin 
rays are illustrated as simple except in caudal fin and probably last 
pelvic ray; caudal peduncle distinct. Doubt must be cast on the 
accuracy of soft dorsal and of anal rays in regard to the details of 
branched or not. 

Lophiocharon horridus (Bleeker) 

Plate 7,b 

Antennarius horridus Bleeker, Natuurk. Tijdschr. Nederlandsch-Indie, vol. 5, 
p. 83, 1853 (type locality, Solor) ; Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, pi. 194, fig. 1, 
1865 (Cocos; Celebes; Flores; Solor; Timor; Buro; Amboina; and Ceram). 

? Antennarius lutescens Seale, Occ. Pap. Bishop Mus., vol. 4, p. 89, fig. 2, No. 1347 
on p. 14, 1906 (type locality, Tahiti). 

Antennarius lateralis Tanaka, Zool. Mag., vol. 29, No. 345, p. 200, 1917 (type 
locality, Tanabe, Province Kii, Japan); Figures and descriptions of the 
fishes of Japan, vols. 27, 28, p. 494, pi. 135, fig. 378, 1918. (Tanabe, Japan). 

Lophiocharon goramensis (non Bleeker) Whitley, Australian Zool., vol. 10, pt. 
1, p. 45, pi. 2, fig. 29, 1941 (off Cairns, North Queensland, Australia). 

Antennarius commersoni Smith, The sea fishes of southern Africa, p. 430, pi. 
98, fig. 1236, 1949 (Natal). 

This species has the first dorsal spine long and slender with a 
simple tentacle forming the bait; last two or three soft dorsal rays and 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 85 

the last pelvic ray divided; pectoral ra}^s all simple; anal rays all 
divided; caudal peduncle distinct; naked area behind second dorsal 
spine; general coloration dark brown, spotted or speckled with black- 
ish, and some ocellate spots present; Tanaka shows the distal edges 
of median fins pale. The above characters along with 12 or 13 soft 
dorsal rays, 8 or 9 anal rays, and 10 to 12 pectoral rays should aid in 
recognizing this species. 

The only specimen that I have seen that could be assigned to hor- 
ridus is USNM 19991, probably from Mauritius, but the bait is 
missing and the specimen is in imperfect condition. It has the follow- 
ing counts: dorsal soft rays 12, anal 8, and pectoral 11-11. 

Lophiocharon campylacanthus (Bleeker) 

Plate 7,c 

Antennarius campylacanthus Bleeker, Nat. Verh. Hollandaise Maatsch. Wetensch. 
Haarlem, vol. 18, No. 2, p. 28, pi. 4, fig. 3, 1863 (type locality, Ashantee, 
Guinea, West Africa). 

I have not seen a specimen of this species. Bleeker's figure shows 
the last three soft dorsal rays divided, none of the pelvic or pectoral 
rays divided; anal rays all divided; caudal peduncle distinct; no 
naked area behind second dorsal spine; the dark colored body has 
three large ocellate spots on the side, and each median fin with a few 
large ocellate spots. The very short, simple first dorsal spine shorter 
than the second dorsal spine is an important character. 

Genus Antennarius Lacepede 

Antennarius (Commerson MS.) Lacepede, Histoire naturelle des poissons, vol. 1, 
p. 325, 1798 (genotype: Antennarius chironectes (Commerson) Lacep&de 
( = Lophius commersoni Shaw 1804 and authors), designated by Bleeker 
(Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 1, p. 5, 1865)). 

Chironectes Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 418, 1817 (genotype, 
Lophius chironectes (Commerson) Lacepede) . 

Batrachopus Goldfuss, Handbuch der Zoologie, vol. 2, pt. 3, p. 110, 1820. (Pro- 
posed to replace Chironectes Cuvier 1817, no species listed, Histrio Linnaeus 
is listed) [Obviously author is confused.] 

Capellaria Gistel, Naturgeschichte des Thierreichs, p. viii, 1848. (Subs, name 
for Chironectes, no species listed.) 

This genus is characterized by having a complex bait consisting of 
a tuft of tentacles or a bulbous bait with or without obvious tentacles, 
all anal rays branched, in combination with the last two or three soft 
dorsal rays divided or none of dorsal rays divided; the caudal peduncle 
is distinct or indistinct. 

Among the numerous species assigned to this genus, certain groups 
of species indicate divergent lines of evolution. 



86 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Subgenus Fowlerichthys Barbour 

Fowlerichthys Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, p. 12, pi. 7, 
1941 (genotype, Fowlerichthys floridanus Barbour *= Antennarius radiosus 
Garman) . 

This subgenus is characterized by having a tuft of tentacles or a 
bulbouslike bait with filaments in combination with a distinct caudal 
peduncle, all soft rays, except possibly first two or three, of dorsal 
are divided; pelvic rays all divided. 

Fowlerichthys floridanus Barbour (Proc. New England Zool. Club, 
vol. 19, p. 12, 1941) presents a difficult problem as regards the genus 
and species to which the type is related. Although the late Dr. Barbour 
thought the holotype was close to the genus Chaunax, I disagree be- 
cause: (1) The dermal denticles are like those in Antennarius; (2) 
since the type is badly eroded, that which remains resembles other 
eroded specimens of Antennarius that I have examined, leaving ex- 
posed dorsal spines, no bait, and only stubs for most of the fin rays; 
(3) the generic allocation in the family Antennariidae is difficult be- 
cause of the incomplete condition of the t} r pe. However, those char- 
acters remaining do help in forming an opinion as follows: (a) the 
bait is missing, but the presence of the little bony knob from which 
it always arises is present, indicating that the bait was lost through 
erosion, probably in the dredge in which collected; (b) the caudal 
peduncle is distinct, as the last rays of dorsal and anal fins are far in 
front of caudal fin base; (c) the dorsal spines project because the skin 
that covered them has eroded away; and (d) the first three pelvic 
rays are said to be branched, but in all other species of this family if 
the first three pelvic rays were branched all pelvic rays were branched. 

The above characters, along with general shape of body indicates 
without doubt that F. floridanus belongs to the genus Antennarius. 
Among all Atlantic species in the family Antennariidae, only three— 
Antennarius radiosus, A. ocellatus, and Kanazawaichthys scutatus, new 
species — have 13 pectoral fin rays. Since bony scutes are absent on 
the head of F. floridanus it is not close to K. scutatus. Since A. 
ocellatus usually has 12 pectoral, 8 anal, and 13 soft dorsal ra}^s, it is 
improbable that floridanus is the same as ocellatus. 

If the pelvic rays of F. floridanus are all branched, as I suspect 
they are, then it would belong to the same subgenus with radiosus, 
and is no doubt a synonym of that species. 

Doubt must be cast on the depth of capture of 400 to 500 fathoms 
since the fish might have gotten in the dredge when it was being 
hauled to the surface. 



FROGFISHES — SCHIJLTZ 87 

Antennarius radiosus Garman 
Plate 7,d 

Antennarius radiosus Garman, Bull. Lab. Nat. Hist. State Univ. Iowa, vol. 4, 
No. 1, p. 85, pi. 1, 1876 (type locality, Key West, Fla., and Havana, Cuba). — 
Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, pp. 31, 38, pi. 16, fig. 1, 
pi. 17, fig. 3, 1942 (Florida; Bermuda). 

Fowlerichthys floridanus Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, p. 12, 
pi. 7, 1941 (type locality, off Palm Beach, Fla.). 

This is one of the most frequently captured species of Antennarius 
in the vicinity of Florida and along the northern part of the Gulf of 
Mexico. A. radiosus is best characterized by the first dorsal spine 
being a little longer than the second and bearing at its tip a small 
compact bulbous bait with short filaments ; along with 8 anal rays and 
usually 13, sometimes 14, pectoral rays; all the soft dorsal, anal, and 
pelvic rays are divided; pectoral rays all simple; a naked area occurs 
behind second dorsal spine; caudal peduncle distinct; third dorsal 
spine movable; coloration generally brown or grayish, somewhat 
mottled; median fins barred; a characteristic ocellate spot occurs 
near bases of soft dorsal rays 8 to 10, a little more on body than on 
base of fin. 

I have studied 103 specimens from USNM: 30210(1), Pensacola, 
Fla.; 134251(1), off Pensacola, Fla.; 116761(15), Tortugas, Fla.; 
129814(1) and 131615(2), Key West, Fla.; 142894(9) and 148521(4), 
near Apalachiola, Fla.; 152222(1), 153142(1), 153143(1), 153144(3), 
153145(4), 153225(3), and 161369(1), Palm Beach, Fla.; 131644(1), 
143163(2), 120195(1), Gulf of Mexico; 153141(1), Sombrero Light, 
Fla.; 101585(1), 101586(1), and 101509(2), off Florida; 123505(1), 
133649(7), 155479(2), 155481(2), 155483(2), 155486(1), 155487(4), 
155488(3), 163984(4), 163985(4), and 162594(1), off Louisiana; 
151925(1) off Salvo, N. C; 155480(1), 155484(1), 155485(5), and 
163986(2), off Mississippi; 155482(1), 155489(1), 155490(2), and 
155491(2), off Texas; 155492(1) and 155493(1) off Savannah, Ga. 
In addition I have studied numerous specimens in 25 lots from the 
Gulf of Mexico loaned by the Chicago Natural History Museum. 

Antennarius avalonis Jordan and Starks 

Figure 6 

Antennarius avalonis Jordan and Starks, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 32, p. 76, 
1907 (type locality, Avalon Bay, Santa Catalina Island, Calif.). 

Antennarius sanguineus (non Gill) Meek and Hildebrand, Field Mus. Nat. Hist. 
Pub. No. 249, Zool. Ser., vol. 15, pt. 3, p. 1013, 1928 (Panama)— Hildebrand, 
U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 189, p. 501, 1946 (San Lorenzo Island, Peru). 

This species is characterized by the first dorsal spine being shorter 
than the second, the bait in the form of a filamentous bulb; soft 
dorsal, anal, and pelvic rays all divided; most or all of pectoral rays 



88 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 




Figure 6. — Antennarius avalonis Jordan and Starks. Drawing of type retouched by 

author. 



divided (in small to half grown specimens the divided rays may need 
the skin removed on one side before the branched condition of the 
ray can be seen); naked area behind second dorsal spine; third dorsal 
spine movable; caudal peduncle distinct. Coloration of brownish 
reticulations and dark brown spots on fins and body, a distinct ocellate 
spot on soft dorsal at bases of rays 9 to 11. 

This species has been generally misidentified as sanguineus (for 
example, all specimens recorded below from Panama by Meek and 
Hildebrand, "The Marine Fishes of Panama''). I have studied 23 
specimens. From USNM: 82694(1), 81779(3), and 81787(1), all 
from Panama; 144727(2) and 144726(11) from Guaymus, Mexico; 
128237(1), San Lorenzo Island, Peru. From CNHM: 8547(3) and 
8548(1) from Panama. 

Antennarius sarasa Tanaka 

Plate 8, a 
Antennarius sarasa Tanaka, Zool. Mag., vol. 28, No. 330, p. 143, 1916 (type 
locality, Tokyo Market); Figures and descriptions of the fishes of Japan, 
vol. 25, p. 432, pi. 119, fig. 346, 1916 (Tokyo Market). 

This species, with first dorsal spine shorter than second, may have 
all the soft dorsal and anal rays divided, but Tanaka 's drawing shows 
only the last eight dorsal rays divided ; probably all of the pelvic rays 
are divided; third dorsal spine movable; caudal peduncle distinct. 

This species is known from Tanaka 's description and figure. I have 
not seen a specimen. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 89 

Antennarius ocellatus (Bloch and Schneider) 

Plate 8,b 
Lophius histrio var. ocellatus Bloch and Schneider, Systema ichthyologiae, p. 142, 

1801, on Parra, pi. 1, 1787). 
Chironectes ocellatus Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 419, 1837 (Cuba). 
Antennarius pleurophthalmus Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 92, 

1863 (type locality, Charlotte Harbor, Fla., not Key West; holotype, USNM 

5886). 
Antennarius astroscopus (non Nichols) Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 

vol. 92, pp. 19, 21, fig. 37, 1940 (Boca Grande, Fla). 
Antennarius ocellatus Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, pp. 30, 

38, pi. 12, pi. 17, fig. 6, 1942 (Florida; Puerto Rico; Louisiana; Mississippi; 

Yucatan; South Carolina). 

This species has the first dorsal spine a little shorter than the second 
dorsal spine; the third dorsal spine movable; bait consists of a fila- 
mentous bulb ; area behind second dorsal naked except in large adults, 
about 140 mm. and longer; all the anal, soft dorsal, pelvic, and pectoral 
rays are divided; caudal peduncle distinct; background color light 
brown to brown, darker dorsally, overlaid with somewhat scattered 
dark brown dots or small spots; a large ocellate spot occurs basally 
on dorsal soft rays 7 to 9 and one on lower side of body over anal fin 
origin; another may or may not occur on middle of caudal fin. 

I have studied 17 specimens. From USNM: 4545(1) and 4546(1), 
unknown localities; 5886(1) (holotype of A. pleurophthalmus Gill); 
73114(1), Puerto Rico; 143181(1), 33001(1), 125386(1), 119310(1), 
124280(2), 153234(2), 155478(1), all from both coasts of Florida; 
155477(1) off Wilmington, N. C; 163947(1) Spanish Wells, Bahamas. 
From CNHM: 45696(1), 59957(1), and 59958(1), all from Gulf of 
Mexico. 

Plumantennatus, new subgenus 

Genotype : Antennarius asper Macleay . 

This subgenus is characterized by having a plumelike bait, caudal 
peduncle absent, and all the soft dorsal rays divided but all the pelvic 
rays simple. 

Antennarius asper Macleay 

Plate 8,c 

Chironectes caudimaculatus (non Riippell) Richardson, Ichthyology of the voy- 
age .. . Erebus and Terror, p. 125, pi. 60, figs. 8, 9, 1844-1848 (Australia). 

Antennarius asper Macleay, Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, vol. 5, p. 580, 
1881 (type locality, Darnley Island, Australia). — Whitley, Australian Zool., 
vol. 10, pt. 1, p. 46, pi. 2, fig. 30, 1941 (Murray Island). 

This species has the first dorsal spine longer than the second, the 
bait consists of a broad ribbonlike tentacle with filaments basally, and 



90 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

some distally; all of the soft dorsal and anal rays are divided but no 
pelvic or pectoral rays divided; no naked area behind base of second 
dorsal spine; caudal peduncle absent; coloration consists of a pale back- 
ground, but profusely covered with small blackish spots or oblong 
small blotches, even on all fins; the caudal fin has three cross rows of 
h} T aline spots encircled with a blackish line; at base of soft dorsal rays 
7 to 9 is an oceilate spot with an unusually wide white area; distally 
the dorsal fin is broadly white-edged. 

I have studied two specimens: USNM 164194 from Woods Inlet, 
West of Darwin, collected by Robert R. Miller, and CNHM 47248, 
from Singapore. The latter specimen is black all over, except distal 
edges of all median fins and tips of rays of paired fins are pale. 

Subgenus Antennarius Lacepede 

This subgenus is characterized by having only the last two or three 
soft dorsal rays divided; none or only the last pelvic ray divided; 
pectoral rays all simple; anal rays all divided, except possibly first 
is simple. 

Antennarius phymatodes Bleeker 

Plate 11, a 
Antennarius phymatodes Bleeker, Acta Soc. Sci. Indo-Neerlandicae, vol. 3, p. 69, 
1857 (type locality, Amboina); Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 11, pis. 197, 
fig. 1, and pi. 199, fig. 5, 1865 (Amboina). 

This species was distinguished by Bleeker on the basis of "warts'" 
on the skin. His figure does not show any of the rays branched except 
those of the caudal fin. This, in my opinion, would place phymatodes 
as a distinct species. 

Dr. Robert R. Harry kindly loaned his Ifaluk Atoll collection of 
antennariids, and one specimen, 26.5 mm. in standard length with 
"warts" on the skin, agrees with phymatodes in not having any fin 
rays branched except those of the caudal. The color pattern has 
almost faded in the Ifaluk specimen and differs from phymatodes by 
lacking black spots. This might be caused by its small size, and until 
more material is available it is not good ichtlryology to describe his 
specimen as new. 

Antennarius hispidus (Bloch and Schneider) 

Plate 8,d 

Lophius hispidus Bloch and Schneider, Systema ichthyologiae, p. 142, 1801 (type 

locality, Indian Ocean). 
Chironectes lophotes Cuvier, Mem, Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 428, pi. 17, fig. 

2, 1817 (no locality). 
Chironectes hispidus Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 407, 1837 (East Indies). 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 91 

Antennarius hispidus Bleeker, Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 14, pi. 194, fig. 2, pi. 197, 

fig. 1, 1865 (Singapura; Ceram, Amboina). — Gtinther, Journ. Mus. Godef- 

froy, pt. 11, p. 162, pi. 99, fig. a, 1876 (Misol). 
Antennarius scriptissimus Jordan, in Jordan and Sindo, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 

vol. 24, p. 373, fig. 4, 1902 (type locality, Boshu, Tokyo Bay, Japan). 
Antennarius tridens (non Temminck and Schlegel, in part) Tanaka, Figures and 

descriptions of the fishes of Japan, vol. 47, p. 929, pi. 186, fig. 508, 1930 

(Japan) . 
Antennarius hispidus, Smith, The sea fishes of southern Africa, p. 430, p. 98, fig. 

1234, 1949 (South to Knysna). 

This species, with the first dorsal spine about the same length as 
the second dorsal spine, has for the bait a large tuft of filaments; 
second dorsal spine movable; only the last two, possibly last three, 
soft dorsal rays are divided; last pelvic ray divided; all anal rays 
divided; pectoral rays all simple; caudal peduncle distinct; naked area 
behind second dorsal spine; background coloration pale or light tan, 
overlaid with zebralike brown streaks, the pale interspaces 2 to 4 or 
more times wider than the narrow brown streaks; all fins with dark 
brown or blackish spots. 

I have studied four specimens, all from the Philippines. From 
USNM: 56284(1), 56314(1), and 164361(1). From CNHM: 47095(1). 

Antennarius rnoluccensis Bleeker 

Plate 9,a,c 

Chironectes commersoni (non Shaw 1804) Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, 

vol. 3, p. 431, pi. 18, fig. 1, 1817 (type locality, Sea of the Indies); Cuvier 

and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, vol. 12, p. 426, 1837 

(on Cuvier, 1817). 
Antennarius rnoluccensis Bleeker, Natuurk. Tijdschr. Nederlandsch-Indie, vol. 8, 

p. 414, 1855 (type locality, Amboina); Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 17, 

pi. 196, fig. 2, 1865 (Amboina; Celebes). 
Antennarius goramensis Bleeker, Nederlandsch Tijdschr. Dierk., vol. 2, p. 177, 

1865 (type locality, Goram); Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 1, p. 17, pi. 195, 

fig. 2, 1865 (Goram). 

Dr. de Beaufort has examined the types of commersoni Cuvier 1817, 
rnoluccensis Bleeker 1855, and goramensis Bleeker 1865 and finds them 
to represent the same species. 

This species is known from large specimens only; has a long slender 
first dorsal spine, with a slender filamentous tentacle, no naked area 
behind second dorsal spine, third dorsal spine movable; last two rays 
of soft dorsal and last pelvic ray divided; anal rays all divided; pec- 
toral rays all simple; caudal peduncle distinct but the anal fin is 
membranously attached to peduncle notably much farther back than 
that of dorsal fin ; coloration light brown or reddish brown, everywhere 
spotted or blotched with brown; ocellate spots occur at middle of 
length of base of anal fin, at bases of soft dorsal rays 7 to 9, and an 



92 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

ocellate spot on midside of body; these spots have broken up to form 
a block of smaller spots on the 215 mm. specimen. 

I refer to this species with some doubt, two specimens, USNM 
32507 from ?"California," 80 mm. in standard length, 108 mm. total 
length, and USNM 81061, Panama City Market, 215 mm. standard 
length, 255 total length, recorded by Meek and Hildebrand as A. 
strigatus. These two specimens cannot be confused with A. sanguineus 
because the latter has the first dorsal spine about the same length as 
the second and a different color pattern. 

Dr. John Kandail sent a Kodachrome transparency of a 230 mm. 
specimen taken at Oahu which is intermediate in color pattern be- 
tween the two illustrations of this species. When alive the specimen 
was mottled dark brown and bright pink. A specimen captured by 
him was sent to me and he states that when alive it was "solid bright 
yellow." Another specimen measuring 195 mm. in standard length 
was "light yellowish brown" profusely speckled with tiny brown spots. 
All these specimens (USNM 167508, 167509) came from Oahu. 

The speckled and mottled color patterns each may represent differ- 
ent sexes, but I was unable to determine the sex of the specimens. 

Antennarius leucosoma Bleeker 

Plate 9,b 

Antennarius leucosoma Bleeker, Nat. Tijdschr. Nederlandsch-Indie, vol. 6, p. 328, 
1854 (type locality, Flores); Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 19, pi. 199, fig. 
2, 1865 (Flores; Amboina). 

Antennarius multiocellatus leucosoma Giinther, Catalog of the fishes in the British 
Museum, vol. 3, p. 195, 1861 (Amboina and Flores). [Dr. de Beaufort 
examined Gunther's specimen and kindly writes that it is "identical with 
Bleeker's type in the Leiden Museum."] 

Antennarius multiocellatus var. &., Playfair, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, p. 862, 1867 
(Seychelles) . 

This species has a long slender first dorsal spine, much longer than 
second dorsal spine; bait a tuft of filaments; a movable third dorsal 
spine; last two rays of soft dorsal divided; no pectoral or pelvic ray 
divided; anal rays all divided; no naked area behind second dorsal 
spine and a distinct caudal peduncle; the whitish background color, 
everywhere profusely marked with tiny black dots, distinguishes this 
species from all others. I have not seen a specimen of leucosoma. 

Antennarius pardalis (Cuvier and Valenciennes) 

Plate 9,d 

Chironectes pardalis Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 
vol. 12, p. 420, pi. 363, 1837 (type locality, Goree [at Dakar, West Africa]). 

This species is known from the description and figure of Cuvier and 
Valenciennes. Their illustration shows all the soft dorsal, pectoral, 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 93 

and pelvic rays as simple or undivided and all anal rays divided; first 
dorsal spine longer than second; third movable; caudal peduncle 
distinct; color dark red, liberally spotted with black and with a few 
ocellate spots on median fins. 

Antennarius chironectes Lacep&de 

Plate 10,a,b 

Anternnarius chironectes Lacepede, Histoire naturelle des poissons, vol. 1, p. 325, 

pi. 14, middle fig. 2, 1798 (on Commerson) . — Bleeker, Atlas ichthyologique, 

vol. 5, p. 13, pi. 200, fig. 3, 1865 (Amboina; Banda). 
Lophius commersoni Shaw, General zoology or systematic natural history, vol. 5, 

pt. 2, p. 387, 1804 (type locality, on Commerson in Indian Seas). 
Chironectes variegatus Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 422, 1837 (on Lacepede; on Commerson). 
Lophius sandvicensis Bennett, Narrative of a whaling voyage round the globe 

. . . , vol. 2, p. 258, fig., 1840 (type locality, Oahu). 
? Chironectes peravok Montrouzier, Ann. Soc. Agr. Sci. Ind. Lyon, ser. 2, vol. 8, 

p. 467, 1856 (type locality, Woodlark Island). 
Chironectes rubrofuscus Garrett, Proe. California Acad. Nat. Sci., vol. 3, p. 64, 

1863 (type locality, Hawaiian Islands). 
Chironectes niger Garrett, Proc. California Acad. Nat. Sci., vol. 3, p. 107, 1864 

(type locality, Hawaiian Islands). 
Antennarius commersoni Bleeker, Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 20, pi. 197, fig. 3, 

1865 (Ambonia; Ceram). 
Antennarius polyophthalmus Bleeker, Natuurk. Tijdschr. Nederlandsch-Indie, 

vol. 3, p. 644, 1852 (type locality, Banda); Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 12, 

pi. 197, fig. 4, 1865 (Banda; Goram). 
Antennarius nigromaculatus Playfair, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, p. 239, 1869 (type 

locality, Zanzibar). 
Antennarius commersoni Gunther, Journ. Mus. Godeffroy, pt. 11, pp. 163, 164, 

pi. 100, figs, b, c, 1876; pt. 13, pis. 101, 102, fig. a, pi. 104, fig. a, pi. 106, 

fig. b, pi. 105, fig. a, 1877 (Raiatea; Huahine; Hawaiian Islands; Schiffer 

Island; Bonham Island). 
Antennarius commersoni var. nigromaculatus Gunther, Journ. Mus. Godeffroy, 

pt. 11, p. 163, 1876; pt. 13, pi. 102, fig. b, 1877 (Zanzibar). 
Antennarius commersoni var. niger Gunther, Journ. Mus. Godeffroy, pt. 11, p. 163, 

1876; pt. 13, pi. 103, figs, a, b, 1877 (Hawaiian Islands). 
Antennarius commersoni var. rubrofuscus, Gunther, Journ. Mus. Godeffroy, pt. 11, 

p. 164, 1876; pt. 13, pi. 106, fig. a, 1877 (Hawaiian Islands). 
Antennarius commersoni Gunther, Journ. Mus. Godeffroy, p. 164, pt. 13, pi. 104, 

fig. b, 1877 (Society Island). [This plate shows only 7 pectoral rays, which 

is most unusual for a species of Antennarius; the only other known species 

having only 7 pectoral rays is Tathicarpus butleri. Otherwise pi. 104, fig. b 

resembles A. chironectes as recognized here. I think the drawing to be in 

error, and until a specimen is available a new name should not be assigned 

to the drawing.] 
Antennarius argus Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 55, p. 172, 

pi. 8, 1903 (type locality, Zanzibar; holotype ANSP 24208, examined by me). 
Antennarius laysanius Jordan and Snyder, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 27, p. 947, 

1904 (type locality, Laysan Island). — Jordan and Evermann, Bull. U. S. 

Fish Comm., vol. 23, pt. 1, p. 520, pi. 63, 1905 (Laysan Island). 



94 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Antennarius leprosus (non Eydoux and Souleyet) Jordan and Evermann, Bull. 

U. S. Fish Comm., vol. 23, pt. 1, p. 519, fig. 228, 1905 (Honolulu). 
Antennarius commersoni var. nigromaculatus Steindachner, Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. 

Wien, vol. 115, pt. 1, p. 1413 [reprint p. 45], 1906 (on Gunther, Fische der 

Siidsee, pi. 102, fig. a, 1877). 
Antennarius polyophthalmus, Smith, The sea fishes of southern Africa, p. 431, pi. 98, 

fig. 1242, 1949 (Delagoa Bay). 
Antennarius glauerti Whitley, Western Australian Nat., vol. 5, No. 7, p. 207, 

fig., 1957 (type locality, Exmouth Gulf, Western Australia). 

The smaller specimens of this species have a naked area behind 
base of second dorsal spine that becomes completely denticulate in 
the largest adults, over 200 mm. total length. This latter condition 
is represented by A. laysanius Jordan and Snyder and A. chironectes 
of Bleeker. 

This species is widely distributed and variable in color pattern. 
The first dorsal spine is much longer than second dorsal spine, the 
third is movable; bait usually consists of a long ribbonlike tentacle 
and filaments; last two or three soft dorsal rays divided as is the last 
pelvic ray; anal rays all divided; pectoral rays all simple; caudal 
peduncle distinct. Color pattern may be black with tips of rays 
white, or a pale background with a few ocellate spots and scattered 
blackish spots on body, usually occurring rather constantly on the 
belly. 

I have studied six specimens. From USNM: 63626(1), 75839(1), 
89791(1), 92277(1), 126508(1), all from the Hawaiian Islands; 
125961(1), Apia. 

Antennarius multiocellatus (Cuvier and Valenciennes) 

Plate 10,c 

Chironectes multiocellatus Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 420, 1837 (type locality, Martinique). 
Chironectes mentzelii Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 147, 1837 (on a manuscript by Mentzel). 
Chironectes principis Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 416, 1837 (on a manuscript by Mentzel). 
Antennarius annulatus Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 91, 1863 (type 

locality, Garden Key, Fla.; holotype, USNM 4849). 
Antennarius corallinus Poey, Repertorio fisico natural de la Isla de Cuba, p. 188, 

1865 (type locality, Cuba). 
Antennarius stellifer Barbour, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 46, No. 7, p. 132, 

pi. 4, 1905 (type locality, Castle Harbour, Bermuda). 
Antennarius astroscopus Nichols, Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. 31, art. 11, 

pp. 109-111, fig. 1, 1921 (type locality, Barbados). 
Antennarius multiocellatus Barbour, Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, pp. 

27, 37, pis. 10, 11, 13, 14, 16 (fig. 2), 17 (fig. 5), 1942 (Gulf Stream; Bahamas; 

Florida; Cuba; Bermuda; Yucatan; Barbados). 

This species has the first dorsal spine slender and much longer than 
the second dorsal spine, the former bears at its tip the filamentous 
bait; third dorsal spine movable; sometimes none but usually last 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 95 

two soft dorsal rays divided, last pelvic ray divided; anal rays all 
divided; pectoral rays all simple; naked area behind second dorsal 
spine; caudal peduncle distinct. 

There are two color-phases, one has a pale or light brownish back- 
ground with black ocellate spots located in characteristic places as 
follows: basally on middle of anal fin; basally on soft dorsal rays 8 
to 10; black spot each side of base of third dorsal spine; a few 
smaller black spots on caudal, dorsal, and pectoral fins; sides of body 
with several small scattered black spots; belly unspotted; a whitish 
or pale saddle on dorsal edge of caudal peduncle, especially notable 
in blackish color-phase. The blackish color-phase, in addition to the 
white peduncular spot, has one at rear of head, a small one on side 
just behind head, and another one at rear corner of mouth; the black 
spots may show as deeper black through the background color. 

The shorter first dorsal spine, more numerous pectoral fin rays, 
and large ocellate spot on side of body of A. ocellatus distinguishes 
that species from multiocellatus . 

I have studied eight specimens. From USNM: 4849, holotype of 
A. annulatus Gill; 39898 (1), Bahamas; 107351(1), Cuba; 116760(1), 
and 116763(1), Tortugas; 34447(1), unknown locality; 27561(1), dried 
specimen from St. Thomas, Virgin Islands. From CNHM: 48720(1), 
Bermuda. 

Antennarius oligospilos Bleeker 

Plate 11,b 

Antennarius oligospilos Bleeker, Acta Soc. Sci. Indo-Neerlandicae, vol. 2, p. 70, 
1857 (type locality, Amboina); Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 11, pi. 195, 
fig. 1, and pL 200, fig. 1, 1865 (Amboina; Ceram; New Guinea) .—Smith, 
The sea fishes of southern Africa, p. 431, pi. 98, fig. 1241, 1949 (Durban; 
Delagoa Bay). 

This species was distinguished by Bleeker on the basis of "warts" 
on the skin. A. oligospilos is similar to A. commersoni except for the 
warts, and the last pelvic ray is unbranched. It resembles A. 
phymatodes Bleeker in regard to warts on the skin but that species 
does not have any branched rays except those of the caudal fin. I 
have not seen a specimen. 

Antennarius sanguineus Gill 

Plate 10,d 

Antennarius sanguineus Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 91, 1863 

(type locality, Cape San Lucas; 2 types, USNM 6393). 
Antennarius leopardinus Gunther, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, p. 151, 1864 (type 

locality Pacific Coast, Panama); Trans. Zool. Soc. London, vol. 6, pt. 7, 

pi. 69, fig. 3, 1869 (Panama). 
Antennarius tagus Heller and Snodgrass, Proc. Washington Acad. Sci., vol. 5, p. 

226, p. 20, 1903 (type locality, Tagus Cove, Albemarle Island, Galapagos). 
416279—57 1 



96 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

First dorsal spine about same length as the second, which has a 
"hooked tip," third dorsal spine bound down by skin and not movable 
in adults but somewhat movable in the young; naked area behind 
second dorsal spine ; only last two or three soft rays of dorsal branched 
or divided, only last ray of pelvic divided; caudal peduncle scarcely 
or not distinct; none of pectoral rays branched; anal rays all divided; 
background coloration light tan or light brown, overlaid with dark 
brown spots, more numerous and larger ventrally, especially larger on 
belly; a small ocellate spot basally on soft dorsal; fins with small 
brown spots. 

I have studied five specimens of A. sanguineus in addition to the 
types. From USNM: 18604(1), Cape San Lucas; 101755(1), Gorgona 
Island, Colombia. From CNHM: 41442(1), Albemarle Island, 
Galapagos; 60276(1), Gulf of Nicoya, Costa Kica; 60278(1), Acapulco, 
Mexico. 

Antennarius drombus Jordan and Evermann 

Plate 11,c,d. 

Antennarius drombus Jordan and Evermann, Bull. U. S. Fish Comm., vol. 22, 
p. 207, 1903 (type locality, Waikiki, near Honolulu; holotype, USNM 50659) ; 
Ibid., vol. 23, p. 521, pi. 64, 1905 (Waikiki). 

Antennarius nexilis Snyder, Bull. U. S. Fish Comm., vol. 22, p. 537, pi. 13, fig. 23, 
1904 (type locality, Honolulu; holotype, USNM 50883) .—Jordan and Ever- 
mann, Bull. U. S. Fish Comm., vol. 23, pt. 1, p. 523, pi. 65, fig. 1, 1905 
(Honolulu) . 

First dorsal spine about same length as second; latter without a 
definite naked area behind its base, although sometimes it is partly 
naked; third dorsal spine bound down with skin, scarcely movable; 
last two or three soft dorsal and last pelvic ray divided; none of 
pectoral rays divided; anal rays all divided; caudal peduncle scarcely 
present; color dark brown with darker brown or blackish spots on 
body and fins; no ocellate spot on soft dorsal. 

In addition to the two holotypes, I have studied 12 specimens. 
From USNM: 119772(1), from Cocos Island, Eastern Pacific; 
160709(2), Hawaii; 167510(1), Oahu. Dr. John Randall sent me 
a Kodachrome transparenc}^ taken of a Oahu specimen. The fisb 
was profusely blackspotted after preservation. When alive it had 
"many conspicuous pink areas" and the blackish spots were not dis- 
tinct. Dr. Robert R. Harry loaned to me 8 specimens collected by 
him from the reefs on the northwest side of Laysan Island, June 27- 
July 3, 1951, while he was with the George Vanderbilt Pacific 
Equatorial Expedition. 



FROGFISHES- — SCHULTZ 97 

Antennarius coccineus (Lesson) 

Plate 12, a 

Ckironectes coccineus Lesson, Voyage autour du monde, La Coquille, Zool., vol. 

2, pt. 1, p. 143, pi. 16, fig. 1, 1830 (type locality, Mauritius) [Dr. de Beaufort 

examined the type of this species and in a letter stated "the dorsal and anal 

end close to base of caudal;" therefore, Lesson's figure 1 is inaccurate]. — 

Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle de poissons, vol. 12, p. 430, 

1837 (on Lesson). 
Antennarius coccineus Bleeker, Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 22, pi. 197, fig. 2, 

1865 (Java; Cocos; Nias; Singapura; Sangi; Buro; Amboina; Ceram; 

Goram). — Smith, The sea fishes of southern Africa, p. 431, pi. 98, fig. 1238, 

1949 (Natal). 
Antennarius stigmaticus Ogilby. Mem. Queensland Mus., vol. 1, p. 63, pi. 14, 

fig. 2, 1912 (type locality, Moreton Bay, Queensland). 
Antennarius leucas Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 86, p. 512, 

fig. 53, 1934 (type locality, Durban, Natal, holotype ANSP 54955, examined 

by me). 
Antennarius punctatissimus Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 98, 

p. 216, fig. 76, 1946 (type locality, Aguni Shima, Riu Kiu Islands, holotype 

ANSP 72089, examined by me). 

This species has first dorsal spine short, about same length as 
second, with naked area behind second dorsal spine; third dorsal 
spine partly bound down with skin and only partly movable; only 
the last two or three soft dorsal rays and last pelvic rays divided; 
pectoral rays all simple, undivided; anal rays all divided; caudal 
peduncle absent or nearly so; background color light tan, somewhat 
marbled or profusely peppered with dark dots; occasionally a trace 
of a dark spot near midbase of soft dorsal on young and those as large 
as 32 mm. in standard length. 

I have studied 24 specimens. From USNM: 113988(1), 113989(1), 
113986(1), 113987(3), 113990(1), all from Bikini Atoll; 167506(1), 
Onotoa Atoll; 164193(1), Arnol Atoll; 52280(1), Samoan Islands; 
133868(1) , Tonga Island, Paumotu. From University of Washington: 
1 from Bikini Atoll. From Chicago Natural History Museum: 1 
from the Marshall Islands. From Dr. Robert R. Harry: 6 from Ifaluk 
Atoll; 4 from Kapingamarangi Atoll. From Dr. John Randall: 1 
from Moorea, Society Islands. 

Antennarius dorehensis Bleeker 

Plate 12,b 

Antennarius dorehensis Bleeker, Acta Soc. Sci. Indo-Neerlandicae, vol. 6, p. 21, 
1859 (type locality, New Guinea); Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 5, p. 19, pi. 199, 
fig. 7, 1865 (Doreh, New Guinea). 

This species with the first dorsal spine about same length as second, 
bait a tuft of filaments, has about the last four soft dorsal rays divided; 



98 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM tol.iot 

none of pelvic or pectoral rays divided; anal rays all divided; caudal 
peduncle distinct. Background coloration blackish, everywhere 
speckled with white dots. This species is known from Bleeker's 
description and figure. I have not seen a specimen nor have I seen 
the specimens reported upon as this species by Herre (Copeia, No. 
3, p. 149, 1945) from Estancia, Panay. 

Antennarius bermudensis, new species 

Plate 12,c 

Holotype: USNM 50000, Hungry Bay, Bermuda (Paget County), 
F. Goodwin Gosling, standard length 51 mm., total length 65 mm. 

Paratype: CNHM 48862, Harrington Sound, Bermuda, April 
1931, L. L. Mobray, standard length 61.5 mm., total length about 
79 mm. 

Description: The following counts were made on the holotype and 
paratype respectively: Dorsal 1-1-1,12 and 1-1-1,12; anal 7 and 7; 
pectoral 9-9 and 10-10; pel vies 5 and 5; caudal 4+5 and 4 + 5. 

The following characters are recorded in thousandths of the standard 
length, for the holotype and paratype, respectively. Standard length 
51 and 61.5 mm. Greatest depth of body 686 and 650; length of bony 
part of first dorsal spine 118 and 114; of second dorsal spine 127 and 
114; of third dorsal spine 225 and 195; longest soft dorsal ray 223 
and 276; longest (middle) caudal ray 275 and 276; length of head 
(tip of snout to gill opening) 628 and 634; length of maxillaries 260 
and 293; least depth of caudal peduncle 123 and 130; length of caudal 
peduncle (distance between vertical lines through caudal fin base and 
rear of membranous bases of anal and dorsal fins) 27 and 29; length 
of base of soft dorsal fin 461 and 495; eye diameter 59 and 55; inter- 
orbital space 184 and 163. 

The bony part of first dorsal spine about same length as second 
dorsal spine, bearing filaments at its tip; second dorsal spine curved, 
covered with denticles and with tentacles; third dorsal spine bound 
down with skin except its tip, scarcely movable; area behind base 
of second dorsal spine naked; all soft dorsal rays simple except last 
two may or may not be divided; anal and caudal rays all divided, 
pectoral rays all simple; onry last pelvic ray branched; caudal peduncle 
almost absent; body and head profusely covered with denticles. 

Color in Alcohol: Background color brownish above, very light 
tan on belly; everywhere speckled with darker brown; median fins 
somewhat barred; a large ocellate spot basally on soft dorsal rays 8 
to 1 1 more on body than on base of fin ; lateral line with dark brown 
spots; pectoral and pelvic fins with dark spots. 

Remarks: This new species may be distinguished by the key from 
all others referred to the genus Antennarius. It is most closely related 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 99 

to (trombus and coccineus of the Pacific, differing in having one more 
soft dorsal ray and an ocellatc spot on the soft dorsal, absent in the 
two species from the Pacific. 

Named in reference to the island group where the type was collected. 

Antennarius notophthalmus Bleeker 

Plate 13, a, b 

Antennarius notophthalmus Bleeker, Nat. Tijdschr. Nederlandsch-Indie, vol. 5, 
p. 544, 1853 (type locality, Java) ; Atlas ichthyologique, vol. 1, p. 16, pt. 
196, fig. 1, 1865 (Java; Nias; Celebes; Batjan; Amboina; Ceram). 

Antennarius biocellatus (non Cuvier 1817) Bleeker, Acta Soc. Sci. Indo-Neer- 
landicae, vol. 8, p. 4, 1860 (type locality, Amboina) ; Atlas ichthyologique, 
vol. 5, p. 18, pi. 194, fig. 3, pi. 198, fig. 5, 1865 (Amboina) .—Smith, The 
sea fishes of southern Africa, p. 431, pi. 98, fig. 1237, 1949 (East London to 
Delagoa Bay). 

This species with first dorsal spine about as long as second has the 
bait composed of a tuft of filaments; none of pelvic or pectoral rays 
divided; last two or three soft dorsal rays divided; anal rays all 
divided; caudal peduncle distinct; background coloration brownish, 
sometimes overlaid with a coarse network of darker brown marks; or 
mottled and spotted with brown; usually a dark bar or saddle between 
third dorsal spine and soft dorsal origin, usually an ocellate spot 
posterobasally on soft dorsal fin. 

I have studied two specimens. From USNM: 133169(1) and 
150949(1) from the Philippines. 

Antennarius verrucosus Bean 

Plate 12,d 

Antennarius verrucosus Bean, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 19, p. 31, 1906 
(type locality, St. George Island, Bermuda) . 

This species, with first dorsal spine about same length as second, 
has the bait consisting of a tuft of filaments; third dorsal spine mov- 
able; naked area behind base of second dorsal spine; caudal peduncle 
distinct; last two or three soft dorsal rays divided; last pelvic ray 
divided; anal rays all divided; none of pectoral rays divided; back- 
ground color light tan, overlaid with brown streaks and bars, those 
dorsally with pale centers; fins brown-spotted, those on dorsal and 
caudal fins with pale centers. 

I have studied two specimens. From USNM : 164244(1), Bermuda. 
From CNHM: 46818(1), Florida. 

Antennarius altipinnis Smith and Radcliffe 

Plate 13,c 

Antennarius altipinnis Smith and Radcliffe, in Radcliffe, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 42, p. 204, fig. 3, 1912 (type locality, Nogas Point, Panay, Philippines; 
holotype, USNM 70267). 



100 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Antennarius albomarginatus Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 

97, p. 74, fig. 19, 1945 (type locality, Saipan Island; type, Academy of 

Natural Sciences of Philadelphia (ANSP) No. 71609, examined by me). 
Antennarius niveus Fowler, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 98, p. 215, 

fig. 75, 1946 (type locality, Aguni Shima, Riu Km Islands; type, ANSP 

72088, examined by me). 

This rather common species in the Philippines has the first dorsal 
spine shorter than the second dorsal spine, and the bait consists of a 
tuft of filaments; no naked area behind second dorsal spine; last two 
or three soft dorsal rays divided, as is the last pelvic ray ; anal rays all 
divided; all of pectoral rays undivided; third dorsal spine somewhat 
bound down by skin but movable; caudal peduncle distinct but 
short; background coloration brownish and somewhat dark-spotted; 
cirri on body usually whitish ; median fins notably dark brown except 
distally with broad white or pale edges; pale bar across caudal fin 
basally is a characteristic mark. 

In addition to the types, I have studied 16 specimens. From 
USNM: 122342(1), 122811(2), 122343(1), 122344(1), 122808(2), 
122809(1), 150939(1), 150950(1), 150995(1), all from the Philippines ; 
154625(1), Guam; 164196(1), Palau Islands. From Australian 
Museum, Sydney, 1 from Gilbert Islands. From ANSP: 71818(1), 
Fiji. From Dr. R. R. Harry: 2, collected by him at Kapingamarangi 
Atoll in 1954. 

Antennarius pauciradiatus, new species 

FlGUEE 7 

Antennarius pleurophthalmus (non Gill) Longley and Hildebrand, Papers Tortugas 
Lab., vol. 34, p. 308, 1941 (Tortugas, Fla., only the 40 and 42 mm. specimens). 

Holotype: USNM 153226, off Palm Beach, Fla., in 30 to 40 
fathoms on rocky reef, August 1950, collected by Thompson and 
McGinty, standard length 20 mm. and total length 28 mm. 

Paratypes: USNM 82583, off Cape San Antonio, Cuba, May 24, 
1914, Bartsch and Henderson, 1 specimen, 16.5 mm.; USNM 153146, 
off Palm Beach, Fla., 1950, McGinty, 2 specimens, 13.8 and 15.5 mm.; 
USNM 153147, off Palm Beach, Fla., 20 to 30 fathoms, April 1950, 
Thompson and McGinty, 2 specimens, 12.5 and 15.5 mm.; USNM 
153148, off Palm Beach in 20 fathoms, March 1950, McGinty, 1 
specimen, 12 mm.; USNM 153223, off Palm Beach, Fla., sand and 
rocky reef, Aug. 2, 1950, Thompson and McGinty, 2 specimens, 
21 and 26.5 mm.; CNHM 50249, South end of Biscayne Bay, Fla., 
W. B. Grey, July-August 1949, 2 specimens, 35 and 40 mm. (in poor 
condition); USNM 116764, Tortugas, Fla., W. H. Longley, 2 speci- 
mens, 30 and 31 mm. (40 and 42 mm. total length). 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 



101 



Description: The following counts were made on the holotype 
(additional counts are recorded in table 1): Dorsal rays I-I-I-12; 
anal 7; pectoral 9-10. 

The following characters are recorded in thousandths of the 
standard length for the holotype and one paratype, respectively: 
Standard length 20 and 30 mm. Greatest depth of body 600 and 550 ; 
length of bony part of first dorsal spine 55 and 50; of second dorsal 
spine 110 and 97; of third dorsal spine 325 and 297; longest soft 
dorsal ray 270 and 300; longest (middle) caudal ray 425 and 417; 
length of head (tip of snout to gill opening) 600 and 600; length of 
maxillaries 215 and 220; least depth of caudal peduncle 150 and 147; 
length of caudal peduncle (distance between vertical lines thru caudal 
fin base and rear of membranous bases of anal and dorsal fins) 90 
and 100; length of base of soft dorsal fin 550 and 584; eye diameter 
95 and 67; interorbital space 110 and 93. 

The bony part of first dorsal spine much shorter than second dorsal 
spine, bearing at its tip a tuft of filaments; second dorsal spine curved 
and short; third dorsal spine notably much longer than second; 
both second and third spines with membranes behind ; the third spine 
becoming partly bound down to body on the largest specimens 
(26.5 and 40 mm.) but still somewhat movable; only last two or three 
soft dorsal rays divided; only last pelvic ray divided; caudal rays all 




Figure 7. — Antennarius pauciradiatus, new species. Drawing by Mrs. A. M. Awl of 
holotype, USNM 153226, from Florida. 



102 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

branched ; anal rays all branched ; pectoral rays all simple ; gill opening 
close to base of pectoral fin; caudal peduncle distinct; skin with fine 
denticles almost everywhere on body and head; scattered dermal 
cirri present. 

Color in alcohol: Background coloration almost whitish, some- 
what tinged with pink, larger specimens light tan; a few dark dots 
present on a few specimens mostly on head and fins ; the most charac- 
teristic mark is a small ocellate spot basally on soft dorsal fin between 
rays 8 to 10. 

Remarks: This new species has been confused with A. radiosus, 
A. multiocellatus, and A. ocellatus, all of the Western Atlantic. The 
reason for this confusion is the presence of an ocellate spot in the 
soft dorsal fin of these four species. A. radiosus has 13 or 14 pectoral 
rays and A. ocellatus has 11 to 13, whereas the new species has only 
8 to 10, usually 9. A. multiocellatus differs from A. pauciradiatus in 
having 10 pectoral rays instead of 9, rarely 10, and in addition the 
first dorsal spine of multiocellatus is much longer than the second. 

This new species is named in reference to the fewer pectoral rays 
as compared with closely related species in the Western Atlantic. 

Antennarius nummifer (Cuvier) 

Figure 8 

Chironectes nummifer Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 430, pi. 17, 
fig. 4, 1817 (no locality given) ; Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle 
des poissons, vol. 12, p. 425, 1837 (coast of Malabar). 

Antennarius sanguifluus Jordan, in Jordan and Sindo, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 
24, p. 374, fig. 5, 1 1902 (type locality, Misaki, Japan; holotype, USNM 
49820) — Jordan, Tanaka and Snyder, Journ. Coll. Sci. Tokyo Imp. Univ., 
vol. 23, art. 1, p. 424, fig. 393, 1913 (Japan). — Okada and Matsubara, Keys 
to the fishes and fishlike animals of Japan, p. 457, pi. 112, fig. 2, 1938 (Japan). 

The first dorsal spine, about the same length as second, has the 
bait consisting of a tuft of filaments; area behind second dorsal spine 
naked; third dorsal spine movable, tip hooked or nearly so; last 2 
or 3 soft dorsal rays and last pelvic ray divided; all pectoral rays 
simple; anal ra}^s all divided; caudal peduncle distinct; background 
coloration light tan or brownish, somewhat mottled with darker 
brown; large ocellate spot posterobasally on soft dorsal fin between 
rays 7 and 9; tentatively, I refer CNHM 51864 to this species as it 
agrees in every respect except its generally blackish color. Since 
other species of Antennarius apparently have a black color phase, I 
presume it could happen in this one too. Series of antennariids are 
not available for the study of such problems. 



1 Drawing in error; last pelvic ray is divided in the holotype. 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 



103 




Figure 8. — Antennarius nummifer (Cuvier). Drawing of type of A. sanguifluus retouched 

by author. 

In addition to the holotype of A. sanguifluus, I have studied 21 
specimens. From USNM: 167505(1), Onotoa Atoll, Gilbert Islands, 
collected by Dr. John Randall. From CNHM: 2487(6) and 5752(3) 
both from Persian Gulf; 51864(1), Sandakan District, Northern 
Borneo. Dr. R. A. Harry loaned 10 specimens from the Caroline 
Islands. 

Subfamily Histrioninae 

Genus His trio Fischer 

Histrio Fischer, Zoognosia, ed. 3, vol. 1, pp. 70, 78, 1813 (genotype, Lophius 
histrio Linnaeus). 

Pterophryne (non Pterophrynus Lutken 1863) Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila- 
delphia (1863), p. 90, 1864 (genotype, Chironectes laevigatus Cuvier). 

Pterophrynoides Gill, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 1, p. 216, 1878 (genotype, 
Lophius histrio Linnaeus; proposed to replace Pterophryne Gill). 

Histrio histrio (Linnaeus) 

Plate 13,d 

Lophius histrio Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 237, 1758 (type locality, 
pelagic in Fucus). — Shaw, General zoology, vol. 5, pt. 2, p. 384, pi. 164, 
1804 (Indian and American Seas). — Smith, Sea fishes of southern Africa, 
p. 431, pi. 98, fig. 1243, 1949 (pelagic). 

? Lophius marmoratus Shaw and Nodder, Naturalist's miscellany, vol. 5, pi. 176, 
1794 (no locality). 



104 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.iot 

? Lophius pictus Shaw and Nodder, Naturalist's miscellany, vol. 5, pi. 176, 1794 

(no locality) . 
Lophius raninus Tilesius, M6m. Soc. Nat. Moscou, vol. 2, p. 245, pis. 16, 17, 

1809 (no locality). 
Lophius cocinsinensis Shaw and Nodder, Naturalist's miscellany, vol. 23, pi. 

1012, p. ?, 1812 (type locality, Indian Seas). 
Lophius gibbus Mitchill, Trans. Lit. Philosoph. Soc. New York, vol. 1, pi. 4, fig. 

9, 1815 (no locality given). 
Chironectes laevigatus Cuvier, Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 423, pi. 

16, upper fig., 1817 (type locality, Atlantic Ocean). 
Lophius histrio marmoratus Bloch and Schneider, Systema ichthylogiae, p. 142, 

1801 (no locality given). 
Lophius geographicus Quoy and Gaimard, Voy. Uranie . . . Physicienne, Zool., 

p. 355, pi. 65, fig. 3, 1824 (type locality, New Guinea). 
Lophius histrio pictus Bloch and Schneider, Systema ichthyologiae, p. 142, 1801 

(no locality). 
Chironectes pictus Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, vol. 

12, p. 393, pi. 363, 1837 (middle of Atlantic). 
Chironectes tumidus Cuvier and Valenciennes, Histoire naturelle des poissons, 

vol. 12, p. 397, 1837 (type locality, Atlantic). 
Chironectes arcticus Diiben and Koren, Kongl. Vet. Akad. Handl., p. 72, pi. 3, 

figs. 4, 5, 1844 (type locality, Atlantic). 
Chironectes pictus var vittatus Richardson, Voy. Erebus and Terrior, Fishes, p. 

15, pi. 9, figs. 3, 4, 1844 (type locality, tropical Atlantic). 
Chironectes sonntagii Miiller, Reisen in den Vereinigten Staaten, Canada und 

Mexico, vol. 1, pt. 2, p. 180, 1864 (type locality, Gulf Stream). 
Antennarius inops Poey, Anal. Soc. Espafiola Hist. Nat., vol. 10, p. 340, 1881 

(type locality of holotype, USNM 37434, Puerto Rico). 
Histrio jagua Nichols, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 33, p. 62, 1920 (type 

locality, Bermuda.) 
Histrio gibba, Longley and Hildebrand, Papers Tortugas Lab., vol. 34, p. 303, 

pi. 34, 1941 (Panamd; West Indies; Florida). 
Pterophrynoides histrio Whitley, Rec. Australian Mus. vol. 17, p. 137, pi. 31, 

fig. 4, 1929 (New South Wales). — Koefoed, Rep. Sci. Results Michael Sars 

North Atlantic Deep-Sea Exped., 1910, vol. 4, pt. 2, No. 1, p. 3, pi. 3, figs. 1, 

2, 1944 (North Atlantic). 

I have compared specimens from the Atlantic, East and West 
Pacific, and Indian Oceans and did not find any significant differences 
throughout the entire range in tropical marine waters. I conclude 
that only one species is represented. 

The largest Atlantic specimen observed by me measures 106 mm. 
in standard length and a total length of 140 mm. In the Pacific, one 
from the Philippines is 140 mm. standard length and 195 mm. in 
total length. 

I have studied 452 specimens, as follows : 



FROGFISHES — SCHULTZ 



105 



ATLANTIC OCEAN 

Western Atlantic Ocean: USNM 4880(1), 21250(1), 38043(1), 39474(6), 

44245(1), 82620(2), 83863(33), 92639(1), 92689(1), 92691(2), 92749(1); 

CNHM 34216(1), 34219(1), 34220(1). 
Gulf of Maine: USNM 164190(8), 164191(4). 
Massachusetts: USNM 20661(1), 125415(5). 
Delaware: USNM 87584(1). 
North Carolina: USNM 53257(6), 73535(1). 
South Carolina: USNM 131631(1). 
Florida: USNM 18045(1), 49587(1), 49704(1), 88097(1), 89368(2), 89712(1), 

89713(1), 89788(1), 92219(1), 116765(9), 116766(1), 119123(1), 126789(1), 

134017(4), 134323(1), 135674(4), 155494(1), 163948(1), 164183(1), 164185 to 

164189(5); CNHM 16156(1), 21703(1), 46140(1), 46895(1), 50219(1), 

50250(1), 50261(4). 
Carribbean, Bahamas, West Indies, Curacao: USNM 20420(6), 37544(1), 

53259(3), 38766(1), 53258(1), 53260(7), 53261(1), 108326(1), 108327(1), 

108370(1), 128801(1), 132620(1), 133908(1), 164177(2), 164184(20); CNHM 

50259(1), 60277(1). 
Gulf of Mexico: USNM 37239(1), 73588(1), 84579(1), 84580(1), 120233(1), 

131525(1), 133880(1), 164178(1), 164180(2), 164181(3), 164182(1); CNHM 

35361 to 35365(5). 
Panama (Atlantic): USNM 81781(1), 81788(1). 
Bermuda: USNM 105268(3); CNHM 5290 to 5293(4), 8550(1), 48213(1), 

48252(1), 48358(1), 48516(1), 48545(1), 48581(1), 48601(1), 48805(1), 

48894(26), 49176(1), 49177(1), 49178(1). 
Trinidad: USNM 164179(1). 
PACIFIC OCEAN 

Galapagos Islands: USNM 20403(2), 84612(6), 92698(1). 

Hawaiian Islands: USNM 82842(2). 

Japan: USNM 76259(2); CNHM 55403(1). 

China: USNM 56401(5). 

Philippine Islands: USNM 56315(1), 122385(16), 122543(1), 122817(170), 

122818(2). 
Australia (Newcastle): USNM 150941(1). 

New Scientific Names 
Following is a list of new scientific names appearing in this paper. 



Kanazawaichthys, new genus (p. 62) 
Kanazawaichthys scutatus, new species 

(p. 63) 
Nudiantennarius, new genus (p. 66) 
Abantennarius, new genus (p. 66) 
Abantcnnarius analis Gosline, new 

species (p. 67) 
Triantennatus , new subgenus (p. 74) 
Phrynelox zebrinus, new species (p. 75) 
Phrynelox atra, new species (p. 76) 



Antennatus, new genus, new subgenus 

(p. 80) 
Xenophrynichthys, new subgenus (p. 

81) 
Uniantennatus, new subgenus (p. 83) 
Plumantennatus, new subgenus (p. 89) 
Antennarius bermudensis, new species 

(p. 98) 
Antennarius pauciradiatus, new species 

(p. 100) 



a. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1987 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS.. VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 1 



Offlfc 










, ^ 



£ £ 



ex •"> 







416279— 5 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 




T \ 







SCHULTZ, 


PLATE 


22 -C 


ON 4, 


' — ' *-H 


<u ^ 


4=! (30 


•5 * 


L ^ V 


fe. +-' 


& "Ot: 


m c « 


BE rt 


*vl ^ 




-G +-> 


'■' 


1^ 






^■Uf 


U 13 




U C 




S * 




S 8 


H* 


"-t- 1 " 




rt p 


^1 






Is 



fa 



M^ On 



i ! * 



eg; T3 



o u 




J<l 







X^- 





as 


Am4=- if 


*7 >- 


f A 


oT ^.c; 




d, CO 




X i! 


^dSprT £■ < jtf # * # 


4-> c 


-■-*■ ,- ' > £ / . 


o c 




*o .Si 




c 




s-T <u 




>* > 




i- ctS 




cu 




+-> Ui 




"-*-; <u 




rt • — 




„ > 




^~s 3 




S3 U 


11 ■ '* ■ „. -• 


TJ "— ' 


V- >* ;;. 




■i^y|fe.^- : 






*-> '2 




S « 


n*P*3&.. '■ 






•2 ^ 


Wj/pgJr .-cJ^S^N 


« rS 


' '■wi^C' 


1 -° • 
r ^ oo 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 3 













m\ 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS.. VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 4 




pq 






U ON 



'S as 



8 £? 





ON I-, 
"7? rt 



IS 



PQ 






PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 5 



MWII/g 





co o 

T3 O 
a O-, 



,r-1 



v,v^jW"stfWHn 



V; w# 



_^r 




I 






\< 



!U, 



HI 



Kj£*.tw 



% J^ 






T 




a is 



^3 . 

oo 



«-> o 
o c 

(in ctf 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS.. VOL. "107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 




™ S . 



^ 






a, <u 
a, a. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 7 




v 



*m 






pq 



£2 



>. 




^ 




s 






O 


1*4 






U-| 


o 


i—i 




S 


<U 


z, 


^4 


GO 


<u 


£> 






pq 


"o 


Ui 




<u 


o 








o 


rt 


JZ 


^< 


Oh 










<u 

o 


g 


- 


ctf 


. ' 


o 


s 


•-» 


;§ 


s 


£ 




*» 




o 


^3 
<3 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 





;% 




• ';*•* /Ov» 



Ph -^ 

us 

o s- 
o 2 
O cs 

a, <— s 



CO T3 



.5 PQ 



21 



<0. 

£ a 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL- 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 9 




pq 









.'*W2:-'. 






.''•"« jf ■£•••' 












•*.'f/. : ,-"- 






«>•* 


w$* 


S/H 


&J8^ 


mW- 


'"'•■ »Y% 


-"V~.*V* 




XS1 






4 -*.»•'»!] 




i m 




P**** *". ; v*S5 






ffi&^~*V?yJ3 










E9 




".■^^Sfe** 


» *JM 


^e** ; ** ' • '.T* 


^ilii5fe 




m&«?*+ - " * >'i» 




ag^MM 


g^,< „*,. % *4i 


&^r 




^/»' ; '^ 


J8?TO»f'~'^ 


J 






r ^' 


>/*2B&r 






If 





■g'l 

co -ev, 

3^ 



pq 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 10 








CTJ 




M 


)_ 


T3 


cu 


O 


•*~j 


C 


rt 


CO 


<D 


id 


2» 


d 


-C 


rt 


a 


i-i 






g 


"« 



o 


X 




S-. 


■a 


<u 


D 


+j 






— 


rt 


o 


~ 


i 


" 




a 



ON <-> 



CO 



pq 





o > 






►si 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ. PLATE 11 





CO 




W 



« S 

^ >-< 



pq 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 12 






O 

2 6 
% 3 

riH CO 

CO ^J 

8.S 

CO CO 






„ o 



pq 2 





DC 


CU 


s 


PQ X 


.«-) 


2 


^ 


u 


s 






ex, 


J: 


>> 


o 




^3 


o 








o 


^ 


J2 


m 


c~ 




cS 




V 


Ui 


pq 


<u 


>-> 



PQ a 






PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS., VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 13 





: »z 



.2 <u 
S 2 

TO 

2 x 

O "U 

„ o 




PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS, VOL. 107 



SCHULTZ, PLATE 14 




iSSF' 



ex 3T 
&§ 

Is 

N <£ 



^ Oh 



c 

"0 




PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Vol. 107 Washington: 1957 No. 3384 



NEW AMERICAN CYNIPID WASPS FROM OAK GALLS 



By Lewis H. Weld 



Twenty-three new species of cynipids are described herein; two 
are inquilines, while the others are gall makers. Twenty-one of 
these new species are from the United States, but two of the gall 
makers are from Mexico. 

Types of the 23 new species are deposited in the U. S. National 
Museum. Paratypes are in institutions designated by the following 
abbreviations: 

AM: American Museum of Natural History. 

CM: Chicago Museum of Natural History. 

CA: California Academy of Sciences. 

PA: Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. 

C: Cornell University. 

MCZ: Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

Genus Synergus Hartig 
Synergus magnificus, new species 

Female: Thorax black; head, except above antennae and on 
occiput, light-colored like legs and antennae; abdomen black or 
sometimes reddish. Vertex punctate, cheeks not broadened behind 
eyes, antennae 14-segmented, tapering to tip. Mesoscutum rugoso- 
coriaceous with a suggestion of transverse sculpture in low relief, 

107 



108 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

parapsidal grooves obsolete anteriorly, no median. Disk of scutellum 
rugose, pits transverse. Mesopleuron bare, entirely striate. Veins 
brown, areolet complete. Base of hind and middle coxae black. 
Abdomen longer than high, longer than head plus thorax, slightly 
gibbous at base. Big tergite deeply excavated behind in dorsal 
view so that four other tergites are visible in side view, lengths along 
dorsal margin as 35:9:7:6. Hind margin of big tergite and exposed 
parts of rest punctate, almost smooth in some individuals, vn pubes- 
cent, sheaths projecting. Length 3.4-6.05 mm. Average of 53 
specimens, 4.74 mm. 

Male: Similar to female in color except that sides of pronotum 
and most of mesopleuron are not black, abdomen all black. Antennae 
15-segmented, third very slightly excavated. Length 2.25-4.7 mm. 
Average of 74, 3.91 mm. 

Types: USNM 63004, type female, allotype, and 10 paratypes. 
Paratypes in AM, CM, CA. 

Habitat: Guests in the ellipsoidal stem gall of Disholcaspis truckeen- 
sis (Ashm.) on Quercus chrysolepis Liebm. Types are from a series 
of 23 which emerged in April 1923 from galls collected at Idyllwild, 
Calif., in September 1922. Thirteen paratypes emerged May 18, 
1911, from galls collected at Kanawyer, Tulare County, Calif., on 
July 4, 1910; two are from Colfax, Calif., two from Kyhuiz, Calif., 
and two are from Oregon Caves, Oreg. Eighty-five were reared 
Apr. 24 to May 6, 1954, by Hugh B. Leech from galls collected at 
Mill Valley, Marin County, Calif.; these paratypes are in the Cali- 
fornia Academy of Sciences. 

Genus Ceroptres Hartig 
Ceroptres montensis, new species 

Female: Black; antennae brown, darker distally; legs light brown 
except for slight infuscation on base of coxae. Face pubescent with 
a median ridge and faint striae about mouth. Antennae 13-seg- 
mented, segments 3-5 subequal. Vertex bare. Pronotum and 
mesonotum coriaceous, dull, pubescent. Anterior and lateral lines 
smooth. Parapsidal grooves extending forward half-way, median 
groove shorter. Disk of scutellum finely rugose behind, pits at base 
indistinct, dull. Mesopleuron with a large, smooth, bare, polished 
area. Wing pubescent, cilia short, veins brown, areolet distinct, 
radial cell 2.3 times as long as broad. Claws simple. Abdomen 
longer than high, lengths of tergites n and in on dorsal margin as 
25 : 45, in smooth, exposed parts of rest and sides of the hypopygium 
punctate, ventral spine twice as long as broad. Length 1.8-3.1 mm. 
Average of 42 specimens, 2.52 mm. 



CYNIPID WASPS — WELD 109 

Male: Antennae 15-segmented, third slightly shorter than fourth 
and not excavated. Abdomen short, tergites n and in as 24:38. 
Length 1.8-2.35 mm. Average of 23, 2.08 mm. 

Types: USNM 63005, type, allotype and 12 paratypes. Paratypes 
in AM, CM, CA, PA, MCZ, C. 

Habitat: Guests in tan, smooth, ellipsoidal stem galls. The types 
are from a series reared Mar. 17, 1923, from galls of Andricus reni- 
formis McC. and Egb. on Quercus vaccinifolia Kell., at Tahoe City, 
Calif. Paratypes are from Holland, Oreg., and Kyburz, Mount 
Wilson, and Idyllwild, Calif., from galls of Disholcaspis truckeensis 
(Ashm.) on Quercus chrysolepis Liebm. 

Genus Neuroterus Hartig 
Neuroterus floricomus, new species 

Female: Black; tibiae, tarsi, most of coxae and first three segments 
of antennae straw-yellow. Head coriaceous; from above broader 
than thorax, cheeks broadened behind eye, occiput concave; from in 
front broader than high, malar space one-sixth as long as eye, antennae 
13-segmented. Mesonotum smooth, mesopleuron bare, smooth, 
bulging. Wing short-pubescent, ciliate, veins distinct, areolet 
reaching one-sixth way to basal. Abdomen sessile, collapsed, shorter 
than thorax, ventral spine short. Length 1.4-1.7 mm. Average of 
11 specimens, 1.56 mm. 

Male: Head and abdomen black; antennae, thorax and legs pale 
yellow. Cheeks not broadened behind eyes. Antennae 14-seg- 
mented, third elongated and slightly bent. Length 1.9-2.05 mm. 
Average of 7, 1.98 mm. 

Types: USNM 63006, type female, allotype, and 2 paratypes. 
Other paratypes in AM, CM, CA. 

Host: Quercus reticulata Humb. & Bonpl. 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 5): On staminate flowers in late June. A densely 
woolly enlargement of the axis up to 25 mm. long by 10 mm. in diameter 
with only the anthers protruding. 

Habitat: The type material (Hopkins No. 15618 d ) was collected 
June 28, 1918, in the Santa Catalina Mountains, Ariz., and adults 
emerged up to July 9. Galls were seen in the Santa Catalina Moun- 
tains on Quercus oblongifolia Torr. and Q. arizonica Sarg., in the 
Huachuca Mountains on Q. reticulata, Q. oblongifolia, and Q. arizonica, 
in the Mule Mountains on Q. arizonica, and in the Chiricahua Moun- 
tains on Q. arizonica and Q. toumeyi Sarg. 

Neuroterus lamellae, new species 

Female: Black except for light area about mouth, tibiae, tarsi, and 
three basal segments of antennae. Head microcoriaceous like thorax; 



110 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

from above transverse, cheeks slightly broadened behind eyes; from 
in front malar space one-fourth of eye with a fine groove, antennae 
13-segmented, the third longer than second or fourth. No parapsidal 
grooves. First abscissa of radius bent, areolet reaching one-sixth 
way to basal. Abdomen sessile, longer than thorax. Length 1.4- 
1.75 mm. Average of 10 specimens, 1.6 mm. 

Types: USNM 63007, t}^pe and one paratype. Other paratypes 
in AM, CM, CA. 

Host: Quercus subturbinella=Q. turbinella Greene. 

Gall: A thickening of the parenchyma of a part of the leaf area, 
deforming the leaf, almost half an inch thick. Pubescence on lower 
side white and short, on upper side, where exit holes are located, it is 
longer. Resembles the gall of Neuroterus washingtonensis Beut. on 
Quercus garryana Dougl. 

Habitat: Dead adults were cut out of galls in November 1944 
from galls collected July 23, 1943, at Prescott, Ariz., by Mrs. N. W. 
Capron. As dark pupae were found in galls at Prescott on July 12, 
1947, the normal emergence is probably in late July. 

Neuroterus florulentus, new species 

Female: Black, except for pale area about mouth and on antennae, 
tibiae, and tarsi. Head microcoriaceous like thorax; from above 
massive, cheeks as long as eye, slightly broadened behind eyes; from 
In front, malar space one-seventh as long as eye without groove, anten- 
nae 13-segmented, scape and pedicel swollen distally, third shorter than 
fourth. No trace of parapsidal grooves. First abscissa of radius 
arcuate, areolet small. Femora of normal shape, claws simple. 
Abdomen sessile, higher than long, ovipositor projecting straight out 
behind. Using width of the head as a base, the length of mesonotum 
ratio is 1.4, antenna 2.0, wing 4.6, ovipositor 1.7. Length 1.15-1.6 mm. 
Average of 24 specimens, 1.36 mm. 

Male: Almost uniformly light-colored. Head massive, broader 
than thorax, cheeks greatly broadened behind eyes, antennae 14- 
segmented, scape and pedicel greatly elongated and obovate, third 
straight, last short, malar space without groove. Wing broadest 
one-third way from areolet to apex instead of midway as is usual. 
All femora greatly swollen on proximal two-thirds. Abdomen sessile, 
triangular, small. Length 1.15-1.7 mm. Average of 24, 1.36 mm. 

Types: USNM 63008, type female, allotype, and 8 paratypes. 
Other paratypes in AM, CM, CA. 

Hosts: Quercus dumosa Nutt. and Q. lobata Nee. 

Gall: Thin-walled, tan, ovate cells scattered singly or in small 
clusters among the staminate flowers, bearing at apex on either side 
the shrunken darker anthers. The base is truncate and excavated, 
unlike the gall of N. floricola Kinsey. Length 1.5 mm. 



CYNIPID WASPS — WELD 111 

Habitat: Types are from galls collected on flowers of Quercus 
dumosa Nutt., on Santa Catalina Island, Calif., Mar. 31, 1922, when 
adults were emerging. More emerged by April 10, and more came 
out and died by April 15. Similar galls were collected at Palo Alto, 
Calif., on May 3 on flowers of Quercus lobata Nee, and some of the 
paratypes are from this lot. 

Genus Liodora Foerster 
Liodora dumosae, new species 

Female : Black ; basal segments of antennae and legs beyond coxae 
pale. Head coriaceous; from above as broad as thorax, occiput con- 
cave, cheeks slightly broadened behind eyes; from in front malar space 
one-fourth as long as eye without groove, antennae 14-segmented. 
Mesocutum bare, smooth and shining except at anterior end of the 
percurrent grooves. Scutellum punctate, pubescent, overhanging 
propodeum behind in side view, pits smooth. Mesopleuron bare, 
smooth, polished. Wing pubescent, ciliate, veins brown, radial cell 
long and narrow, areolet faint. Claws with a tooth. Carinae on 
propodeum bent. Abdomen in side view higher than long, lengths 
of tergites on dorsal margin as 42:10:5:2. Ventral spine in side 
view hardly longer than broad. Using width of the head as a base, 
the length of antenna ratio is 2.35, ovipositor 1.4, wing 4.3. Length 
1.4-2.2 mm. Average of 7 specimens, 1.75 mm. 

Male: Antennae 15-segmented, third to fourth as 16 : 11 and slightly 
bent. Abdomen small, pedicel 7, tergites n and in as 38:7. Length 
1.5-1.75 mm. Average of 8, 1.68 mm. 

Types: USNM 63009, type, allotype, and 2 paratypes. 

Host: Quercus dumosa Nutt. 

Gall: Conical, thin-walled, 3 mm. long, erect, at margin of leaf, 
black when dry. 

Habitat: The types are from galls collected at Stanford, Calif., 
May 3, 1922, the adults emerging May 10. Paratypes are from 
Newhall, Lakeport, and Ukiah, Calif. Galls have been seen also on 
Quercus douglasii Hook. & Arm, Q. lobata Nee, and Q\garryana Dougl. 

Genus Amphibolips Reinhard 
Amphibolips murata* new species 

Agamic female: A concolorous amber species. Mesoscutum 
irregularly rugose without a distinct median groove and with faint 
transverse sculpture to right and left of anterior lines. Disk of 
scutellum coarsely rugose without a median depression, rounded 
behind; pits large with faint transverse sculpture, septum thin. 
Wing neither banded nor smoky but with a dark cloud on base of 



112 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

radial cell. Cheeks bulging behind eyes. Abdomen almost globular, 
all the tergites visible, bare except for usual pubescence at base of 
ii and on vn, hind margin of n and exposed parts of the rest finely- 
punctate, ventral spine longer than hind metatarsus. Length 3.85- 
4.8 mm. Average of 20 specimens, 4.31 mm. 

Belongs in a group that emerges from bud galls in late fall or in 
early spring from galls that have overwintered. 

Types: USNM 63010, type and 4 paratypes. Other paratypes in 
AM, CM, PA. 

Hosts. — Quercus myrtifolia Willd., Q. pumila Walt., Q. laurifolia 
Michx., and Q. cinerea=Q. incana Bartr. 

Gall: A smooth, tan bud gall in the fall, from 8-12 mm. in diameter, 
tapering slightly to point of attachment, the thin-walled larval cell 
not free and separated from the thick, dense outer wall by a thin 
layer of spongy tissue (not radiating fibers). Adults are cut out of 
the galls in November; the only emergence records are December 4, 
December 8, and April 11. 

Habitat: The type is from Quercus myrtifolia Willd. at Naples, 
Fla. Paratypes are from Quercus myrtifolia Willd. at Carrabelle, 
Fla.; Q. pumila Walt, at Ocala and Miami, Fla.; Q. cinerea—Q. 
incana Bartr., at St. Petersburg, Dade City, Sopchoppy, and Kiver 
Junction, Fla.; and Q. laurifolia Michx. at Gainesville, Fla. 

Genus Andricus Hartig 
Andricus mendocinensis, new species 

Female: Red; head, mesopleuron, and abdomen dorsally darker. 
Head from above transverse, cheeks broadened behind eyes, occiput 
not concave; from in front malar space finely striate, antennae 13- 
segmented. Mesonotum somewhat shining, punctate with appressed 
pubescence, parapsidal grooves percurrent, median extending forward 
one-third way. Pits on scutellum smooth. Mesopleuron bare, 
smooth. Wing pubescent, ciliate, first abscissa of radius angulate, 
areolet distinct. Claws with a strong tooth. Carinae on propodeum 
straight and parallel. Abdomen as high as long, tergites smooth, 
lengths along dorsal curvature as 20 : 10 : 9. Ventral spine longer 
than hind metatarus. Length 3.0 mm. Separated from A. mamilla- 
formis (Weld), which has tergites punctate, mesopleuron striate in 
part, and disk rugose. 

Type: USNM 63011, type. Paratype in CA. 

Host: Quercus densiflora= Lithocarpus densiflora (Hook. & Arn.) 
Rehd., the tanbark oak. 

Gall: An abrupt woody swelling about 30 mm. in diameter, thought 
to be a "root gall," containing many separable cells. 



CYNIPID WASPS — WELD 113 

Habitat: Mendocino County, Calif. Collected May 29, 1917, by 
Dr. E. O. Essig. Described from two dead adults cut out of the gall 
at Stanford University in 1922. The gall can not now be located. 
If the host record is correct this is the first cynipid gall to be recorded 
on this host. 

Genus Disholcaspis Dalla Torre and Kieffer 
Disholcaspis edura, new species 

Adults of Disholcaspis can hardly be described so as to be recog- 
nized from descriptions. The galls, however, are quite characteristic. 
The genus is known only from agamic females, reared in late fall 
from detachable stem galls on white oaks. No alternating generation 
has ever been recognized for any of the species. The only recognizable 
difference between this and the following species seems to be in color. 

Agamic female: Head reddish brown like sides of pronotum and 
mesopleuron; antennae, tarsi, and abdomen darker. Eyes black, as 
are lateral lines and a large median area covering anterior parallel 
lines. Length 2.8-4.0 mm. Average of 33 specimens, 3.47 mm. 

Types: USNM 63012, type and 8 paratypes. Other paratypes in 
AM, CM, CA, PA, C, and MCZ. 

Hosts: Quercus oblongifolia Torr. and Q. arizonica Sarg. 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 1) : A bullet gall in clusters of 3-6 on twigs, sessile, 
rounded at end, yellowish, up to 12 mm. in diameter. Larval cell 
basal, its wall unusually thick and hard, persisting after the soft 
distal tissue has weathered away. 

Habitat: The types are from galls collected at Nogales, Ariz., 
Nov. 14, 1939, on Quercus oblongifolia Torr. Adults emerged Jan. 11 
to Feb. 11, 1940. Paratypes are from galls collected at Magdalena, 
N. Mex., Nov. 9, 1921, then containing adults which emerged 
December 31. One paratype is from Patagonia, Ariz., and one from 
Oracle, Ariz. These galls have been noted also on Quercus toumeyi 
Sarg. and Q. reticulata Humb. & Bonpl. 

Disholcaspis prehensa, new species 

Agamic female: Similar in color to the preceding species. Length 
2.65-3.35 mm. Average of 51 specimens, 2.99 mm. 

Types: USNM 63013, type and 12 paratypes. Other paratypes 
in AM, CM, CA, PA, MCZ. 

Host: Quercus dumosa Nutt. 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 8) : Single or in groups of up to 25. Sessile with a 
smooth brown basal part clasping the twig, the top enlarged, rugose, 
dull and darker in color, probably secreting honeydew when young. 
Larval cell basal. 



114 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Habitat : The type is from galls collected in Sequoia National Park, 
Calif., on Sept. 9, 1922, when they contained full-grown larvae. 
Living adults were cut out Jan. 23, 1923. Paratypes are from Ukiah 
and St. Helena, Calif. 

Disholcaspis mellificG, new species 

Agamic female: Similar to D. edura (above) in color except that, 
never having emerged naturally, the abdomen is scarcely darker and 
the median dark area on mesonotum is not as large. It is also smaller 
than all the above species. Range in length, 1.85-3.0 mm. Average 
of 46 specimens, 2.71 mm. 

Types: USNM 63014, type and 8 paratypes. Other paratvpes in 
AM, CM, CA, PA. 

Host: Quercus garryana Dougl. 

Gall: Bursting out of cracks in the bark, usually in rows, like galls 
of Callirhytis excavata (Ashm.) but extending only one or two milli- 
meters up above the flaps of bark. On current year's growth in fall, 
often on sprouts close to the ground. The top is flat, rugose, and 
secretes hone3 r dew. Larval cell basal and occupying most of the in- 
terior, the only thick dense tissue being directly above. Single galls 
from above measure up to 3 by 5 mm., but those in a row are much 
distorted by mutual pressure. 

Habitat: The types are from galls collected Sept. 8, 1922, above 
Cedar Creek checking station in Sequoia National Park, Calif. The 
galls then contained larvae and secreted so much honeydew that it 
dripped to the ground and in the sun was even evaporated to a white 
solid. Pupae were found in galls on October 1. Dead adults were 
cut out Mar. 17, 1923. This is the undescribed gall whose secretion 
has been described more fully by the author (Bull. Brooklyn Ent. 
Soc, vol. 20, p. 177, 1925). 

Disholcaspis spissa, new species 

Agamic female: Similar in general coloration but darker than 
either of the three preceding species, having black on face below 
antennae, on vertex, proepisternum, mesosternum, metapleuron, 
propodeum, and dorsal abdomen. The black areas on mesoscutum 
and at base of scutellum are larger also. Length 2.45-3.6 mm. 
Average of 80 specimens, 2.98 mm. 

Types: USNM 63015, type and 20 paratypes. Other paratypes 
in AM, CM, CA, PA, C, MCZ. 

Hosts: Quercus subturbinella=Q. turbinella Greene, Q. arizonica 
Sarg., Q. fendleri=Q. undulata Torr., and Q. havardi Rydb. 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 7) : Single or in dense clusters on twigs or rarely on 
the peduncle. Yellowish when young, brown with a dull matte 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



WELD, PLATE 1 




1, Disholcaspis edura on Quercus oblongifolia; 2, Callirhytis glomerosa on Q. coccinea; 3, 
Callirhytis balanella on 0. emoryi; 4, Callirhytis floripara on Q. agrifolia; 5, Neuroterus flori- 
comus on Q. reticulata; 6, Callirhytis medularis on Q. velutina; 7, Disholcaspis spissa on 
0. subturbinella = Q. turbinella; 8, Disholcaspis prehensa on Q. dumosa. 



CYNIPID WASPS — WELD 115 

surface when mature. Sessile by a broad base, rounded and darker 
at apex, 6-7 mm. high. Larval cell basal, its wall thin, not free but 
imbedded in the dense cellular tissue of the distal part of the gall 
which is not cavernous as in D. edura. 

Habitat: The type is selected from galls collected at Tijeras, N. 
Mex., Nov. 1, 1921. Many adults had emerged by December 31, 
and adults continued to come out until January 14. Para types are 
from galls on Quercus arizonica at Oracle and in the Chiricahua 
Mountains, Ariz.; from galls on Q. fendleri=Q. undulata Torr. at 
Shoemaker, N. Mex.; from Q. subturbinella=Q. turbinella Greene at 
Camp Creek, Ariz., and one from Q. havardi Rydb. at Sayre, Okla. 

Diskolcaspis mamillana, new species 

Agamic female: Almost uniform amber except for the darker 
distal segments of antennae, metapleuron, tarsi, and dorsal abdomen. 
Length 2.8-3.3 mm. Average of 9 specimens, 3.1 mm. 

Types: USNM 63016, type and two paratypes. Other paratypes 
in AM, CM, CA. 

Host: Quercus douglasii Hook. & Arn. 

Gall: A globular bullet gall drawn out at apex into a distinct blunt 
point like the pointed bullet gall of the Eastern States. Wall thick, 
central larval cell not separable. Covered when young with very 
dense, short pubescence which weathers away in late fall. 

Habitat: The types were collected at Stanford, Calif., on Dec. 10, 
1935, when they contained adults which had already chewed their 
way nearly to the surface. Galls were seen also at Paso Eobles, 
Paraiso Springs, and Jolon, Calif. 

Genus Antron Kinsey 
Antron tepicana, new species 

Agamic female: A light-colored species with the habitus of a 
Disholcaspis . Malar grooves absent, antenae 14-segmented. Parap- 
sidal grooves percurrent, lateral lines smooth. Disk entirely finel}^ 
rugose, dull. Wing pubescent, cilia short posteriorly, first abscissa of 
radius angulate, second heavy, enlarged at margin, basal heavy. A 
cloud at base of radial cell, on break of anal, at base of cubitus, and a 
large double one in distal end of cubital cell. Claws with a heavy 
tooth. Area between curved carinae on propodeum broader than 
high. Abdomen longer than high, tergites n and in pubescent on 
sides, ii foliiform. Ventral spine broad, bristly, tapering suddenly 
into a triangular point. Length 3.5-5.25 mm. Average of 16 speci- 
mens, 4.63 mm. 



116 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Related to A. nubila (Ashmead) which is smaller, darker, and the 
two clouds in the cubital cell are not fused together. Differs from 
A. chica (Kinsey) in having no black on thorax, a larger areolet 
(reaching one-fifth way to basal), and in its larger size. 

Types: USNM 63017, type and 3 paratypes. Other paratypes in 
AM, CM. 

Host: Quercus reticulata Humb. & Bonpl. 

Gall: Similar to that of A. chica (Kinsey) (Indiana Univ. PubL, 
Sci. Ser. No. 4, fig. 151, p. 244, 1936), up to 60 mm. in diameter, the 
inner pile with transparent, tapering tips 5 mm. deep, the long outer 
crumpled hairs not swollen at the base. Larval cell up to 12 mm. 
high by 6 mm. in diameter. 

Habitat: Galls were collected Jan. 22, 1936, at Tepic, Mexico. 
Adults emerged and died in box before April. 

Antron magdalenae, new species 

Agamic female: Similar in color to the preceding species. Anten- 
nae 13-segmented. Cheeks broadened behind eyes, malar groove 
absent. Lateral lines and area between the percurrent parapsidal 
grooves smooth and shining. Disk coriaceous with a large smooth 
and shining transverse groove at base. Wing pubescent, cilia short. 
Tergite 11 foliiform, in bare. Ventral spine broad, bristly, tapering 
abruptly to a triangular apex. Using width of the head as a base, the 
length of mesonotum ratio is 1.47, antenna 2.4, wing 5.0, ovipositor 
1.37. Length 2.45-3.1 mm. Average of 12 specimens, 2.81 mm. 
Differs from preceding species in its smaller size, fainter spots in 
cubital cell, and smooth base of disk. 

Types: USNM 63018, type and two paratypes. Other paratypes 
in AM, CM. 

Host: Quercus subturbinella=Q. turbinella Greene. 

Gall: Globular, 3 mm. in diameter, with a dull, uneven surface 
covered with stellate hairs, sessile by a broad base on under side of 
leaf in the fall. Wall thin. 

Habitat: The types were cut out November 10 from galls collected 
Nov. 9, 1921, at Magdalena, N. Mex. Two paratypes are from 
Tijeras, N. Mex. Galls were seen also at Hillsboro, Kingston, and 
in the Burro Mountains, N. Mex. 

Genus Loxaulus Mayr 
Loxaulus beutenmuelleri, new species 

Female: Amber, abdomen darker posteriorly. Head coriaceous; 
from above massive, broader than thorax, slightly broadened behind 
eyes; from in front malar groove present, antennae 13-segmented. 



CYNIPID WASPS — WELD 117 

Sides of pronotum with faint, irregular ridges. Mesoscutum coria- 
ceous, parapsidal grooves obsolete anteriorly, no median. Disk 
rugose with a sculptured groove at base. Mesopleuron coriaceous. 
Pubescence and cilia on wing short, both cross-veins clouded. Claws 
simple. Carinae on propodeum almost straight, diverging slightly 
above, a distinct median present. Abdomen not as long as thorax, 
lengths of tergites along dorsal margin as 38 : 12 : 4. Ventral spine 
about twice as long as broad. Length 1.45-2.15 mm. Average of 
32 specimens, 1.83 mm. 

Types: USNM 63019, type and 7 paratypes. Other paratypes in 
AM, CM, CA. 

Host: Quercus borealis=Q. rubra L., northern red oak. 

Gall: Probably a midrib cluster. 

Habitat: The type is selected from a series reared from galls 
collected by William Beutenmueller at Fort Lee, N. J., Oct. 21, 1916, 
and sent to me for rearing. They were picked up on the ground 
under a red oak tree and thought at the time to be galls of Dryocosmus 
piperoides (Bass.). Adults emerged Apr. 6, Apr. 22, and May 11, 
1918. Paratypes are from what were thought to be all galls of 
D. piperoides picked up at the Chicago River west of Evanston, 111., on 
Oct. 8, 1916. Adults emerged April 22-May 28, 1918, and some were 
D. piperoides (Bass.). One was captured at Vienna, Va., Apr. 29, 
1945. Three are from Washtenaw County, Mich., May 13, 1951 
(R. R. Dreisbach). 

Genus Callirhytis Foerster 
Callirhytis balanella, new species 

Female: A light brown species with dorsal abdomen darker. 
Head from above transverse, cheeks bulging behind eyes, occiput 
concave; from in front broadest above middle of eyes, antennae 13- 
segmented, twice as long as width of head. Mesoscutum with short, 
appressed pubescence, granulate with slight transverse sculpture 
posteriorly, parapsidal grooves obsolete anteriorly, anterior and 
lateral lines not infuscated. Scutellum disk transversely sculptured, 
pits smooth. Mesopleuron pubescent, with spaced, curved ridges. 
Wing hyaline, almost bare, nonciliate, areolet reaching one-fifth way 
to basal, first abscissa of radius angulate. Claws simple. Carinae 
on propodeum slightly bent. Abdomen longer than high, all tergites 
showing on dorsal curvature. Ventral spine as long as hind meta- 
tarsus. Length 3.4 mm. Belongs in Group A of Callirhytis. Nearest 
related species are eastern. 

Types: USNM 63020, type. One paratype in CA. 

Host: Quercus emoryi Torr. 



118 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 3): Similar to a "pip" gall in shape but produced 
on the side of the cup of an undersized acorn in June and July. Gall 
slightly flattened, 4 mm. high by 3 mm. in diameter. 

Habitat: The type and one paratype are from galls collected at 
Cherry, Ariz., by Mrs. N. W. Capron on Oct. 4, 1935. One adult 
emerged April 23 and the other May 1, 1937. One paratype is from 
a gall Mrs. Capron collected at Prescott, Ariz., Sept. 12, 1950, and the 
living adult was cut out Apr. 11, 1952. Galls were seen in the Santa 
Catalina and Huachuca Mountains and at Patagonia, Nogales, and 
Bisbee, Ariz., and at Alpine, Tex. 

Callirhylis jloripara, new species 

Female: Light brown, head darker, antennae and legs straw-yellow. 
Head coriaceous; from above transverse, as broad as thorax, slightly 
broadened behind eyes; from in front malar space about half as long as 
eye without groove, antennae 13-segmented. Mesoscutum coriaceous, 
parapsidal grooves percurrent, broader behind. Disk pebbled, from 
rear rugose, pits deep, smooth. Mesopleuron bare, striate. Wing 
hyaline, dotted, nonciliate, veins beyond second cross-vein pale. 
Claws small, simple. Carinae on propodeum slightly curved. Abdo- 
men shorter than head plus thorax, lengths of tergites on dorsal 
curvature as 32:7:2. Tergite n smooth. Ventral spine three times 
as long as broad in side view. Using width of head as a base, the 
length of mesonotum ratio is 1.1, antenna 2.3, wing 4.0, ovipositor 2.5. 
Length 1.1-1.5 mm. Average of 100 specimens, 1.27 mm. 

Male: Almost black with antennae and legs yellow. Antennae 
14-segmented, the third longest and slightly bent. Wing ciliate. 
Length 0.95-1.35 mm. Average of 100 specimens, 1.21 mm. 

The well-developed second abscissa of radius and a distinct cubitus 
distinguish this from the other species in Group B reared from flower 
galls. 

Types: USNM 63021, type female, allotype, and 10 paratypes. 
Other paratypes in AM, CM, PA, C, CA. 

Host: Quercus agrifolia Nee. 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 4) : A thin-walled, conical, tan gall measuring up to 
2.2 mm. long by 1.0 mm. in diameter, developed from a filament and 
bearing dis tally trace of a shriveled anther, scattered in among normal 
stamens in a much-shortened inflorescence. 

Habitat: The types are from galls collected from a tree of Q. 
agrifolia Nee at Carpinteria, Calif., on Apr. 29, 1918, when adults 
were emerging in large numbers and when adults (probably these) 
were observed ovipositing in young acorns. Adults continued to 
emerge until May 18 in material sent to Washington as "Hopk. 
U. S. No. 15606V This tree also had galls of Callirhytis carmelensis 



CYNIPID WASPS — WELD 119 

Weld on acorns of the previous season. These flower galls were seen 
also at Paso Robles and Monterey, Calif., on trees which had C. 
carmelensis also, circumstantial evidence that this is the alternating 
generation of that species. 

Callirhytis glomerosa, new species 

Female: Amber. Head from above transverse, narrower than 
thorax (48:50), occiput concave; from in front broader than high, 
cheeks broadened behind eyes, no malar groove, striate and pubescent 
about mouth, antennae 13-segmented. Mesoscutum almost bare, 
coriaceous, parapsidal grooves percurrent, broader and deeper behind, 
a median present posteriorly as a groove or as discontinuous punctures. 
Scutellum coriaceous behind the pits, rugose peripherally. Meso- 
pleuron almost bare, coriaceous above, striate below. Wing hyaline, 
dotted, nonciliate, radial cell open at base, cubitus barely visible. 
Carinae on propodeum slightly bent. Abdomen with an interrupted 
ring of tangled pubescence at base with similar patches on sides of pro- 
podeum, metapleura, and hind coxae, all the tergites visible, the posteri- 
or ones punctate, ventral spine longer than hind metatarsus. Using 
width of head as a base, the length of mesonotum ratio is 1.1, antenna 
2.1, wing 3.64, ovipositor 3.5. Length 1.8-2.05 mm. Described from 
four specimens, one on slide. 

Types: USNM 63022, type and one paratype. 

Host: Quercus coccinea Muenchh. 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 2): A smooth greenish or brownish (in sun) bud 
gall in September or October about 3 mm. in diameter, over half of it 
projecting beyond the bud scales, dropping when full-grown and then 
slightly pubescent at the base. Adults emerge the second spring. 

Habitat: The type is from a gall collected at East Falls Church, 
Va., in late September 1933 and the adult cut out Oct. 16, 1934. 
Paratypes are from Vienna and Alexandria, Va. Similar galls have 
been seen on northern red oak, Spanish oak, and on Quercus ilicifolia 
Wangenh. Not in type series is one from Baldwin County, Kans., 
collected in May by J. C. Bridwell. 

Callirhytis intersita, new species 

Female: Reddish brown; antennae, face in part, and legs beyond 
coxae light yellow. Head finely rugose; from above transverse, 
cheeks broadened behind eyes, occiput concave; from in front malar 
space striate, anteimae 14-segmented. Sides of pronotum rugose. 
Mesoscutum broader than long, bare, transversely rugose, the parap- 
sidal grooves obsolete anteriorly. Disk of scutellum entirely rugose, 
pits with longitudinal ridges. Mesopleuron rugose above and below 
a coriaceous area. Wing short-pubescent, nonciliate, veins clear, no 



120 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

areolet. Claws simple. Abdomen as long as head plus thorax, as 
high as long, tergites shining, iii-vi finely punctate, lengths as 
60:18:18:4:3. Ventral spine very short. Length 2.1-2.75 mm. 
Average of 18 specimens, 2.44 mm. 

Distinguished from C. lapillula Weld whose parapsidal grooves 
are percurrent with face coriaceous instead of rugose below the 
median ocellus. 

Types: USNM 63023, type and 4 paratypes. Other paratypes in 
AM, CM. 

Host: Quercus alba L. 

Gall: Unknown. These were taken ovipositing in the internodes 
of the green new growth of white oak twigs on April 25, 29, and May 5. 
What gall resulted, if any, is not known. There are cells in the pith 
of white oak twigs, but fragments of the only dead adults cut out so 
far are different from these. 

Habitat: The type is selected from adults taken ovipositing at 
Vienna, Va., on Apr. 29, 1945. Paratypes are from East Falls Church, 
Va., Apr. 25, 1941, and May 5, 1946. 

Callirhytis manni, new species 

Female: Light red, mesopleura and propodeum darker. Head 
coriaceous but rugose above and below antennae; from above trans- 
verse, broader than thorax, cheeks bulging behind eyes, occiput con- 
cave; from in front, malar space not striate, antennae 14-segmented. 
Sides of pronotum striate. Mesoscutum bare, finely pebbled, par- 
apsidal grooves percurrent, anterior lines smooth. Disk of scutellum 
coriaceous back of the smooth pits, rugose peripherally. Mesopleuron 
bare, coriaceous. Wing pubescent, ciliate, veins brown, first abscissa 
of radius angulate, areolet distinct. Claws simple. Abdomen 
shorter than head plus thorax, as high as long, tergites smooth, 
lengths as 65 : 15, ventral spine 3-4 times as long as broad. Length 
2.5-2.85 mm. Average of 7 specimens, 2.58 mm. Distinguished from 
C. suttoni (Ashmead) which has mesonotum pubescent and punctate. 

Types: USNM 63024, type and one paratype. Other paratypes 
in AM, CM. 

Host: An undetermined oak. 

Gall: A spindle-shaped woody stem swelling similar to the gall of 
Callirhytis floridana (Ashmead) . 

Habitat: The types are from galls collected Jan. 22, 1935, at Tepic, 
Mexico. Adults emerged in packet. Dr. William Mann collected 
these galls in March 1923. 



CYNIPID WASPS — WELD 12 L 



Callirhytis medularis, new species 



Female: Amber, abdomen and hind tibiae darker. Head coria- 
ceous; from above massive, broader than thorax, cheeks bulging 
behind eyes, occiput concave; from in front malar space faintly 
striate above groove, antennae 13-segmented. Mesoscutum trans- 
versely rugose, less coarsely so anteriorly, parapsidal grooves per- 
current, no median. Scutellum rugose, the sculptured groove at base 
with indistinct septum. Mesopleuron bare, coriaceous. Wing 
dotted, nonciliate, veins clear beyond second cross-vein, no areolet. 
Claws simple. Carinae on propodeum diverging slightly behind. 
Abdomen as long as head plus thorax, tergite n bare at base, reaching 
back half-way, its hind margin and exposed parts of rest coriaceous. 
Ventral spine very short, valves exserted. Using width of the head 
as a base, the length of mesonotum ratio is 1.2, antenna 2.2, wing 
3.15, ovipositor 8.7. Length 2.2-2.9 mm. Average of 25 specimens, 
2.37 mm. 

Male: Body dark; antennae, parts of head, and legs amber. 
Antennae 15-segmented, tapering to tip, third strongly bent and al- 
most as long as fourth. Wing pubescent and ciliate. Abdomen 
shorter than thorax, lengths of tergites on dorsal margin as 47 : 10 : 3, 
exposed part of in coriaceous. Length 1.25-2.0 mm. Average of 40 
specimens, 1.55 mm. 

Belongs in Group B of Callirhytis. Ruled out of Bassettia by its 
short ventral spine and bare base of abdomen. The sculpture sug- 
gests that this may be the sexual generation of a species making 
stone galls in acorns. The unusually long ovipositor also suggests 
this. 

Types: USNM 63025, type female, allotype, and 6 paratypes. 
Other paratypes in AM, CM, PA, C. 

Hosts: Quercus borealis=Q. rubra L., Q. velutina Lam., and Q. 
coccinea Muenchh. 

Gall (pi. 1, fig. 6) : Cells are in the pith of current year's growth of 
various red oaks with no visible evidence until exit holes are noticed, 
when it is too late to secure adults. Synergus and three species of 
chalcids emerged the next spring, April 27 to May 3. 

Habitat: The types are selected from a series of 16 females and 35 
males reared by Dr. F. C. Craighead near Blain, Pa., from twigs of 
northern red oak, the males emerging July 15 to July 24, the females 
July 16 to Aug. 1, 1956, from current season's growth. He had cut 
out dead males and females in August 1955. Four paratypes were 
cut out of twigs of scarlet oak in August 1950 at Cincinnati, Ohio, 



122 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

by R,. B. Neiswander. From black oak are two paratypes from 
Vienna, two from Williamsburg, and one from East Falls Church, Va. 
Nurseries at Cincinnati, Ohio, and at Southampton, Pa., reported 
that leaders of pin and scarlet oaks broke off where weakened by many 
exit holes causing lateral branches to form, resulting in poor-headed 
trees. The landscape superintendent at Williamsburg, Va., reported 
branches 12-18 inches long breaking off there. Similar cells in the 
pith of willow oak were noted at Durham, N. C, where 200 terminal 
twigs, weakened by exit holes, had been broken off or left hanging on 
one tree on the Duke University campus. Similar cells occur in the 
pith of twigs of red oak in Missouri and in blackjack and scrub oak 
in Virginia. 

Callirhytis perohscura, new species 

Female: Reddish brown to black, base of abdomen red, legs, ex- 
cept hind and middle coxae, and antennae brown. Head rugose; 
from above transverse, cheeks broadened behind eyes, occiput slightly 
concave; from in front malar space 0.3 of eye, antennae 14-segmented. 
Sides of pronotum and propleura rugose. Mesoscutum beautifully 
coriaceous, parapsidal grooves percurrent, anterior and lateral lines 
sunken, median extending to middle of anterior lines. Disk of scu- 
tellum rugose, pits with longitudinal ridges. Wing pubescent, non- 
cilia te, venation complete, first abscissa of radius angulate. Claws 
simple. Abdomen longer than high, shorter than head plus thorax, 
bare at base, lengths of tergites as 33:7, hind margin of 11 and exposed 
part of in finely coriaceous. Ventral spine short. Length 3.5-4.25 
mm. Average of 15 specimens, 3.93 mm. 

Belongs in Group C, the root gall group, near C. marginata Weld, 
from which it is distinguished by its longer median groove and sunken 
anterior and lateral lines. 

Types: USNM 63026, type and 3 paratypes. Other paratypes in 
AM, CM, PA. 

Host: Quercus velutina Lam. 

Gall: Unknown. 

Habitat: The types were taken ovipositing in buds at East Falls 
Church, Va., on Apr. 18 and 20, 1927, Apr. 22, 1930, Apr. 23, 1932, 
Apr. 23, 1947, and at Takoma Park, Md., on Apr. 13, 1925. 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OrFICE:I957 




PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Issued 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Vol. 107 Washington: 1958 No. 3385 

THE FORAMINIFERAL GENUS HALYPHYSEMA AND TWO 
NEW TROPICAL PACIFIC SPECIES 



By Alfred R. Loeblich, Jr. 



The peculiar foraminiferal genus Halyphysema, originally described 
by Bowerbank from the coast of England as a sponge, is redescribed 
and refigured, and a lectotype designated for the type species. Two 
new species from the tropical Pacific, H. harryi from Ifaluk Atoll, 
Caroline Islands, and H. bayeri from the Palau Islands are described. 
The genus is without doubt abundantly represented in shallow tropical 
waters of the Pacific, but is generally overlooked by students of 
Foraminifera because collecting necessitates a detailed search of 
coralline rocks and other substrata for "colonies." Rarely will such 
a form be obtained in dredged material. The present paper extends 
the geographic range of the genus into the Central Pacific area. 

The writer is indebted to Dr. Robert R. Harry, research director of 
George Vanderbilt Foundation, Stanford University, Calif., and to 
Mr. Frederick M. Bayer of the U. S. National Museum for their 
interest and enthusiasm in collecting this material, especially as it is 
far from their own special interest. 

Genus Halyphysema Bowerbank, 1862 

Halyphysema Bowerbank, Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, vol. 152, p. 1105, 1862. 

Type species: Halyphysema tumanowiczii Bowerbank, 1862. 
Fixed by monotypy. 

123 

431300—57 



124 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Description: Test attached, commonly to bryozoans, hydrozoans, 
or other substrata, and consisting of a spreading basal expansion with 
a later erect conical or club-shaped portion formed by the single 
chamber, in some species the chamber may bifurcate; wall aggluti- 
nated, that of the basal expansion fine grained and including small 
fragments of sponge spicules, erect portion commonly more coarsely 
grained with very numerous, elongate spicules incorporated into the 
wall and alined in the direction of growth of the test; aperture ter- 
minal, commonly rounded, obscured by the clustering of spicules. 

Remarks: Halyphysema differs from Dendronina Heron-Allen and 
Earland in having a single conical chamber, instead of an arborescent, 
branching, nonseptate tube following the development of the basal 
expansion. 

Halyphysema tumanowiczii Bowerbank 

Plate 1, Figures 1, 2 

Halyphysema tumanowiczii Bowerbank, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, vol. 152, 

p. 1105, pi. 73, fig. 3, 1862. 
Squamulina scopula Carter, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 4, vol. 5, p. 310, pi. 4, 

figs. 1-11, 1870. 

Description: Test attached, forming a series of hemispherical 
bases, each of which gives rise to a single clavate chamber; wall 
agglutinated, with small sand grains and spicules in the basal expan- 
sion, clavate chambers in large part composed of sponge spicules, their 
long axes paralleling the surface, elongate sponge spicules clustered 
around the distal end of the clavate chambers giving the test a 
bristling appearance; aperture terminal, not visible, obscured by the 
cluster of spicules. 

Length of chamber of lectotype 1.10 mm., breadth of basal expansion 
0.25 mm. 

Remarks: This species was originally described as a sponge and 
later was renamed Squamulina scopula by Carter (1870), who thought 



Explanation of Plate 1 

Figure 1. — Halyphysema tumanowiczii; side view of lectotype (BMNH ZF3652) showing 
flaring shape of chamber and wall composed largely of sponge spicules. (X 85.) 

Figure 2. — Halyphysema tumanowiczii; side view of several paratypes showing small 
hemispherical basal expansions, each with an individual chamber. The chambers have 
been broken from some of the expansions, but scars show they were formerly present. 
From the Recent, off England. (X 25.) 

Figure 3. — Halyphysema bayeri, new species; holotype (USNM P5901) showing spreading, 
sheetlike basal expansion and long, slender, flexible chambers that commonly bifurcate 
near their distal ends. From the Recent, Palau Islands. (X 25.) 

Figure 4. — Halyphysema harryi, new species; holotype (USNM P5900) showing spreading 
sheetlike basal expansion and low, nearly cylindrical chambers. From the Recent, Ifaluk 
Atoll, Caroline Islands. (X 25.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. !07 



LOEBLICH. PLATE 1 




Halyphysema tumanozviczii; II. bayeri, new species; and II. harryi, new species. For 
explanation see facing page. All figures are camera luci da drawings. Figure 1 is by Helen 
X. Loeblich, and figures 2-4 are by Lawrence B. Isham, scientific illustrator at the Smith- 
sonian Institution. 



F0RMIN1FERAL GENUS HALPHYSEMA LOEBLICH 125 

that this would remove the species from consideration as a sponge! 
It is not congeneric with Squamulina Schultze, however, as the latter 
is a calcareous imperforate form. Carter's specific name is a junior 
synonym of that of Bowerbank. 

Types and occurrence: Specimens figured are from the original 
types in the British Museum (BMNH ZF3652), lectotype from Recent 
beach debris at Hastings, County Sussex, England. 

Halyphysema bayeri, new species 
Plate 1, Figure 3 

Description: Test attached, in the type specimens encrusting on 
an alcyonarian base, forming a broad, thin, basal expansion from 
which arise one to six or more individual, erect, flexible, slender 
chambers that are expanded and knob-shaped at their distal end and 
commonly may bifurcate near their distal end; wall agglutinated, 
thin, 0.02 mm. in diameter in erect chambers, that of basal expansion 
and erect chambers composed of small sand grains and fragmentary 
sponge spicules in a groundmass of fine grains, spicules oriented 
with long axes paralleling the surface, elongate sponge spicules 
incorporated around the apertures at the terminal end of the erect 
chambers; aperture terminal, 0.08 mm. in diameter. 

Diameter of individual chambers at distal end ranges from 0.23 to 
0.38 mm., diameter at midlength of erect chamber ranges from 
0.10 to 0.13 mm. Distance between chambers ranges from 0.28 to 
1.30 mm. 

Remarks: Halyphysema baye?*i, new species, differs from H. harryi, 
new species, from Ifaluk Atoll, Caroline Islands, in possessing chambers 
that are much more slender, flexible, and elongate. It is similar in 
general appearance to H. advena Cushman described from the Tortu- 
gas, but is smaller in size. The present species has a tendency for the 
individual chambers to bifurcate near their distal part, and the base 
is sheet-like instead of forming small hemispherical masses as in 
H. advena Cushman. 

The species is named in honor of Frederick M. Bayer, zoologist, 
U. S. National Museum, in recognition of his contributions to the 
knowledge of the Pacific atolls. 

Types and occurrence: Holotype (USNM P5901) from eel-grass, 
sand, and coral flat in Geruherugairu-suido, between Kaibakku Island 
and Kogai-hanto of Auluptagel, Iwayama Bay, Palau Islands. U. S. 
Hydrographic Office chart 6076, 2d ed., 1944, lat. 7°19'12" N., long. 
134°29'37" E. Depth 0-3 feet. CoUected by Frederick M. Bayer 
and Robert R. Harry, 1955. 



126 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Halyphysenia harryi, new species 

Plate 1, Figure 4 

Description: Test attached, on coralline-algal rock, forming a 
broad, spreading basal expansion from which arise individual erect, 
clavate-shaped, single chambers, rarely narrowing to a fusiform shape 
or more rarely low and blister-like, may bifurcate near the distal end ; 
wall agglutinated, relatively thick, 0.03 mm. in diameter in erect 
chambers, that of basal expansion and single chambers including fine 
grains of sand and fragmentary sponge spicules, their long axes paral- 
leling the surface, elongate sponge spicules incorporated at the terminal 
ends of the chambers giving a bristling appearance; aperture terminal, 
not observed on specimens examined due to small size and the obscur- 
ing by the terminal spicules. 

Diameter of individual chambers ranges from 0.15 to 0.40 mm. 
Distance between chambers varies from 0.20 to 0.70 mm. 

Remarks : Halyphysema harryi, new species, differs from H. tumano- 
wiczii Bowerbank in possessing individual chambers that are usually 
lower and of equal diameter throughout length and in the tendency 
to develop a broad, spreading, basal expansion from which rises many 
chambers, instead of a small hemispherical base from which arises a 
single chamber. 

The specific name is in honor of Robert R. Harry, research director 
at George Vanderbilt Foundation, Stanford University, Calif., in 
recognition of his interest and devotion to studies of Pacific marine 
life. 

Types and occurrence: Holotype (USNM P5900) from the un- 
derside of elang (boulder flat) boulders, south end Falarik Island, 
Ifaluk Atoll, Caroline Islands. Collected Oct. 31, 1953, by Frederick 
M. Bayer. 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1957 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Vol. 107 Washington : 1957 No. 3386 

THE LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI 
(HOMOPTERA: CICADELLIDAE) 



By David A. Young, Jr. 1 



The last taxonomic treatment of the species of the tribe Alebrini, 
by McAtee in 1926, included 2 genera and 26 species, 9 of which 
McAtee had not seen. The alebrine genera were treated by the 
present writer in 1952, but it was noted then that material was too 
limited to permit formulation of sound generic concepts and that some 
of the genera were heterogeneous. Although much more material 
has been available for the present study, the large number of species 
represented by only a few specimens suggests that additional collecting 
will bring many more species to light, and that the present classifica- 
tion ultimately will be considered as an early, preliminary one. 
Ninety-six species and subspecies in 25 genera are treated. The 
large number of genera in proportion to the number of species, when 
viewed in the light of knowledge of genera in other faunal regions in 
other cicadellid tribes, leads again to the conclusion that the forms 
studied are only a fragment of the complete fauna. However, the 
small proportion of species to genera is not likely to persist when 
more collecting is done, as illustrated by the fact that three of the five 

1 Department of Entomology, North Carolina State College, Raleigh, N. C; formerly with Entomology 
Research Branch, Agricultural Research Service, IT. S. Department of Agriculture. 

127 



128 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

monobasic genera of my 1952 classification are now known to contain 
additional species. 

The relationship of the tribe to higher taxonomic categories of 
leafhoppers is not clear. According to present evidence, the group 
belongs in the subfamily Typhlocybinae, but is not closely related to 
any of the other typhlocybine tribes. The interrelationships of 
genera within the tribe are not always clear. Such relationships as 
are evident are discussed in connection with the generic descriptions. 

The genera are primarily Neotropical and southern Nearctic, except 
the genus Alebra, which is Holarctic. Paoli (1941) described the 
subgenus Alebra (Afralebra) from a single female from Italian Somali- 
land. The true position of this form must remain in doubt until 
males can be examined. 

Very little is known of food plants in most genera. The known 
food plants represent diverse families, grasses as well as woody plants. 

Tribal characters: The tribe Alebrini includes all species of the 
subfamily Typhlocybinae in which an appendix is present on the 
forewing, a characteristic not found in the other tribes. The follow- 
ing combination of characters also separates them from other tribes: 
the presence of ocelli, the occurrence of two vannal veins in the hind 
wing, the presence of sternal abdominal apodemes in the male, and in 
the ninth tergum of the male a dorsal preanal excision that is deeper 
than that usually found in the subfamily. 

External anatomy: The shape of the head is variable, ranging 
from strongly produced before the eyes in Lawsonellus and Pro- 
talebrella to very slightly produced, with anterior and posterior margins 
parallel, as in Alebra, Albera, Lareba and Rabela. The proportions 
of the dorsal surface of the head, the crown, have been employed as 
distinguishing characters at specific and occasionally at generic level. 
These proportions 2 have been obtained by comparing the median 
length of the crown with its interocular width, i. e., the shortest 
distance between the inner margins of the eyes. The disc of the 
crown may be flat, convex, or concave. Ocelli are present in all 
species, located almost always on the rounded margin between the 
crown and the face, and usually equidistant from inner eye margin 
and median line of head. The face is usually slightly convex in profile 
and divergent from the profile of the dorsum. No species were found 
with the contour of the face parallel to that of the crown, a condition 
that occasionally occurs in the Dikraneurini. 

The pronotum is narrowest anteriorly, its lateral margins diverging 
posteriorly to a variable degree. The humeral margins are convex, 
and the posterior margin is usually shallowly concave, broadly ex- 
posing the scutellum. Measurements of the pronotum used in this 

» Unless otherwise specified, all proportions In the descriptive portion of this paper apply to males. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 129 

paper refer to its length at the midline and its greatest width. The 
length of the pronotum exhibits more individual variation than the 
length of the crown. In most Alebrini the pronotum is longer than 
the crown and wider than the head including the eyes. 

The forewing has an appendix which may extend to or around the 
apical wing margin. The apical wing margin is usually smoothly 
convex, but it may be obliquely truncate (Protalebrella) . The vena- 
tion varies greatly in the tribe, in minor respects among specimens of 
a species, and even between wings of a single specimen. The longi- 
tudinal veins are obscure in the middle portion of the wing, but 
distinct anteapically and apically. Usually veins R, M, and Cu 
extend directly to the bases of the apical cells, but rarely there are 
supernumerary cross veins, and occasionally some coalescence of the 
longitudinal veins anteapically (e. g., Aphanalebra, Rabela). The 
apical cells are four and are numbered beginning with the innermost 
with the wing in repose, but because this system of numbering is new 
to many users, the terms i 'inner" and "outer" are frequently sub- 
stituted in the discussions which follow. There is much variation in 
their form. Most often the inner apical cell is broader basally than 
at its apex, the second apical cell is slender and parallel-sided, the 
third apical cell is triangular and often stalked, and the outer apical 
cell is short, not attaining the apical wing margin, and with its base 
proximad of the base of the third apical cell, but many departures 
occur from this commonest condition. In the corium the cell ad- 
joining the claval suture is referred to as the brachial cell. In the 
middle third of the corium near the costal margin there usually 
occurs a waxy oval area, which is referred to as the costal plaque. 
The contiguous wing margins, when the wings are in the position of 
repose, are the commissural margins. 

The hind wings have three longitudinal, one oblique, and three 
transverse veins. The longitudinal veins, beginning with the one 
nearest the costa, are R, M, and Cu. In the apical region, a continua- 
tion of vein R attains the apical wing margin, occasionally after 
becoming confluent with the anterior branch of vein M for a short 
distance. This apical portion of vein R, for convenience, has been 
termed the "posterior branch of vein R." It is usually connected 
with the anterior branch of vein M by a short cross vein which varies 
so much in postion that it has little taxonomic importance. In some 
species the posterior branch of vein R is evanescent apically, and in 
some it is confluent with the anterior margin of the wing before the 
wing apex. 

The next more posterior apical vein of the hind wing is believed to 
be M 1+2 , and the third is M 3+4 . The hindmost vein in the apical 
series is Cu! which Evans (1946, p. 55) states is unbranched. This 



130 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

vein is connected to vein M 3+4 by a cross vein (m-cu) that often appears 
oblique or even longitudinal. 

The oblique vein is Cu 2 . The location of its apex has some taxo- 
nomic value. Most frequently the apex occurs at a point basad of 
the m-cu cross vein, but occasionally it occurs at a point opposite 
that cross vein. 

The transverse veins of the hind wing are the first and second 
vannal veins, lying between the vannal and jugal folds, and a jugal 
vein in the jugum. 

In the males of all the species examined, there is a pair of sternal 
intra-abdominal apodemes arising near the base of the abdomen and 
extending caudad into the abdominal cavity. Actually these have 
been shown to arise from abdominal sternum II, but the origin is not 
apparent without careful study and is of little importance for descrip- 
tive purposes. The length of the apodemes is useful to some extent. 
They may be vestigial or very prominent, and in the genus Balera 
they may be capitate apically. Their length is shown roughly in the 
descriptions and illustrations by indicating how many of the abdom- 
inal conjunctivae posteeior to their origin they traverse. Thus, 
if the description states that the apodemes "attain the second con- 
junctiva," the words "posterior to their origin" are implied in each 
case to make the description correct morphologically. This is, of 
course, a rough measurement because the macerated abdomen is 
elastic, but even considering the variation in the length of the apo- 
demes themselves, it permits useful comparisons. 

The last visible sternum of the female is the seventh, and the shape 
of its hind margin is of taxonomic importance. On each side of the 
ovipositor, on the pygof er, there is a group of setae, usually irregularly 
spaced, and usually pale in color. 

The tergum of the ninth segment of the male is termed the pygofer 
which, together with the ninth sternum and its lobe-like posteriorly- 
projecting male plates forms the genital capsule. The genital capsule 
is closed posteriorly by the intersegmental membrane between seg- 
ments IX and X, the latter being the first segment of the anal tube. 
The sclerotized dorsal portion of the pygofer appears excised in 
macerated specimens, the excision representing the dorsal portion of 
the conjunctiva between segments IX and X. The excision is deeper 
in the Alebrini than is usually the case in other typhlocybine leaf- 
hoppers. The basal transverse sclerotized area before the excision 
may be an uninterrupted band, more heavily sclerotized or not, ex- 
tending between and continuous with the lateral portions of the py- 
gofer, or it may be separated from the larger lateral area of the pygofer 
by a weakly sclerotized line of flection laterally, or occasionally by 
internal heavily sclerotized bars, in the last two instances forming a 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — 10UNG 131 

distinct ninth tergite. Along the dorsal excision, on each side, the 
integument is frequently thicker, and often there is a ventral extension 
of this thickened area, forming a dorsal pygofer process. Other 
pygofer processes may arise from the apical margin, the ventral mar- 
gin, or on the disc. They are occasionally only differentially sclero- 
tized areas of the pygofer wall, and tenuous, hence not very reliable 
as taxonomic characters, but often they are strong, sharply differen- 
tiated structures, frequently projecting away from the pygofer wall, 
and are then much less variable. The chaetotaxy of the lateral areas 
of the pygofer exhibits only slight variation, and has been found to 
be a useful character. The location of the very minute setae, termed 
"microsetae" in my 1952 paper, is not utilized in the present classifica- 
tion. The "macrosetae" are those conventionally termed • 'setae' ' in 
leafhopper taxonomy. They are easily observed with low magnifica- 
tion. Only in the genus Alebra are there setae of somewhat inter- 
mediate size. The macrosetae are usually few and in a characteristic 
location on the pygofer. Less commonly they are fairly numerous 
and are generally distributed over the pygofer disc but even then the 
pygofer is never heavily setose as is often the case in the subfamily 
Deltocephalinae. 

The so-called "internal male genitalia" consist of the styles, the 
connective, and the aedeagus. The styles are more intimately con- 
nected with the plates in the Alebrini than is the condition in most 
leafhopper tribes, rendering dissection more difficult. They may be 
long or short, and there is occasionally a preapical lobe which is, how- 
ever, usually less pronounced than that found in the Dikraneurini, 
Zyginini (Zygina and its relatives), or Erythroneurini. When a 
preapical lobe is present, that portion of the style from its cephalic 
end to the apex of the lobe is termed the shank. 

The connective may be entirely (Paralebra, Trypanalebra, et al.) or 
partially (Protalebra, sensu stricto) membranous, or it may be en- 
tirely sclerotized (most genera). The aedeagus varies greatly among 
genera and occasionally even among species of a single genus. The 
basal opening, the atrium, which admits the gonoduct, may be at the 
base of the aedeagus or it may be more distal in position, in which case 
the more basal portion of the aedeagus is termed the preatrium. 
There is usually a sclerotized area above the atrium, the dorsal 
apodeme, to which muscles are attached, but this may be inconspic- 
uous. Occasionally it is paired, and rarely it is asymmetrical. Its 
form is often useful in classification. The term shaft is applied to 
that portion of the aedeagus that bears the gonoduct. The shaft 
differs greatly in form in different species. There are also aedeagal 
processes of various sorts. These are called preatrial, atrial, or shaft 
processes, according to their point of origin. 



132 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. ur 

In all of the measurements giving total length, the measurements 
were taken from the tip of the crown to the apex of the forewings in 
repose. 

Acknowledgments: The majority of the specimens examined in 
this work are in the United States National Museum collection. I am 
greatly indebted to the following for the privilege of examining mate- 
rial from the sources indicated: Dr. R. H. Beamer, Snow Entomo- 
logical Collections, University of Kansas; Dr. B. P. Beirne, Canadian 
National Collection; Dr. D. M. DeLong, personal collection; Dr. J. N 
Knull, the Ohio State University collection; Dr. C. E. Pemberton, 
Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association; Dr. E. S. Ross, California 
Academy of Sciences collection; Dr. George Wallace, Carnegie Mu- 
seum; Dr. A. Willink, Fundacidn Miguel Lillo, Tucuman, Argentina. 

Key to genera of Alebrini 3 

1. Fore wing with appendix extending around wing apex and hind wing with 

submarginal vein distinct from apical wing margin 2 

Forewing with appendix not extending around apical wing margin, or if so 
(Diceratalebra interrogata (Knull)) then hind wing with submarginal vein 
confluent with apical wing margin 3 

2. Hind wing with submarginal vein continuous apically with posterior branch 

of vein R; male plates with an apical lobe bearing a tuft of setae (distribu- 
tion Holarctic) Alebra Fieber (p. 134) 

Hind wings with submarginal vein extending beyond posterior branch of vein 
R, and curved basad along costal margin (distribution Neotropical). 

Orsalebra Young (p. 141) 

3. Male with anal tube having lateral paired and median unpaired processes. 

Albera, new genus (p. 143) 

Male occasionally with lateral paired anal processes, never with unpaired 

median process 4 

4. Male with connective entirely membranous 5 

Male with connective, at least partly, heavily sclerotized 9 

5. Male without an unpaired aedeagal process; paired aedeagal processes 

present Paralebra McAtee (p. 145) 

Male with an unpaired aedeagal process; paired processes present or absent . 6 

6. Male with aedeagus symmetrical 7 

Male with aedeagus markedly asymmetrical 8 

7. Crown of head with median length more than one-half interocular width and 

more than one-third median length of pronotum; male usually with paired 

aedeagal processes Trypanalebra Young (p. 153) 

Crown of head with median length less than one-half interocular width and 
less than one-third median length of pronotum; male without paired 
processes Blarea, new genus (p. 159) 



3 The genus Hadralebra Young (Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. vol. 35, p. 19, 1952) was erected for Dikraneura 
(Hyloidea) laticeps (Osborn) (Ann. Carnegie Mus. vol. 18, p. 277, 1928), although the genitalia are unique 
among typhlocybine lcafhoppers, as was stated in the original generic description. A subsequent study of 
the genitalia of a number of neotropical Tettigcllinae has revealed that Hadralebra is closely related to some 
tettigelline genera, and the study of specimens with entire wings will probably eventually confirm the 
correctness of its transfer to the Tettigcllinae, made at this time. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 133 

8. Male with paired aedeagal processes; aedeagal shaft not recurved apically; 

forewing without confluent longitudinal veins before apical cells. 

Relaba, new genus (p. 161) 
Male without paired aedeagal processes; shaft recurved apically; forewing 
with veins M and Cu confluent proximad of the apical cells. 

Aphanalebra McAtee (p. 163) 

9. Aedeagus with two pairs of ventral processes arising at atrium. 

Osbornulus, new genus (p. 164) 
Aedeagus not so 10 

10. Aedeagus drastically asymmetrical Protalebra Baker (p. 166) 

Aedeagus not so 11 

11. Style apex strongly sigmoid in lateral aspect; sternal abdominal apodemes 

elongate, slender, capitate, traversing at least two abdominal conjunctivae. 

Balera Young (p. 171) 

Style apex not strongly sigmoid in lateral aspect; sternal abdominal apodemes 

rarely (Rhabdotalebra) traversing more than one abdominal conjunctiva, not 

slender or capitate 12 

12. Style in lateral aspect with a basal lobe extending beneath adjoining arm of 

connective (fig. 14,c) ; aedeagus with widely-separated short paired dorsal 
apodemes (fig. 14,d) ; head broadly rounded, only very slightly longer at 

middle than next to eye Brunerella Young (p. 176) 

Not with above combination of characters 13 

13. Crown with interocular width one-half greater than median length; forewing 

with outer apical cell broader than long; style greatly elongate. 

Lareba, new genus (p. 180) 

Without the above combination of characters; rarely with any one of above 

characters 14 

14. Crown with median length more than twice interocular width; connective 

T-shaped with unpaired portion directed cephalad. 

Lawsonellus, new genus (p. 182) 

Crown with median length less than twice interocular width; connective not 

as above 15 

15. Forewing with base of outer apical cell only slightly basad of base of third 

apical cell, the bases almost in same straight line which is at right angles to 

the long axis of the wing (fig. 17,c) Habralebra Young (p. 183) 

Forewing with base of outer apical cell, at least at its intersection with costal 
margin, distinctly basad of base of third apical cell 16 

16. Color patterns of forewings including a conspicuous trans-commissural 

omega-shaped marking over the wings in repose (exception lenticula 

(Osborn)) Omegalebra, new genus (p. 199) 

Forewings without omega-shaped marking 17 

17. Male pygofer notched at apex (fig. 24,#) ; aedeagus with unpaired ventral 

process arising at base of shaft, exceeding shaft in length (fig. 24,/) . 

Erabla, new genus (p. 212) 
Without above combination of characters 18 

18. Aedeagal shaft semicircular or nearly so in lateral aspect; style with apical 

extension broadened at extremity Rabela Young (p. 214) 

Not as above 19 

19. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme transverse, distinctly bilobed at apex; pygofer 

processes absent (exception: sarana); anal processes present (figs. 26, 27). 

Elabra Young (p. 218) 

Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme longitudinal, not lobed, or weakly lobed at 

base, or absent; anal processes present or absent 20 



134 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

20. Style with preapical lobe usually very well developed; aedeagus with dorsal 

apodeme usually saddle-shaped in lateral aspect and bilobed at cephalic 

extremity; male pygofer with macrosetae nearly always restricted to 

posterodorsal portion (figs. 28-30) . . . Rhabdotalebra Young (p. 226) 

Not so 21 

21. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme distinct, often elongate 22 

Aedeagus without dorsal apodeme Abrela, new genus (p. 240) 

22. Length of male more than 4 mm.; color pattern including a prominent zigzag 

vitta of red or black on each forewing; anal processes extending antero- 
ventrad almost to ventral pygofer margin; ninth tergum with tergite 
delimited caudally and laterally by an integumental thickening. 

Beamerulus, new genus (p. 242) 

Length of male less than 4 mm.; color pattern not as above; anal process 

absent or very short, at most not extending beyond middle of pygofer; 

ninth tergite usually absent, occasionally delimited laterally but not 

caudally as described above 23 

23. Aedeagus bifurcate apically (fig. 33, e) . . . Diceratalebra Young (p. 247) 
Aedeagus not so 24 

24. Apex of forewing obliquely truncate or emarginate; anal tube without 

processes; color never including oblique angular red or orange markings. 

Protalebrella Young (p. 255) 
Apex of forewing rounded; anal tube with short processes; color pattern 
often including prominent oblique red or orange vittae. 

Barela, new genus (p. 264) 

Genus Alebra Fieber 

Figure 1 

Compsus Fieber (nee Schoenherr, 1823), Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien, vol. 16, p. 

507, 1866. 
Alebra Fieber, Katalog der Europaischen Cicadinen, p. 14, 1874 (nomen novum 

for Compsus Fieber). 

Type of the genus Cicada albostriella Fallen by subsequent designa- 
tion of Oshanin (Kat. Pal. Hemip., p. Ill, 1912). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein distinct and separate from apical 
margin, extending around apex and confluent with apex of posterior 
branch of vein B, which is entire; vein Cu 2 confluent with submarginal 
vein at point opposite m-cu. Forewing with appendix extending 
around wing apex which is smoothly rounded; inner apical cell slender, 
not greatly wider in basal third than in apical half; about as long as 
second and third apical cells which are slender and parallel-sided; 
outer apical cell elongate triangular, with base slightly proximad of 
base of third apical cell, occasionally obsolescent. Female seventh 
sternum broadly produced posteriorly with apex shallowly emarginate. 
Male plates greatly exceeding posterior pygofer margin, lobed apically, 
each with a row of weak macrosetae along mesal margin and a cluster 
of dorsal macrosetae on the apical lobe. Pygofer with posterior 
margin produced in a dorsal and a ventral lobe; disc without macro- 
setae (occasionally with elongate fine microsetae along dorsal margin 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 135 

of ventral lobe) ; pygofer process an inrolled portion of ventral pygofer 
margin. Ninth tergum with a differentially sclerotized transverse bar, 
without a tergite. Anal processes absent. Style elongate, without 
strong preapical lobe, apex decurved, acute. Connective triangular 
or V-shaped. Aedeagus with preatrium distinct; dorsal apodeme 
well-developed, slender and slightly compressed laterally, or membran- 
ous; shaft simple, slightly curved dorsad, without processes; gonopore 
apical. Sternal abdominal apodemes short, not traversing first 
conjunctiva. Head very weakly produced; crown with median 
length approximately two-thirds interocular width; ocelli on broadly 
rounded margin between crown and face, closer to median line than 
to inner eye margins. Pronotum at least twice median length of 
crown, wider than head including eyes; lateral margins strongly 
divergent posteriorly. Face slightly convex in lateral aspect. 

Distribution is Holarctic. 

The complete appendix of the forewing, the lack of macrosetae on 
the male pygofer and the apically lobed male plates with clustered 
setae on the lobes set Alebra well apart from other alebrine genera. 

In addition to the species treated below, W. Wagner has described 
Alebra sorbi (Zentralbl. Ges. Forstw., vol. 3, p. 43, 1949), which I 
have been unable to examine. The species is closely related to 
A. albostriella (Fallen). 

Key to species of Alebra 

1. Pygofer, in lateral aspect, with posterior margin vertical in upper half, not 

notched albostriella (Fallen) 

Pygofer, in lateral aspect, with posterior margin strongly or weakly notched 
in upper half 2 

2. Pygofer with posterodorsal margin strongly notched (fig. l,g); connective 

strong, elongate-triangular; style expanded anteapically . . aurea (Walsh) 

Pygofer with posterodorsal margin weakly notched (fig. 1,/c), connective weak, 

shallowly V-shaped; style gradually tapering fumida Gillette 

Alebra albostriella (Fallen) 

Figure l,a-c 

Cicada albostriella Fallen, Hemiptera Sveciae vol. 2, p. 54, 1826. 

Cicadula elegentula Zetterstedt, Fauna insectorum Lapponica, vol. 1, p. 536, 1828. 

Typhlocyba discicollis Herrich-Schaeffer, Deutschlands Insecten, Heft 124, p. 8, 

1834. 
Eupteryx fasciata Curtis, Brit. Ent., vol. 14, pi. 640, 1837. 
Typhlocyba fulveola Herrich-Schaeffer, Deutschlands Insecten, Heft 164, p. 16, 

1838. 
Typhlocyba wahlbergi Boheman, Handl. Svenska Vet. Akad. (1845), p. 42, 1845. 
Typhlocyba eximia Hardy, Trans. Tyneside Nat. Club, vol. 1, p. 417, 1850. 
Alebra albostriella var. viridis Rey, fichange, vol. 10, p. 46, 1894. 
Alebra flavocephala Kupka, Ent. Nachr., vol. 25, p. 33, 1899. 
Alebra albostriella var. albostriella McAtee (in part?), Jo urn. New York Ent. 

Soc, vol. 34, p. 144, 1926. 



136 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Alebra albostriella var. insigiia McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, 

p. 143, 1926. 
Alebra albostriella var. insignita McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, 

p. 144, 1926. 
(?) Alebra albostriella f. costatella Matsumura, Ins. Mats., vol. 6, p. 67, 1931. 
Alebra albostriella var. diluta Ribaut, . Faune de France, vol. 31, p. 196, 1936. 
Alebra albostriella var. dufouri Ribaut, Faune de France, vol. 31, p. 197, 1936. 
Alebra wahlbergi var. brunnea Ribaut, Faune de France, vol. 31, p. 198, 1936. 
Alebra ivahlbergi var. pallescens Ribaut, Faune de France, vol. 31, p. 198, 1936. 
Alebra albostriella (part.) of American authors, nee Fallen. 

Length of male 3.2-3.9 mm., of female 3.5-4.5 mm. Crown short, 
broad, anterior and posterior margins parallel. Male pygofer in 
lateral aspect with posterior margin vertical in upper half, the postero- 
dorsal portion not, or only very slightly produced posteriorly, posterior 
margin in lower half produced posteriorly in a digitiform lobe, and 
appearing to have a tapered differ en tially-sclerotized process (actually 
merely the inrolled ventral pygofer margin) . Style elongate, slender, 
abruptly decurved apically, in broadest aspect slightly expanded 
basad of the decurved portion, but without a distinct preapical lobe. 
Connective eloo gate-triangular. Aedeagus slender and elongate, 
preatrium short, dorsal apodeme elongate, slender, sub cylindrical 
except expanded portion near union with shaft; shaft elongate, slender, 
gradually tapering, without processes, slightly bisinuate, the apex 
slightly procurved, shaft slightly asymmetrical in ventral aspect. 
Abdominal sterna of male bearing microsetae. 

Color dimorphic. Male: Dorsum unmarked lemon yellow except 
apical cells and apices of anteapical cells which are hyaline; venter 
varying from entirely lemon yellow (occasionally with somewhat paler 
areas but these not constant) to black over thorax and abdomen. 
Female: Extremely variable. Typical variety with ground color of 
head, pronotum, and scutellum milky subhyaline to milky opaque, a 
pair of broad vittae beginning on posterior margin of crown next 
inner ocular margins and diverging over disc of pronotum to its hind 
margin, a broad vitta bordering the commissural margin from pro- 
notum to apex of clavus, a broad vitta in corium beginning opposite 
apex of scutellum, extending parallel to claval suture almost to cross- 
veins, and a broad vitta along anterior wing margin from base to 
apical cells, pale yellow to red, venter varying from pale yellow to 
black. Variety discicollis (Herrich-Schaeffer) with ground color of 
crown and pronotum sordid white, a broad median dark vitta begin- 
ning on disc of crown and extending with divergent lateral margins 
over pronotal disc and over entire scutellum, the last with transverse 
sulcus and a short narrow marking along each lateral margin jet black; 
forewing subhyaline usually with some indication of the longitudinal 
vittae of the typical variety, with a variable transverse broad stripe 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



137 



near midlength of wing; face and venter entirely pale. Variety diluta 
Ribaut differing from typical form in forewing coloration in that 
commissural vitta is wanting, as is the subcostal vitta occasionally; 




Figure 1. — Alebra. a-c, A. albostriella: a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral aspect; c, 
aedeagus, lateral aspect, d-i, A. aurea: d, hind wing; e, forewing; /, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect; g, pygofer, lateral aspect; h, style and connective, ventral aspect; i, style, lateral 
aspect. /-/, A. fumida: j, style, apical portion, lateral aspect; k, pygofer, lateral aspect; 
/, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 

all vitfcae yellow (based on original description). Variety viridis Rey 
(according to Bibaut 's 1936 description) differs from the typical vari- 
ety in that the white band of the clavus is narrower, and with its outer 
margin parallel to claval suture, to which it extends in some speci- 



138 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

mens. In the original description, Rey merely stated that the stripes 
were green instead of yellow or orange. Variety dufouri Ribaut was 
described originally from two females which were dark brown from 
crown to apical half of fore wings, except the basal angles of the pro- 
notum. 

The type of A. albosiriella var. insignita McAtee (in USNM) has 
been examined. It agrees well with descriptions of the typical variety 
given by Ribaut (1936) and Ossiannilsson (1946, 106). 

Ribaut (1936, p. 197) distinguishes a second European species, with- 
out genital characters, as wahlbergi (Boheman, 1845), but specimens 
studied from Zircz, Hungary, from Rijswijck, Holland, and Bucharest, 
Rumania appear to be intermediate in character, and it seems advis- 
able to relegate wahlbergi (Boheman) to synonymy in view of this. 

The original description states that both sexes are striped, but no 
males have been found to be marked like females of the typical variety 
in the course of this study. 

American authors for many years have identified the common wide- 
spread North American species as albosiriella, and the author followed 
this course in a recent publication (Young, 1952, p. 30), although 
constant differences in male genitalia were noted. Further study has 
led to the conclusion that the common North American species is 
distinct (see Alebra aurea (Walsh), below). The true albostriella has 
been taken in Washington, D. C, by Dr. E. D. Ball and Dr. O. Heide- 
mann, and in the Arnold Arboretum, Boston, Mass., by Dr. Harold 
Morrison. Possibly the species has been introduced. 

Ribaut (1936, pp. 195, 197) lists oak, elm, birch, alder, maple, 
linden, walnut and hawthorn as food plants. One of the specimens 
taken in Washington, D. C, was taken from hickory. The single 
specimen from the Arnold Arboretum was swept from Physocarpus sp. 

Alebra aurea (Walsh) 

Figure l,d-i 

Typhlocyba aurea Walsh, Prairie Farmer, vol. 10, new ser., p. 149, 1862. 

Typhlocyba binotata Walsh, loc. cit. 

Typhlocyba pallidula Walsh, loc. cit. 

Typhlocyba aurata Gillette, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 20, p. 713, 1898. [err. 

pro aurea Walsh], new synonymy. 
Alebra albostriella var. rubrafrons DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 18, p. 240, 1918, 

new synonymy. 
Alebra bicincta DeLong, loc. cit., new synonymy. 
? Alebra eburnea DeLong, op. cit., p. 241, new synonymy. 
Alebra albostriella var. tincta McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, p. 143, 

1926, new synonymy. 
Alebra albostriella var. agresta McAtee, op. cit., p. 144, new synonymy. 
? Alebra albostriella var. albostriella; McAtee (in part), loc. cit., new synonymy. 
Alebra albostriella var. fulveola; McAtee, loc. cit., new synonymy. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 139 

Alebra albostriella var. scopa McAtee, op. cit., p. 145, new synonymy. 
Alebra albostriella var. discicollis ; McAtee, op. cit., p. 146, new synonymy. 
Alebra albostriella; American authors nee Fallen, new synonymy. 

Length of male 3.3-4.2 mm., of female 3.7-4.4 mm. Male pygofer, 
in lateral aspect with posterodorsal portion produced posteriorly form- 
ing a short dorsal lobe, forming with the more ventral longer lobe, a 
distinct notch. Aedeagus in lateral aspect with shaft smoothly curved, 
not bisinuate. Other characters as in A. albostriella (Fallen). 

Color variable. Male: Typical variety as described above for 
Alebra albostriella (Fallen) , but with the yellow color of the f orewings 
frequently entirely filling the anteapical cells and occasionally tinted 
with orange. Variety rubrafrons DeLong with coloration like typical 
variety but with crown, clypeus and clypellus pink to red. In variety 
pallidula Walsh (sens. McAtee), markings are chiefly lacking, with the 
forewing apices occasionally fumose (the original description also 
included specimens with pale yellow vittae on commissural and costal 
margins). In the holotype of var. tincta (McAtee) the apex of the 
forewing from slightly in front of cross veins to wing apex is covered 
by a transverse smoky band. The pygofer is as described above. 
Female: Variety pallidula (Walsh) with coloration as discussed under 
the male variety of this (above). Variety binotata (Walsh) with two 
transverse dark submarginal spots near anterior margin of pronotum. 
Variety bicincta DeLong with two broad transverse dark bands on 
forewings, the anterior one beginning opposite apex of scutellum and 
extending to midlength of commissural margin of clavus, the posterior 
one from apices of anteapical cells to wing apex. Variety agresta 
McAtee with a pale yellow vitta along anterior margin, fading out 
near midlength of wing, and a second similarly colored vitta along 
commissural margin to cross veins; pronotum occasionally with a 
broad median pale yellow vitta. 

This species is undoubtedly more widespread than the collections 
at hand indicate. Specimens have been examined from Ontario, 
Massachusetts, New York, Maryland, District of Columbia, Virginia, 
Kentucky, Wisconsin, Missouri, and Kansas. Tennessee should be 
added to the list because it has the type localities for some of DeLong's 
varieties. 

Specimens have been collected from maple, linden, oak, chestnut, 
sycamore, dogwood, and elm. The species was abundant on the 
campus of the University of Louisville in a group of elms, many of 
which were dying from phloem necrosis. 

Some of the specimens placed in var. pallidula Walsh by McAtee are 
teneral. DeLong's eburnea was placed in synonymy with pallidula 
Walsh by McAtee (1926, p. 143) and from the original description 
that disposition appears correct. The type of eburnea had darker 



140 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

longitudinal lines on the pronotum, however, according to the original 
description. 

Variety agresta McAtee appears to represent the commonest color- 
ation of the female. McAtee's paratype series of this variety contains 
a number of females and two males, one of which is a monstrosity, 
the other a specimen with male genitalia like those described below 
for Alebra fumida, but containing a dorilaid parasite. It seems advis- 
able, at present, to consider var. agresta McAtee to apply only to 
females. 

The variety treated by McAtee (1926, pp. 143, 144) as var. albostri- 
ella probably does not occur in this species, although this cannot be 
certified until female specific characters have been found. Red- 
striped females are completely unknown in North America for any 
species in the genus. 

The variety which McAtee (1926, pp. 143, 144) interpreted as var. 
fulveola (Herrich-Schaeffer) appears to be typical aurea (Walsh). 

The type of A. albostriella var. scopa McAtee, a female, has been 
examined. It appears to be a poorly colored specimen, perhaps 
teneral, of this common North American species. The dark spot on 
the base of the scutellum does not appear well-defined, and probably 
is not integumental. 

The variety McAtee assigned to var. discicollis (Herrich-Schaeffer) 
is represented, in the specimens examined, only by a good series of 
females from Washington, D. C, and from surburban Virginia. Oman 
collected a copulating pair on Acer campestre. The male has a pygofer 
typical for this species. The color variety does appear to be the 
analogue of Alebra albostriella var. discicollis (Herrich-Schaeffer). 
With the elevation of aurea to specific rank, this variety is left name- 
less. There seems to be no point in adding one more to an already 
overbundant group of varietal names. 

The form McAtee treated &s fumida Gillette is a good species, based 
upon an examination of the genitalia of Gillette's type. A pair of 
specimens taken by the writer in Louisville, Ky., had similar color- 
ation, but the aedeagus of the male and the style apex is like typical 
aurea. The pygofer of the Kentucky specimen, unfortunately, has 
been lost. A series taken on Crataegus in Prince Edward County, 
Ontario, is colored as in fumida, but the male genitalia present only 
minor differences from aurea as interpreted here. 

Alebrafumida Gillette 

Figure 1, j-l 

Alebrafumida Gillette, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. vol. 20, p. 714, 1898. 
Alebra albostriella var. fumida; McAtee (part?), Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 
34, p. 145, 1926. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 141 

Length of male 3.2-4.2 mm., of female 3.6-4.2 mm. Male py gofer 
in lateral aspect with posterodorsal portion broadly, shallowly con- 
cave, both lobes on posterior pygofer margin markedly shorter than 
in A. aurea (Walsh). Styles not expanded anteapically as in A. 
albostriella (Fallen), gradually tapering to acute decurved apices. 
Connective shallowly V-shaped, style base not or only slightly ex- 
tended cephalad from articulation with connective. Other characters 
as in A. albostriella (Fallen). 

Variable, both sexes from entirely yellowish white to darker. 
Darker males either with crown yellow, pronotum and scutellum 
light gray, the latter with brown basal angles, forewings translucent 
with commissural margin, claval suture, and corial streak parallel to 
claval suture narrowly yellow, or (type) with crown sordid brown, 
pronotum and scutellum much darker brown, forewing except costal 
plaque entirely smoky translucent with the apical cells slightly darker. 
Darker females with crown pale yellow to brownish yellow, pronotum 
brownish yellow to pale brown, a lighter spot near midlength of each 
lateral margin, scutellum dark brown, forewing yellowish hyaline, 
claval region suffused with light brown, apical cells fumose. 

Specimens are at hand from New York, Wisconsin, Kansas, Iowa, 
and Illinois (males from Wisconsin and New York). 

This species, with distinct morphological characters, cannot be 
separated, on the basis of color alone, from aurea (q. v. for discussion 
of darker specimens from Kentucky and Canada). 

Genus Orsalebra Young 

Figure 2 

Orsalebra Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 23, 1952 (type Orsalebra robusta 
Young by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein extending around wing apex, 
distinct from apical margin, continued beyond apex of posterior 
branch of B- along costal margin towards base of wing, becoming 
evanescent near midlength of costal margin; posterior branch of R 
entire apicahy; vein Cu 2 attaining submarginal vein at point opposite 
vein m-cu. Forewing with appendix extending around wing apex; 
bases of first, second, and third apical cells rectilinear, these cells 
successively shorter towards costal margin; outer apical cell open at 
base; first and second apical cells with lateral margins subparallel; 
third apical cell broader apically than at base. Female seventh 
sternum with hind margin produced, regularly convex. Male plates 
greatly exceeding posterior pygofer margin, broad basally, each plate 
abruptly narrowed in apical third, with apex broadly rounded; disc 
with multiseriate short macrosetae in basal two-thirds, becoming 
uniseriate in apical third and extending to apex. P} T gofer with mid- 



142 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

posterior margin produced and forming a subquadrate thickened 
short apical process; macrosetae multiseriate, submarginal near pos- 
terodorsal margin; pygofer wall with an oblique thickened integu- 
mental rod. Ninth tergum without a tergite or a differentially 
sclerotized area. Style elongate, with small distinct dorsal preapical 
lobe and short apical extension directed ventrad. Connective 
U-shaped, vertical. Aedeagus asymmetrical with preatrium elongate, 
dorsal apodeme well developed, more than half length of shaft, shaft 
with anteapical processes and processes near midlength. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes vestigial. Head with anterior margin broadly 
rounded, posterior margin parallel to anterior; ocelli on broadly 
rounded margin between crown and face, closer to median line of 
head than to eyes. Pronotum much longer than head, its width 
subequal to width of head including eyes, lateral margins short, 
strongly divergent posteriorly. Face flat in lateral aspect. 

Known only from the genotype, from Ecuador. At present, 
Orsalebra is believed to be not closely related to other alebrine genera. 
The venation of the hind wing, with the submarginal vein extending 
beyond the apex of the posterior branch of vein R thence basad along 
the costal margin (this sector of the submarginal vein which probably 
represents the preservation of one of the more anterior branches of 
vein It, is unknown elsewhere in the Alebrini, and is suggestive of 
the Dikraneurini) . The form of the head, enclosing a great portion 
of the anterior pronotal margin is also a unique feature in the tribe. 
In the hind wing the confluence of vein Cu 2 with the submarginal 
vein opposite vein m-cu is an unusual character, but it occurs also in 
Alebra, and the condition is approached in the genus Trypanalebra. 
The occurrence in the forewing of an appendix that extends around 
the wing apex is found elsewhere in the tribe only in Alebra and in 
Diceratalebra interrogata (Knull). 

Orsalebra robusta Young 

Figure 2 
Oisalebra robusta Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 24, 1924. 

Length of male 4.6 mm., of female 4.5 mm. Crown with median 
length less than half interocular width and about one-third median 
length of pronotum. Aedeagus with pair of once-branched processes 
slightly distad of midlength, each process bearing small projections 
and appearing somewhat pectinate; with three retrorse anteapical 
processes on cephalic surface near apex; apex a laterally compressed 
decurved lobe. 

Ground color of dorsum yellowish white, a spot around each ocellus 
and basal angles of scutellum pale orange; three longitudinal vittae 
on pronotum, apex of scutellum and vitta within claval suture bright 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



143 



orange. Forewing with vein Cu bright (holotype) or pale orange; 
claval apex and small portion of adjoining appendix deep black; 
brachial cell apically and apical cells, fumose. Face with suggestion 
of two yellow markings at base; remainder of venter stramineous 
except dark tarsal claws. 




Figure 2. — Orsalebra robusta: a, anterior dorsum of female allotype; b, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect; c, hind wing; d, forewing; e, style and connective, lateral aspect; /, aedeagus, apex, 
caudal aspect; g, pygofer, lateral aspect. 

This species is known only from the holotype and allotype, from 
Hacienda Talahua, Bolivar, Ecuador (F. M. and H. H. Brown), in 
the Snow Entromological Collections. 

Albera, new genus 

Figure 3 

Type of the genus, Protalebra picea Osborn. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing 
margin ; posterior branch of vein B, entire apically ; vein Cu 2 confluent 
with submarginal vein at point basad of vein m-cu. Forewing with 
appendix not extending around apex; inner apical cell only slightly 
broader at base than in apical half; second apical cell slender, elongate, 
parallel-sided; third apical cell elongate, triangular; outer apical cell 
elongate, triangular, much longer than broad, not attaining apical 
wing margin, its base distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell. 
Male plates elongate, greatly exceeding posterior pygofer margin, 
each with a single row of macrosetae from near base to apex. Pygofer 
with posterior margin strongly produced, macrosetae in an anteapical 
vertical row; process arising at apex of pygofer. Ninth tergum with- 
out a tergite or heavily sclerotized area. Anal tube with unpaired 
median and paired lateral processes. Style elongate, slender, pre- 
apical lobe weak. Connective Y-shaped with the unpaired portion 
broad. Aedeagus with preatrium absent; dorsal apodeme saddle- 
shaped; shaft simple, without processes. Sternal abdominal apo- 
demes traversing one conjunctiva. Head strongly produced, crown 

422758—57 2 



144 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



with median length exceeding interocular width; ocelli on broad 
margin between crown and face, equidistant from inner eye margins 
and median line of head. Pronotum longer than head, wider than 
head including eyes; lateral margins weakly divergent posteriorly. 
Face convex in lateral aspect. 

Known only from the genotype, from Brazil, Venezuela, and 
Panama. 

The three anal processes serve to set this genus apart from all other 
known genera of Alebrini. 

Albera picea (Osborn), new combination 

Figure 3 

Protalehra picea Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus. Vol. 18, p. 265, 1928. 

Length of male 2.8 mm., of female 2.8-3.0 mm. Crown with 
anterior margin broadly rounded, disc convex; median length almost 
one-half greater than interocular width. Pronotum with median 
length less than twice median length of crown. Female seventh 
sternum sub triangular, sinuate on each side of a pronounced lobate 




Figure 3. — Albera picea: a, anterior dorsum; b, aedeagus, lateral aspect; c, style and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect; d, style apex, lateral aspect; e, anal processes, lateral aspect; f, apex 
of forewing; g, apex of hind wing; k, pygofer, lateral aspect. 



median posterior projection; pygofer with weak macrosetae near and 
parallel to ovipositor from near base to apex. Male pygofer with a 
weakly sclerotized apical process directed caudomesad, not attaining 
midline. Style with apical narrowed portion decurved; aedeagus 
with dorsal apodeme laterally compressed, narrower at base than at 
apex; shaft abruptly narrowed on ventral margin in basal third; 
gonopore near midlength of caudal margin. Anal tube with a pair of 
lateral decurved hooks and a large unpaired median lanceolate pro- 
cess, all heavily sclerotized. 

Crown ivory suffused with tan, with a longitudinal black stripe on 
each side extending from near base of crown to an anteapical paler 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOTJNG 145 

ocellus-like spot spot for which it forms a border. Pronotum pitch- 
black. Scutellum dark brown, shining, the apical third ivory. 
Forewing translucent shining brown ; clavus with basal triangular and 
apical trapezoidal transcommissural spots ivory, the latter extending 
slightly into the brachial cell of each wing, and a quadrate trans- 
commissural spot behind middle, ivory anteriorly, hyaline posteriorly; 
corium with four translucent wedge-shaped spots along middle half 
of costal margin, the third suffused with ivory. Face stramineous, a 
narrow rim around ocelli, except laterally, and a triangular vitta 
extending ventrad and mesad from the anteroventral corner of each 
eye, black. Pleural portion of pronotum pitch-black; thoracic pleura 
dark brown. Hind leg with apex of femur and apical tarsomere dark 
brown; middle leg with apical tarsomere dark brown; foreleg variable, 
from unmarked yellow to yellow with a transverse marking on each 
femur, and entire tibia and tarsus, black. Remainder pale beneath 
except female pygofer and ovipositor which are pitch-black. 

The type, a female from Fort Principe, Rio Guapore, Brazil, is in 
the Carnegie Museum collection. Additional specimens have been 
examined from Aguadulce, Code Province, and Garachine, Daritm 
Province, Panama, and from Barinas, Venezuela. 

This peculiar species has the facies of Xestocephalus, but appears 
properly placed in the Alebrini. 

Genus Paralebra McAtee 

Figures 4, 5 

Protalebra subgenus Paralebra McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, 
pp. 147, 151, 1926 (type Protalebra similis Baker by original designation). 

Protalebra subgenus Plagalebra McAtee, op. cit., pp. 147, 151 (type Protalebra 
singularis Baker by original designation). 

Protalebra subgenus Kallebra McAtee, op. cit., p. 152 (type Protalebra ninettae 
Baker by original designation) new synonymy. 

Paralebra; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 28, 1952. 

Kallebra; Young, op. cit., p. 22 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin ; 
posterior branch of vein R evanescent or not apically; vein Cu 2 
confluent with submarginal vein at point proximad of vein m-cu. 
Forewing with appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly 
rounded; inner apical cell usually broader at base than at apex; 
second apical cell parallel -sided ; third apical cell stalked ; outer apical 
cell variable in shape, short, not attaining apical wing margin. Male 
plates elongate, triangular, each with a longitudinal group of macro- 
setae parallel to lateral margin. Pygofer with posterior margin 
produced or truncate; macrosetae in vertical irregular row on disc; 
processes arising ventrally. Ninth tergum differentially sclerotized 
with or without lines of flection. Anal processes present or absent. 



146 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Style variable interspecifically, with or without preapical lobe. Con- 
nective membranous. Aedeagus with a pair of conspicuous processes 
arising near base; preatrium present or absent; dorsal apodeme 
distinct or greatly reduced. Sternal abdominal apodemes traversing 
first conjunctiva. Head moderately to strongly produced, crown 
with apex rounded or angular, median length equal to or exceeding 
interocular width; ocelli about equidistant from inner eye margins 
and median line of head. Pronotum with median length equal to or 
exceeding that of crown, as wide as or wider than head including eyes, 
lateral margins varying interspecifically from slightly to strongly 
divergent posteriorly. Face from slightly concave to strongly 
convex in lateral aspect. 

Distribution: Mexico, Central and South America, and West 
Indies. 

Paralebra can be separated from other genera in the group with a 
membranous connective in the male by its lack of an unpaired 
aedeagal process. 

Key to species of Paralebra 

1. Crown with conspicuous black spot at apex; forewing with inner apical cell 

not conspicuously broader at base than at apex; ocelli slightly above margin 

between crown and face ninettae (Baker) 

Crown marked otherwise; forewing with inner apical cell much broader at 
base than at apex; ocelli slightly below margin between crown and face . . 2 

2. Crown without a cruciate pale marking, median length about equal to inter- 

ocular width; total length of insect less than 3 mm 3 

Crown with a cruciate pale marking, median length one-third greater than 
interocular width; total length of insect 3 mm. or more 4 

3. Aedeagus with atrial processes extending directly caudad; male pygofer with 

ventral process inconspicuous and not strongly curved apically. 

similis (Baker) 

Aedeagus with atrial processes appearing looped, extending dorsad thence 

caudad; male pygofer with ventral process conspicuous and strongly curved 

apically keiferi, new species 

4. Male with ventral pygofer process conspicuous, hook-shaped; aedeagal shaft 

smoothly curved decurvata, new species 

Male with ventral pygofer process minute, not hooked; aedeagal shaft 
bisinuate singularis (Baker) 

Paralebra similis (Baker) 

Figure 4,a-e 

Protalebra similis Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, supplement, p. 403, 1899. 

Protalebra (Paralebra) similis McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, p. 151, 

1926. 
Paralebra similis; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 29, 1952. 

Length of male 2.6-2.8 (type) mm., of female 2.7 mm. Crown 
with median length equal to interocular width and slightly less than 
length of pronotum; disc flat; width of head including eyes equal to 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 147 

width of pronotum or slightly less. Ocelli slightly below margin be- 
tween crown and face. Pronotum with lateral margins slightly di- 
vergent posteriorly. Face almost flat in profile. Hind wing with 
posterior branch of vein R entire apically. Female seventh sternum 
with median keel, posterior margin rectilinear; pygofer with few dis- 
persed pale macrosetae on apical half near ovipositor. Male plates 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a single row of macro- 
setae from near base almost to apex. Male pygofer truncate apicalJy 
(not always obviously so in lateral aspect, but if not then distinctly so 
in ventrolateral aspect) ; ventral portion with a distinct lobe (resulting 
from inrolling of ventral margin) or not ; ventral portion with a short 
inconspicuous process. Ninth tergum with a heavily sclerotized trans- 
verse bar, without distinct lines of flection laterally. Anal processes 
absent. Style elongate, slender, without preapical lobe, rounded at 
apex, apical portion slightly decurved. Aedeagus with preatrium 
short, slender; dorsal apodeme paired, the arms short, extending caudo- 
dorsad; atrium V-shaped in cephalic aspect, with a process arising 
dorsally on each side, expanded in apical half, thence gradually tapered 
to acute apex which exceeds apex of shaft; shaft arising dorsally in 
atrium, funnel-shaped, the basal half from broadly to slightly expanded 
on dorsal margin, a variable portiou of apical half curved dorsad (ex- 
treme apex in type, considerably more in some other specimens ex- 
amined) ; gonopore terminal. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum dull orange, crown fading 
anteriorly to a narrow submarginal ivory area, posterior margin of 
pronotum olive, separated from disc by a sharp black line. Scutellum 
dull yellow, the transverse sulcus, a triangular spot at midlength of 
lateral margin, and apex, black. Forewing with ground color olive, 
an elongate inverted U-shaped marking in basal half of clavus con- 
necting posteriorly with a broader oblique vitta extending from com- 
missure posterolaterad over half width of corium, a longitudinal vitta 
in apical third of clavus, the claval suture narrowly in basal half, 
broadly in apical third, a broad submarginal streak parallel to anterior 
wing margin over basal two-thirds, interrupted by costal plaque, a 
dash at midlength of cell R, apical portions of cells R and M and apical 
cells except areoles in second and fourth apical cells, black; a longitudi- 
nal vitta at base in corium next claval suture, a diagonal vitta behind 
coextensive with and parallel to the black oblique clava] vitta, an 
areole in apex of cell R, and one in outer apical cell and apical veins, 
white; second apical cell with a hyaline areole. Face black, a narrow 
transverse basal line, through ocelli, and apex of clypellus, ivory. 
Legs pale, middle tarsus with a single band, hind tarsus with two 
bands, a broad femoral and tibial band on each hind leg, black, re- 
main er of venter black. 



148 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The type, in the U. S. National Museum, bears the label "Corumba" 
[Brazil] and "May." The original description stated that the speci- 
men was collected in April. Specimens with no consistent morpho- 
logical differences have been observed from Panama, British Hon- 
duras, Venezuela, Haiti, and the Dominican Eepublic. Puerto Rico 
should be added to this range, because Caldwell (1952) illustrated a 
male. 

Paralebra keiferi, new species 

Figure 4,f-h 

Length as in P. similis (Baker). Crown with median length 
slightly exceeding interocular width and four-fifths median length of 
pronotum; disc flat; width of head including eyes slightly less than 
width of pronotum. Lateral margins of pronotum, ocelli, face, female 
pygofer and seventh sternum, and male plates as in similis. Male 
pygofer with posterior margin broadly rounded; pygofer processes 
arising ventrally, each with apex hooked dorsad in lateral aspect. 
Ninth tergum as in similis. Anal processes absent. Style similar 
to that of similis. Aedeagus with preatrium and dorsal apodemes 
absent, with a pair of dorsal atrial processes extending slightly cephalad 
at their bases, thence curved sharply caudad, each process aciculate; 
shaft slightly expanded on dorsal margin near midlength, much shorter 
and broader than in similis, apex curved dorsad; gonopore terminal. 

Color similar to similis but with an additional transverse white 
streak on face extending between antennal bases, and with an addi- 
tional transverse black stripe on disc of pronotum, not attaining lateral 
pronotal margins. 

Holotype male, allotype female and long series of paratypes of 
both sexes, Socorro Island, in the Revilla Gigedo group, 2,000 ft., 
May 8, 1925 (H. H. Keifer), in California Academy of Sciences 
collection. Male and female paratypes in U. S. National Museum. 

Paralebra ninettae (Baker), new combination 

FlGTJKE 4:,l-l 

Protalebra ninettae Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 403, 1899. 

Protalebra (Kallebra) ninettae; McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc.,vol. 34, p. 152, 

1926. 
Kallebra ninettae; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 23, 1952. 

Length of male 2.8 mm. Crown with median length almost one- 
half greater than interocular width and about three-fourths of median 
length of pronotum; disc convex; width of head including eyes less than 
width of pronotum. Ocelli slightly above margin between crown and 
face. Pronotum with lateral margins strongly divergent posteriorly. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



149 



Face in profile, and posterior branch of vein R of hind wing as in 
P. similis (Baker). Male plates exceeding posterior pygofer margin, 
each with a single row of macrosetae in apical two-thirds. Male 
pygofer with posterior margin regularly convex; pygofer process 
arising on ventral margin, short, inconspicuous. Ninth tergum as in 




Figure 4. — Paralebra. a-e, P. similis: a, style, ventral aspect (type); b, anterior dorsum 
(type); c, pygofer, lateral aspect (type); d, aedeagus, lateral aspect (specimen from Gara- 
chine, Panama); e, aedeagus, lateral aspect (type), f-h, P. keiferi: /, style, ventral aspect; 
g, pygofer, lateral aspect; h, aedeagus, lateral aspect, i-l, P. ninettae (type): i, style, 
ventral aspect;/, anterior dorsum; k, pygofer, lateral aspect; /, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 

similis. Anal processes absent. Style with preapical lobe, apical 
extension curved caudoventrad, the tip obliquely truncate in ventral 
aspect. Aedeagus with preatrium absent: dorsal apodeme well 
developed, unpaired, triangular in cephalic aspect; shaft elongate, 
slender, curved slightly caudad at apex with a pair of processes arising 
dorsally at base and extending to apical fifth of shaft, acute apically; 
gonopore terminal. 



150 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Crown white with a conspicuous apical black spot. Pronotum 
dark orange with an M-shaped black vitta on posterior half of disc, 
enclosing a more anterior V-shaped pale marking which in turn 
encloses a small black triangle situated in middle of disc. Scutellum 
with basal angles broadly orange, median line on basal half and ex- 
treme tip, black, anteapical portion broadly white. Basal half of 
clavus and adjoining corium striped with olive green and dark, a 
spot at base of corium, the costal plaque, a spot at apex of claval cell 
and a transverse dash from commissure through brachial cell, white, 
the last bordered anteriorly with dark; ground color of apical half of 
forewing smoky subhyaline, the veins olive green except those border- 
ing outer apical cell which are dark. Face pale dorsally except a 
large spot beneath each ocellus, crimson in ventral half except narrow 
pale lateral margins of genae; basal antennal segment black. Legs 
pale yellow. 

Known only from the type, a male from Chapada, Brazil, in the 
U. S. National Museum collection, and a male specimen from Rio 
Tabasara, Chiriqui Province, Panama. 

In my 1952 paper I stated that the style did not possess a preapical 
lobe. This was erroneous, for the lobe is distinct, but small. I erred 
also in stating that aedeagal processes arose from the dorsal apodeme. 
They arise from the base of the shaft near the dorsal apodeme. Third, 
with only the type at hand, I duplicated McAtee's erroneous observa- 
tion that a cell of the forewing was absent in the apical series. More 
careful observation reveals a very small triangular third apical cell 
near the wing margin in the type. The third apical cell is very dis- 
tinct in the Panama specimen. 

Paralebra ninettae is easily separable from other species in the 
genus by external features as set forth in the key. The presence of 
the preapical lobe of the style is distinctive also, and the entire 
posterior branch of vein B, in the hind wing will separate it from all 
other species of the genus except similis. 

Paralebra singularis (Baker) 

Figure 5,a,b 

Protalebra singularis Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, supplement, p. 402, 1899. 
Protalebra (Plagalebra) singularis; McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, 

p. 151, 1926. 
Paralebra singularis; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 29, 1952. 

Length of both sexes, 3.8 mm. Crown with median length more than 
one-third greater than interocular width, and equal to length of 
pronotum; disc concave; width of head including eyes less than width 
of pronotum. Ocelli as in P. similis (Baker). Pronotum with lateral 
margins strongly divergent posteriorly. Face flat in profile. Forewing 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



151 



with two discal cells delimited by supernumerary cross veins. Hind 
wing with posterior branch of vein R evanescent apically. Female 
seventh sternum very slightly produced posteriorly at middle, the 
apex obtusely angulate. Male plates not attaining posterior pygofer 
margin, each with a single row of macrosetae on middle half. Male 
pygofer produced and regularly convex apically; ventral pygofer 
process inconspicuous, short; dorsal process arising in basal half of 
dorsal margin, extending ventrad beyond middle of pygofer disc. 
Ninth tergum as in similis but with distinct lines of flection laterally. 




Figure 5. — Paralebra. a-b, P. singularis: a, aedeagus, lateral aspect; b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect (broken line represents anal process), c-g, P. decurvata: c, anterior dorsum; d, 
aedeagus, lateral aspect; e, pygofer process, caudal aspect (median line broken); /, 
aedeagus, ventral aspect; g, pygofer, lateral aspect. 

Anal processes distinct, short, triangular. Style elongate, slender, 
with ventral preapical lobe, apex slightly decurved. Aedeagus with 
preatrium absent; atrium omega-shaped in cephalic aspect, the closed 
dorsal portion forming the dorsal apodeme, with a process arising at 
base on each side, extending caudodorsad in a gentle arch, as long as 
shaft, bisinuate and narrowed at apex with tip decurved; shaft 
funnel-shaped, bisinuate, the apex directed dorsad; gonopore terminal. 
Crown with ground color dark orange with a dull ivory cruciate 



152 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

marking, the cross-piece attaining the lateral margins just anterior to 
eyes. Pronotum as in similis but with a node at middle of transverse 
black marking. Scutellum orange to yellow, a spot along each 
lateral margin opposite end of transverse sulcus, and apex of scutellum, 
black. Forewing with entire clavus and basal half of corium except 
two large paler spots near base of latter, orange mottled with small 
paler spots, an arcuate vitta beginning at midlength of commissural 
margin of clavus and extending caudolaterad, broadened apically and 
ending on costal margin, translucent gray, the broadened apical 
portion occasionally (type) pale yellow and opaque, the vitta not 
(type) or only faintly margined with brown in its claval portion; 
outer apical and outer anteapical cells hyaline, their veins bordered 
with dark; inner anteapical cell and remaining apical cells smoky, the 
apices of the first and second traversed by short narrow pale vitta. 
Face dull gray (type) to pale yellow, a dark-margined pale transverse 
vitta extending from eye to eye through ocelli, clypellus, lora and 
portion of adjacent genae darker. Prosternal region dark, remainder 
of thoracic venter gray, abdomen paler gray, female seventh sternum 
dark-tipped. Female pygofer grayish brown. Legs pale, hind tarsi 
with two black annuli. 

This species is known only from the type and two paratypes, from 
Chapada, Brazil, in the U. S. National Museum. 

In addition to the characters in the key, the distinctive shape of the 
aedeagal processes will serve to separate this from other species 
in the genus. 

Paralebra decurvata, new species 

Figure 5,c-g 

Length of male, 3.0 mm. Crown with median length one-third 
greater than interocular width and slightly more than two-thirds 
length of pronotum; disc convex; width of head including eyes less 
than width of pronotum. Ocelli as in P. similis (Baker). Pronotum 
with lateral margins strongly divergent posteriorly. Face convex in 
profile. Hind wing with posterior branch of vein K entire apically. 
Male plates exceeding posterior pygofer margin, setae as in P. 
singularis (Baker); pygofer with posterior margin regularly convex; 
a process arising on each side below middle of disc, extending across 
midline and decurved in caudal aspect, rounded apically; a rod-like 
process consisting of differentially sclerotized portion of pygofer wall 
extending horizontally across disc. Ninth tergite triangular, bounded 
laterally and apically by rod-like heavily sclerotized lines. Anal 
processes absent. Style slender, broadest anteapically, apex decurved. 
Aedeagus with preatrium distinct; dorsal apodeme short, liguliform; 
a pair of atrial processes, broader and shorter than shaft, each gradu- 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 153 

ally tapered in apical half, extending parallel to shaft, each with apex 
acute and curved dorsad; shaft setiform, regularly curved caudodorsad. 

Ground color of crown clouded ivory. Pronotum pale yellow, with 
lateral margins deep and a transverse marking in middle of disc paler, 
orange. Scutellum dull yellow, a marginal spot on each lateral 
margin opposite end of sulcus, and apex, black. Forewing with basal 
half of clavus and adjoining portion of corium translucent marked 
with dull orange; remainder of forewing lacteus with a transcommis- 
sural narrow band extending from costal margin to costal margin 
slightly before midlength of clavus, an arcuate narrow pink line across 
clavus in its apical half contiguous with a similarly colored arcuate 
line through brachial cell, a smoky spot before apex of clavus, a 
broad smoky vitta extending from middle of disc of corium apicad 
along vein Cu, confluent with a second smoky vitta extending from 
costal margin beyond its midlength caudomesad through apex of cell 
R, the two vittae filling claval apex and apical portions of cells R, 
M and Cu, basal portions of first and second apical cells and most 
of third apical cell; apical portions of second and third apical cells 
narrowly smoky; apical cross-veins pale. Face and thoracic venter 
stramineous; pleural portion of pronotum pink; hind tibiae with outer 
row of setae set in black spots, and with tibial apex, apex of first 
tarsomere and all of apical tarsomere, black. 

Holotype male, Mojinga Swamp, Panama Canal Zone, Nov. 15, 
1951 (F. S. Blanton), in U. S. National Museum (No. 62674). 

From other species of the genus, decurvata is readily recognizable 
by its strong, decurved male ventral pygofer processes and its setiform 
aedeagal shaft. 

Genus Trypanalebra Young 

FlGUKE 6 

Trypanalebra Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 27, 1952 (type Protalebra 
maculata Baker by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin ; 
posterior branch of vein R entire apically; vein Cu 2 confluent with 
submarginal vein near midlength of wing, occasionally almost opposite 
vein m-cu. Forewing with appendix not extending around wing 
apex which is smoothly rounded; inner apical cell broader at base 
than at apex; second apical cell parallel-sided; third apical cell variable 
interspecifically, from sessile to triangular or petiolate. Female 
seventh sternum with hind margin slightly produced at middle, 
caudolateral angles rounded; pygofer with multiseriate pale macrosetae 
parallel to ovipositor. Male plates narrow, elongate, triangular, 
equal to or exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a longitudi- 



154 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

nal row of macrosetae. Pygofer with hind margin produced and 
rounded; macrosetae in a vertical or oblique discal row; a pair of 
processes arising one on each side from inrolled posterior margin or 
from ventral margin and a weak process on each side arising from 
dorsal margin and extending ventrad. Ninth tegum with a narrow 
transverse tergite separated posteriorly and occasionally laterally by 
a line of flection. Anal processes absent. Style long or short, with- 
out preapical lobe. Connective membranous. Aedeagus with prea- 
trium usually absent ; dorsal apodeme unpaired, laterally compressed ; 
a conspicuous ventral unpaired atrial process much longer than shaft 
which is short, directed caudodorsad and usually has a pair of processes 
arising at base or more distad along its length. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing first conjunctiva. Head moderately to strongly 
produced; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face. Pro- 
notum broader than head including eyes; lateral margins strongly 
divergent posteriorly. Face convex in lateral aspect. 

Distribution: Southwestern United States, Central America, and 
West Indies. 

Trypanalebra is closely related to Blarea, in the discussion of which 
distinguishing characters are mentioned. 

Key to species of Trypanalebra 

1. Crown with four black spots along anterior margin; aedeagal shaft without 

processes blantoni, new species 

Crown not so marked; aedeagal shaft with paired processes 2 

2. Crown with median length greater than interocular width; forewing with cell 

R not in contact with all apical cells; male with pygofer process elongate, 

arising on ventral pygofer margin ziczac (Osborn) 

Crown with median length less than interocular width; forewing with cell R in 
contact with all apical cells; male with pygofer process short, formed by 
inrolled posterior pygofer margin 3 

3. Aedeagus with dorsal processes arising from shaft, greatly exceeded in length 

by shaft maculata (Baker) 

Aedeagus with dorsal processes arising from dorsal apodeme, almost as long as 
shaft balli, new species 

Trypanalebra maculata (Baker) 

Figure 6, a-f 

Protalebra maculata Baker, Invertebrata Pacifica, vol. 1, p. 6, 1903. 

Protalebra (Paralebra) pardalis McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, p. 

151, 1926. 
Trypanalebra maculata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 28, 1952. 
Trypanalebra sp. Young, op. cit., p. 157, fig. 26. 

Length of both sexes, 2.5-2.6 mm. Head moderately produced 
with anterior margin broadly rounded in dorsal aspect; median length 
of crown one-fourth less than interocular width; disc convex; ocelli 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



155 



closer to eyes than to median line of head. Pronotum two-thirds 
longer than crown. Female seventh sternum with hind margin 
obtusely angulate at middle; pygofer with macrosetae sparse, occur- 
ring along posterior half of ovipositor. Male plates each with single 
row of macrosetae on distal two-thirds. Male pygofer with process 




Figure 6. — Trypanalebra. a-f, T. maculata: #, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral aspect; 
c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, style, ventral aspect; e, pygofer process, caudal aspect 
(median line broken) (specimen from Chinandega, Nicaragua);/, same (specimen from 
Guadalajara, Mexico), g-h, T. balli: g, pygofer process, caudal aspect (median line 
broken); h, aedeagus, lateral aspect; i-l, T. blantoni: i, anterior dorsum;;, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; k, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, pygofer process, ventral aspect; m—p, T. ziczac (allo- 
type): m, anterior dorsum; n, pygofer, lateral aspect; o, aedeagus, lateral aspect; p, pygofer 
process, ventral aspect. 



156 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

arising on posteroventral margin, variable in shape in lateral aspect 
but not exceeding posterior pygofer margin and rounded apically, 
in ventral aspect its apex in the shape of a pruning knife. Ninth 
tergite delimited laterally by a line of flection. Style short, apical 
portion slightly decurved, apex acute. Aedeagus with preatrium 
absent; dorsal apodeme bilobed; unpaired ventral process much 
broader than shaft which is curved abruptly ventrad bear base thence 
abruptly dorsad and curving slightly caudad in apical half of length, 
giving off a pair of short narrow inconspicuous processes in basal 
half, these greatly exceeded by apex of shaft. 

Ground color of dorsum deep shining black, a diamond-shaped 
median subapical spot and a laterobasal spot on each side touching 
inner margin of eye on crown, a median campanulate marking border- 
ing anterior margin, a pair of large irregularly rounded discal markings 
at midlength, a smaller median marking behind middle, the lateral and 
posterior margins of the pronotum narrowly, the basal angles narrowly 
and a large V-shaped marking on the scutellum, four spots in basal 
half, one in apical half, and a small dot in apex of clavus, three spots in 
basal half, a very small brachial spot near midlength, two spots op- 
posite anteapical claval spot, a small spot contiguous to apical claval 
spot veins bordering apex of cell K, and extreme apex narrowly, of 
corium, bright yellow, three anteapical areoles along costal margin 
subhyaline. Face black except a transverse basal band between 
ocelli and continuing to ocell ocular areas there surrounding a black 
spot on each side, and apex of clypellus and genae, yellow. Legs dull 
gray, a broad postfemoral and posttibial area and extreme apex of 
latter, dark; thorax dark; abdomen dull gray to black in male, dark 
in female except pale seventh sternum. 

Specimens have been examined from San Marcos, Managua, 
Granada, and Chinandega, Nicaragua; Conception, Guatemala; 
La Ceiba and Zamorano, Honduras; Pico Turquino, Cuba; Puebla, 
Mexico; Totalapan, Oaxaca, Mexico; Tucson, Baboquivari Moun- 
tains, Santa Catalina Mountains, and Sabino Canyon, Ariz.; Del 
Eio and Cameron County, Tex. 

The type of Protalebra partialis McAtee, in the U. S. National 
Museum, has been studied. 

Trypanalebra balli, new species 

Figure Q,g-h 

Length of male, 2.9 mm. Head as in T. maculata (Baker). Prono- 
tum almost twice length of crown. Male plates each with single 
row of macrosetae over middle third; pygofer processes located as in 
maculata but more slender at apex in ventral aspect. Style as in 
maculata, but longer. Aedeagus with shaft and unpaired ventral 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 157 

process much similar to maculata; a pair of dorsal processes arising 
from dorsal apodeme, much more conspicuous than in the latter 
species, curved caudoventrad and almost as long as shaft. 

Color of dorsum as in maculata. Face entirely pale yellow except 
for two black spots on margin between crown and face, and one on 
each ocellocular area. Thoracic venter and legs as in genotype. 

Described from a single male from Tinajas Alt as, Ariz., Apr. 23, 
1935 (E. D. Ball), in the U. S. National Museum (No. 62675). 

Trypanalebra blantoni, new species 

Figure 6,i-l 

Length of male 2.5 mm., of female 2.5-2.6 mm. Head strongly 
produced with anterior margin acutely rounded in dorsal aspect; 
median length of crown more than one-half greater than interocular 
width; disc flat or slightly concave; ocelli about equidistant from 
inner eye margins and median line of head. Pronotum equal to 
crown in length. Female seventh sternum with posterior margin 
regularly convex; pygofer with macrosetae more closely spaced than 
in T. maculata (Baker), occurring along posterior two-thirds of length 
of ovipositor. Male plates with row of macrosetae extending from 
near base almost to apex. Male p3^gofer with process arising along 
ventral margin, the two processes subparallel, extending caudad but 
not exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with apex rounded and 
with small latero ventral subapical projection. Ninth tergum de- 
limited posteriorly, but not laterally, by a line of flection. Style as in 
maculata. Aedeagus with preatrium absent; dorsal apodeme convex 
dorsally, not lobed; unpaired ventral process much broader than shaft 
which is broadly U-shaped in lateral aspect; shaft processes absent. 

Crown ivory with four black spots along anterior margin and a 
pair of indistinct laterobasal pale yellow spots, one next inner margin 
of each eye. Pronotum yellow, bordered with white posteriorly, with 
a black dash along the anterior margin of the white border on each 
side, each humeral margin with a dark spot. Scutellum with basal 
angles yellow with a median longitudinal dark mark between them; 
apical half ivory; transverse sulcus, a spot on each lateral margin at 
midlength and apex, black. Forewing olive green striped with fuscous 
in basal half, smoky with pale veins in apical half; a small spot in 
corium near base of claval suture, a large spot along costa including 
plaque, inner apical cell, and an arcuate transcommissural marking 
extending through apical half of clavus and through brachial cell, 
lacteus, partly bordered with black or fuscous; third apical cell black. 
Face and venter pale. 

Holotype and paratype males from Las Tablas, Los Santos Province, 
Panama, and male paratype from El Real, Darien Province, Panama, 



158 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

in U. S. National Museum (No. 62676). Other Panama specimens 
of both sexes examined from Fort Clayton and Mojinga Swamp, 
Panama Canal Zone; Garachine, Darien Province; Paris and Parita, 
Herrera Province; Kio Hato and Aguadulce, Code Province; and 
Arraijan and Tocumen, Panama Province. All of the specimens 
were collected by F. S. Blanton, in whose honor the species is named. 

Trypanalebra siczac (Osborn), new combination 

Figure 6,m-p 
Protalebra ziczac Osborn, Journ. Dep. Agr. Porto Rico, vol. 13, p. 104, 1929. 

Length of male 2.5 mm., of female 2.5-2.7 mm. Head strongly 
produced with anterior margin broadly rounded in dorsal aspect; 
median length of crown one-seventh greater than interocular width; 
disc flat or slightly convex; ocelli slightly closer to median line than 
to inner eye margins. Pronotum one-fifth longer than crown. Fe- 
male seventh sternum with hind margin rectilinear, caudolateral 
angles rounded; pygofer setae more dispersed than in T. blantoni 
Young and occurring along almost entire length of ovipositor. Male 
plates each with single row of macrosetae from near base to apex. 
Male pygofer with process arising on ventral margin near base, 
elongate, slightly exceeding posterior pygofer margin in lateral aspect, 
gradually tapered and bisinuate apically, in ventral aspect the two 
processes parallel, gradually tapered through most their length, each 
with apical portion crescentiform with the concave surface medial. 
Ninth tergum and style as in blantoni. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme 
weakly lobed on dorsal margin; unpaired ventral process about as 
wide as shaft; shaft with pair of short lateral anteapical expansions, 
the processes together forming an equilateral-triangle-shaped design 
in caudal aspect. 

Crown with ground color sordid brownish gray, a cloverleaf -shaped 
area in anterior half of disc and the hind margin broadly edged with 
dull ivory. Pronotum and scutellum deep yellow to orange, the 
former bordered behind with a vitreous rim that is narrowly bordered 
anteriorly with black. Forewings translucent ; each clavus olive yellow 
to orange, the basal half of inner margin extremely narrowly black, 
within a narrow hyaline to lacteus vitta parallel to inner claval 
margin from wing base to slightly behind midlength, extending thence 
caudolaterad through brachial cell then obtusely angled and extending 
caudomesad along vein Cu and continuous at its apex with lacteus 
angulate base of inner apical cell, this elongate zigzag vitta occasion- 
ally narrowly bordered with smoky in posterior half its length; olive- 
yellow or orange of clavus extending into brachial cell near its apex, 
and extending across claval suture at its midlength into corium in 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 159 

an arched vitta extending beyond midwidth of corium, thence caudad 
and narrowing along vein M to yellow or orange base of second apical 
cell; an oblique vitta extending from behind midlength of costal 
margin to apex of cell R, and areole of third apical cell darkly, the 
areoles of first and second apical cells paler, fumose; base of outer 
apical cell with a black spot next costal margin; costal margin nar- 
rowly pale yellow in basal half. Face and venter pale except dark 
meso thorax. 

The type, a female from Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, is probably in 
the Ohio State University collection. Caldwell (in Caldwell and 
Martorell, 1952, p. 99) selected a male allotype from Vieques Island, 
Puerto Rico, and it is upon this specimen that the above genitalia 
description is based. 

In addition to Puerto Rico specimens, a pair of specimens collected 
at Tamazumchale, Mexico, Dec. 23, 1949, by Dr. R. H. Beamer 
appear to be conspecific with the Puerto Rican forms. The Mexican 
female is larger, measuring 3.0 mm. The Mexican specimens have 
dark orange markings against a slate gray background on the wings, 
and the transverse facial stripe is orange. 

Blarea, new genus 

Figure 7 

Type of the genus, Blarea brasiliensis, new species. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin ; 
posterior branch of vein R evanescent apically; vein Cu 2 confluent 
with submarginal vein in basal half of wing, slightly basad of vein 
m-cu. Forewing with appendix not extending around apical wing 
margin which is smoothly rounded; inner apical cell not greatly wider 
at base than at apex; second apical cell slender, parallel-sided; third 
apical cell sessile, short, much broader at apex than at base; outer 
apical cell short, longer than broad, its base proximad of base of third 
apical cell. Male plates triangular in ventral aspect, exceeding pos- 
terior pygofer margin, each with single row of macrosetae over apical 
two-thirds. Pygofer with posterior margin truncate; macrosetae few, 
in a vertical row on disc; pygofer processes very weak, consisting of 
differentially sclerotized areas of pygofer wall, one on each side extend- 
ing from dorsal margin ventrad to middle of disc and one on each side 
forming an irregular linear area along ventral pygofer margin. Ninth 
tergum with a trilobed transverse tergite consisting of a pair of slender 
lateral arms and a small lobate central area, all delimited by lines of 
flection from remainder of pygofer. Anal processes absent. Style 
slender, elongate, without preapical lobe, the apical portion curved 
mesoventrad. Connective membranous. Aedeagus with preatrium 

422758—57 3 



160 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

distinct, short; dorsal apodeme laterally compressed; unpaired ventral 
process gradually tapered from near base to acute apex, longer and 
broader than setiform shaft. Head very slightly produced, crown 
with median length less than half interocular width; ocelli on very 
broadly rounded margin between crown and face, closer to median 
line than to inner eye margins. Pronotum with median length more 
than three times median length of crown, wider than head including 
eyes, lateral margins strongly divergent posteriorly. Face slightly 
convex in lateral aspect. 

Known only from the genotype, from Brazil. 

In this genus, the form of the male genitalia indicates a close rela- 
tionship to Trypanalebra. The shorter head, the evanescent posterior 
branch of vein B, in the hind wing, and the lack of paired aedeagal 
processes in Blarea will serve to separate it from the preceding genus. 

Blarea brasiliensis, new species 

Figure 7 

Length of male 3.7 mm. Male plates in lateral aspect each with 
apical portion a rounded lobe lying in a sagittal plane. Style extend- 
ing caudad to midlength of plate, bisinuate in lateral aspect. Aedea- 
gus with dorsal apodeme strongly compressed laterally at base, the 
apex slightly expanded; shaft measured at midlength with width less 
than one-third adjacent width of ventral process, about three-fourths 
length of ventral process. 

Crown dull yellow with an apical black spot. Pronotum shining 
deep brown, anterior submarginal area black, posterior and humeral 
margins broadly yellow. Wings smoky translucent, costal plaque 




Figure 7.— Blarea brasiliensis (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, style, ventral aspect; c, pygofer, 
lateral aspect; d, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 

darker, an elongate-oval transcommissural transverse vitta extending 
slightly laterad of brachial cell of each wing and crossing clavus 
slightly behind midlength, bright yellow. Face concolorous with 
crown; clypellus and adjacent apical portion of clypeus black; legs 
stramineous ; remainder of venter black. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



161 



Described from a single male from Rezende, Estado de Rio, Brazil, 
March 1924 (F. X. Williams), in the collection of the Hawaiian Sugar 
Planters Association. 

Relaba, new genus 

Figure 8 

Type of the genus, Relaba williamsi, new species. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin 
to apex of vein M 1+2 ; posterior branch of R occurring as a short spur; 
vein Cu 2 confluent with submarginal vein at point much basad of 
vein m-cu. Fore wing with appendix not extending around apex 
which is smoothly rounded; inner apical cell much broader in basal 
third than in remainder of length; second apical cell parallel-sided; 
third apical cell very small, triangular, petiolate; outer apical cell 
with length greatly exceeding width, not attaining apical wing margin. 
Male plates not exceeding pygofer, each with longitudinal submar- 
ginal row of few macrosetae on basal half. Pygofer with posterior 




Figure 8. — Relaba williamsi (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, apex of forewing; c, style, dorsal 
aspect; d, style apex, lateral aspect; e, pygofer, lateral aspect;/, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 

margin produced; disc with few macrosetae in a vertical row; with 
dorsal and ventral pygofer processes. Ninth tergite distinct, trans- 
verse, delimited laterally by a line of flection, anterior margin bflobed. 
Anal processes absent. Style short, with preapical lobe. Connective 
membranous. Aedeagus with preatrium elongate; dorsal apodeme 
paired; paired and unpaired ventral atrial processes present. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes not traversing first conjunctiva. Head weakly 
produced, crown with median length less than interocular width; 
ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face slightly closer to 
inner eye margins than to median line. Pronotum much longer than 
crown, wider than head including eyes; lateral margins strongty 
divergent posteriorly. Face slightly convex in lateral aspect. 
Distribution: Ecuador. 



162 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

The male genitalia suggest a relationship to Trypanalebra and 
Blarea, from both of which Relaba can be readily separated by its 
asymmetrical dorsal aedeagal process. 

Relaba williamsi, new species 

Figure 8 

Length of male 4.0 mm. Crown with median length slightly more 
than two-thirds interocular width and approximately half length of 
pronotum. Male plates broad basally, each with lateral margin 
convex and strongly narrowing to mesal margin in basal half, apical 
half slender and slightly tapered. Pygofer with posterior margin 
strongly produced and subangulate apically; with few discal macro- 
setae behind middle of disc; a short, ventral process occurring as 
thickened edge of inrolled ventral pygofer wall; and a slender acute 
sclerotized rod arising along dorsal margin, extending ventrad to 
point near middle of disc. Style very short, in dorsal aspect gradu- 
ally tapered to slender rounded apex, in lateral aspect with preapical 
lobe, apical extension short, slightly decurved, acute apically. Aedea- 
gus with preatrium longer than shaft, very slender; dorsal apodeme 
consisting of two arched lateral arms each extending dorsocaudad; 
with a median ventral acute unpaired atrial process almost as long as 
shaft, and a pair of minute acute processes arising near base, one on 
each side of unpaired process; shaft flared apically, around gonopore, 
expanded basally and giving off an unpaired slender process which 
is directed caudodorsad and asymmetrically curved apically. 

Crown dull ivory with a pair of round black spots one on each side 
of median line near anterior margin; disc with a large dull red spot 
on each side of median line, near middle. Pronotum brick-red, the 
lateral and humeral margins bordered with ivory and with a longi- 
tudinal median ivory vitta, the ivory border occasionally extending 
completely across hind margin, and confluent with posterior prolonga- 
tion of median vitta. Scutellum dull yellow, a pair of marginal spots 
opposite transverse sulcus, and apex, black. Forewing with ground 
color of clavus and adjacent corium translucent orange; a trans- 
commissural vitta at midlength of clavus extending into corium of 
each wing, hyaline, bordered with dull smoky; apical portion of each 
wing hyaline basally and laterally, remainder smoky translucent 
with a faint transverse hyaline area through appendix and first and 
second apical cells; apical veins pale; third and fourth apical cells 
and apex of costal cell bordered with black internally; costa orange 
in basal half; costal cell with an oblique dark vitta at midlength. 
Face dull ivory to gray faintly washed with orange near clypeal 
suture, with a conspicuous interocular orange band below base. 
Venter and legs pale, except black mesosternum and apex of hind 
tibia. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



163 



Holotype male, Mar. 8, 1923, paratype males, Mar. 25, and Apr. 4, 
1923, in collection of Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association and one 
male paratype, Apr. 4, 1923, in U. S. National Museum. All are 
from Tena, Ecuador, and were collected by F. X. Williams, in whose 
honor the species is named. 

Genus Aphanalebra McAtee 

Figure 9 

Protalebra subgenus Aphanalebra McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc. vol. 34, 

p. 152. 1926 (type Protalebra unipuncta Baker by original designation). 
Aphanalebra; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 20, 1952. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing mar- 
gin; posterior branch of vein K, entire apically; vein Cu 2 confluent 
with submarginal vein at point much basad of vein m-cu. Forewing 
with appendix not extending around wing apex which is smoothly 
rounded; veins M and Cu fused before base of inner apical cell; 
inner apical cell slender, much broader at base than at apex; second 
apical cell angular at base, petiolate, slender; third apical cell very 
small, triangular, long-petioiate; outer apical cell open basally, 




Figure 9. — Aphanalebra unipuncta: a, anterior dorsum (type); b, pygofer, lateral aspect 
(anal process in broken line) (type); c, forewing; d, hind wing; e, aedeagus, lateral aspect 
(type). 

almost attaining apical wing margin. Female seventh sternum pro- 
duced posteriorly, the hind margin convex on each side of a shallow 
V-shaped median excision; pygofer with macrosetae on posterior 
two-thirds. Male plates triangular, elongate, exceeding posterior 
pygofer margin, each with oblique row of macrosetae in apical half. 
Male pygofer with apex truncate; macrosetae arranged in an irregular 
oblique group over disc; processes absent. Ninth tergum a heavily 
sclerotized transverse area without lines of flection laterally or apically. 
Two pairs of anal processes present. Style elongate, without a pre- 
apical lobe, the apex slightly decurved. Connective membranous. 
Aedeagus with preatrium absent; dorsal apodeme Y-shaped with 
arms widely spaced, giving off a unilateral process that extends caudad 
almost to apex of shaft; shaft elongate, bisinuate, recurved apically; 
gonopore terminal. Head produced with anterior margin broadly 



164 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

rounded; crown with median length equal to interocular width; 
ocelli on broad margin between crown and face, about equidistant 
from inner eye margins and median line of head. Pronotum twice 
length of crown, wider than head including eyes; lateral margins 
strongly divergent posteriorly. Face flat in profile. 

Distribution: Brazil. 

The characters in the key will easily separate Aphanalebra from 
other alebrine genera. The form of the aedeagus is unique in the 
tribe. 

Aphanalebra unipuncta (Baker) 

Figure 9 

Protalebra unipuncta Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 404, 1899. 

Aphanalebra unipuncta; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 20, 1952. 

Length of male 3.1 mm., of female 3.2-3.3 mm. Male pygofer 
with posterior margin truncate, macrosetae arranged in an oblique 
group over disc. Style with apex appearing truncate in dorsal aspect. 
Other characters as in generic description. 

Crown dull ivory with a single apical round black spot. Pronotum 
olive yellow with a pair of oblique oval markings, one on each side 
of median line, and a pair of horizontal dashes, one on each side near 
posterior margin, black. Scutellum orange-yellow, the basal angles, 
a median streak in basal half and extreme apex, black. Forewing 
with costal margin broadly hyaline and a transverse transcommissural 
hyaline area extending to midcorium of each wing across midlength 
of clavus; basal half of clavus orange with a longitudinal curved 
black streak that widens apically to border the hyaline area anteriorly; 
posterior third of clavus, adjacent corium and apical cells except 
outer, smoky; longitudinal veins pale orange. Face and venter sordid 
yellow. 

This species was originally described from four specimens from 
Chapada, Brazil. A male of the original series, No. 29519 in the U. S. 
National Museum, bears a type label. This specimen is here desig- 
nated lectotype. The other three specimens bear "paratype" labels 
with the same catalog number, presumably affixed by McAtee in 
1926. 

Oshornulus, new genus 
Figure 10 

Type of the genus, Dikraneura quadrifasciata Osborn. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing 
margin; posterior branch of vein R entire apically; vein Cu 2 confluent 
with submarginal vein at point considerably proximad of vein m-cu. 
Forewing with appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



165 



rounded; inner apical cell narrowest at base, gradually broadening 
throughout its length; second apical cell almost parallel-sided; third 
apical cell sessile; outer apical cell longer than broad, its base dis- 
tinctly proximad of base of third apical cell. Male plates triangular, 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with single longitudinal 
row of macrosetae over middle half. Pygofer with posterior margin 
slightly angularly produced posteriorly; macrosetae irregularly ar- 
ranged over posterior half of disc; two processes on each side occurring 
as differentially sclerotized areas of the pygofer wall, one along 
posteroventral margin, slender basally, broadened at pygofer apex, 




Figure 10. — Osbornulus quadrifasciatus: a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral aspect; c, 
style, lateral aspect, and connective; d, style apex, ventral aspect; e, apex of forewing; 
/, aedeagus, lateral aspect (type); g, sternal abdominal apodemes, ventral aspect (broken 
line represents conjunctiva). 

the other extending along posterior pygofer margin then caudoventrad 
across posterior half of disc to the first process. Ninth tergite dis- 
tinct, transverse, bounded laterally by distinct integumental thicken- 
ings. Anal processes occurring as a distinct anal collar, extending 
ventrad to middle of pygofer disc. Style short, without distinct 
preapical lobe. Connective T-shaped, strongly joined to base of 
aedeagus. Aedeagus with preatrium elongate, giving rise to two pairs 
of ventral processes; dorsal apodeme transverse; shaft slender, with- 
out processes. Sternal abdominal apodemes not traversing first 
conjunctiva. Head strongly produced, crown with median length 
exceeding interocular width; ocelli on rounded margin between crown 
and face, about equidistant from inner eye margins and median line 
of head. Pronotum longer than crown, wider than head inclading 
eyes; lateral margins slightly divergent posteriorly. Face slightly 
convex in lateral aspect. 

This genus is named in honor of the late Prof. Herbert Osborn of 
the Ohio State University, who made many contributions to our 
knowledge of Cicadellidae. 



166 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Distribution: Bolivia and Brazil. 

Osbornulus does not appear to be closely related to any of the other 
genera in the tribe. The form of the aedeagus with its two pairs of 
atrial processes serves to separate Osbornulus froni all of the following 
genera. 

Osbornulus quadrifasciatus (Osborn), new combination 

Figure 10 

Dikraneura quadrifasciatas Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus. vol. 18, p. 272, 1928. 
Elabra quadrifasciata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 35, 1952. 

Length of male 3.8 mm. Crown with disc concave, median length 
almost twice interocular width and more than two-thirds median 
length of pronotum. Other characters as in generic description. 

Ground color of dorsum lacteus, a pair of vittae beginning on disc 
of crown, extending caudad, diverging over pronotum and scutellum, 
extending entire length of each forewing parallel to commissure, 
around wing apex and basad along costa to its base, amber to pale 
brown, interrupted by white claval suture and a pair of oblique 
white vittae at and behind midlength of costa; posterior two-thirds 
of claval commissure white. Face and venter pale, an amber dash 
across pleural portion of pronotum on each side, apical hind tarsomere 
black. 

The holotype, a male from Provincia del Sara, Bolivia, is in the 
Carnegie Museum collection. Additional specimens have been 
examined from Rio Caraguata, Mato Grosso, Brazil. 

Genus Protalebra Baker 

Figure 11 

Protalebra Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 402, 1899 (type Alebra curvilinea Gillette, 
by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent or not with apical wing 
margin; posterior branch of vein R entire apically; vein Cu 2 confluent 
with submarginal vein at point much basad of vein m-cu. Forewing 
with appendix not extending around wing apex which is smoothly 
rounded; inner apical cell wider in basal third than at apex; second 
apical cell parallel-sided; third apical cell stalked; outer apical cell 
elongate, trapezoidal, not attaining apical wing margin, its base 
distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell. Male plates tri- 
angular, attaining or exceeding posterior pygofer margin, abruptly 
narrowed at midlength, each with a single row of macrosetae extending 
from near base to apex. Pygofer with posterior margin produced: 
macrosetae numerous, irregularly arranged on disc; pygofer processes 
arising ventrally or absent. Ninth tergum with or without a tergite. 
Anal processes present, straight, slender, variable in length inter- 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 167 

specifically. Style elongate, slender, without a distinct preapical 
lobe; apex slightly decurved. Connective Y-shaped. Aedeagus with 
preatrium absent; dorsal apodeme vestigial or present and transverse 
or paired; with a conspicuous asymmetrical dorsal process; shaft 
slender, elongate, without processes. Head strongly produced; 
crown with median length exceeding interocular width; ocelli on 
rounded margin between crown and face, about equidistant from 
inner eye margins and median line of head. Pronotum with median 
length exceeding length of crown, wider than head including eyes; 
lateral margins strongly divergent posteriorly. Face convex in 
lateral aspect. 

Distribution: Brazil, Argentina, and Virgin Islands. 

Key to species of Protalebra 

1. Male pygofer with dorsal processes only, discal and ventral processes absent; 

aedeagus with paired dorsal apodemes, each arm bilobed apically. 

nexa McAtee 

Male pygofer with discal and ventral pygofer processes in addition to dorsal; 

aedeagus with dorsal apodeme a transverse bar or absent 2 

2. Aedeagus with dorsal process slender and cylindrical, not broader than shaft; 

dorsal aedeagal apodeme vestigial haywardi, new species 

Aedeagus with dorsal process broad, not cylindrical, conspicuously broader 
than shaft; dorsal aedeagal apodeme a transverse bar . curvilinea (Gillette) 

Protalebra curvilinea (Gillette) 

Figure 11, a-f 

Alebra curvilinea Gillette, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 20, p. 710, 1898. 
Protalebra curvilinea; Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 405, 1899. 

Length of female 3.2 mm. Crown with median length less than 
one-third greater than interocular width and two-thirds median 
length of pronotum. Hind wing with submarginal vein not confluent 
with apical wing margin. Female seventh sternum large, hind 
margin strongly produced in a broad lobe which is obliquely convex 
on each side of the straight apex; pygofer heavily setose with pale 
setae on each side of the ovipositor throughout its length, a few of the 
setae contrasting black. Male plates exceeding posterior pygofer 
margin. Male pygofer with posterior margin lobed ventrally, with 
an almost straight ventral process extending from near base caudo- 
dorsad to apical margin of pygofer, the two processes convergent in 
their apical halves in ventral aspect but not approximate apically; 
dorsal margin with a differentially sclerotized integumental bar 
extending to midlength of margin, thence curved abruptly ventrad 
to slightly above middle of disc; disc with a second such bar extending 
horizon tally from near middle to apex; tergum with a basal transverse 
heavily sclerotized bar with a median triangular posterior projection. 
Anal processes strong, slender, extending ventrad beyond middle of 



168 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

disc of pygofer. Connective membranous near its articulation with 
styles, with a Y-shaped heavily sclerotized median portion which is 
bilobed apically. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme a transverse bar; 
with a large asymmetrical dorsal process about as long as shaft. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum ivory, a transverse 
undulate vitta between eyes, a transverse vitta completely across 
pronotum before middle, and basal angles of scutellum, dull yellow. 
Forewings hyaline with an omega-shaped lacteus marking on a pale 
yellow background intersecting commissural margin just behind 
scutellum, bordering inner margin of costal plaque laterally, extending 
thence to claval apex, thence caudolaterad to outer apical cell, the 
anterior transverse portion bordered narrowly with black before and 
behind. Face and venter entirely pale. 

Known only from the male type and a female paratype from 
Chapada, Brazil, in the U. S. National Museum. 

Protalebra haywardi, new species 

Figure 11, g-j 

Length of male 2.8 mm. Crown with median length almost one- 
half greater than interocular width and two-thirds median length of 
pronotum. Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical 
wing margin. Male plates as in P. curvilinea (Gillette) but not 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin; pygofer with ventral portion of 
posterior margin produced posteriorly in an acute lobe; a process 
arising ventrally, distad of anterior half of ventral margin, weak, 
extending caudodorsad, not attaining posterior margin; dorsal and 
discal integumental bars present as in curvilinea but with latter more 
oblique and beginning almost at anterior pygofer margin; tergum 
with transverse bar as in curvilinea but without the triangular pro- 
jection. Anal processes forming an anal collar, not extending ventrad 
to discal region of pygofer in lateral aspect. Connective short, 
Y-shaped, with bilobed apical portion, completely sclerotized. 
Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme vestigial; with a conspicuous elongate 
slender process, no wider than shaft in lateral aspect, arising dorsad 
of shaft, extending caudad thence dorsocephalad, apex sharply rounded 
in lateral aspect, bifid in ventral aspect; shaft slender, elongate, 
extending parallel to dorsal process almost to apex. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum, and scutellum ivory, a faint 
transverse line across disc of crown between eyes dull orange; a 
transverse vitta across basal portion of disc of pronotum with an 
acute median posteriorly directed tooth, a trilobed transverse marking 
across base of scutellum and the median line of the scutellum to apical 
third, orange yellow. Forewings with ground color translucent 
yellow, a lacteus circle crossing commissure just behind scutellar apex 



LEAFHOPPEK TRIBE ALEBEINI — YOUNG 



169 




Figure 11. — Protalebra. a-f, P. curvilinea (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect (broken line is anal process); c, style and connective, dorsal aspect; d, style apex, 
lateral aspect; e, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, the same, caudal aspect, g-j, P. haywardi 
(type): g, pygofer, lateral aspect; h, anterior dorsum; i, aedeagus, lateral aspect; ;', style 
and connective, dorsal aspect, k-q, P. nexa: k, anterior dorsum; /, aedeagus, lateral as- 
pect; m, pygofer, lateral aspect; n, aedeagus, caudal aspect; o, apex of forewing (type); 
p, style apex, lateral aspect; _q, style and connective, ventral aspect. 



170 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

and at claval apex, bordering inner margin of costal plaque on each 
wing, and with an arched extension on each wing from apex of brachial 
cell to apex of cell R; apical cells subhyaline with a small black spot 
in areoles of first, second, and third. Face, pleural portion of pro- 
notum and venter pale. 

Holotype male, Tucuman, Argentina, January-March 1941 (K. J. 
Hayward), in U. S. National Museum (No. 62887). 

This species is closely related to curvilinea from which it may be 
distinguished by the characters in the key and in the above description. 

Protalebra nexa McAtee 

Figure 11, k-q 

Protalebra nexa McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. Soc. vol. 34, p. 150, 1926. 
Protalebra insularis Caldwell, in Caldwell and Martorell, Journ. Agr. Univ. 
Puerto Rico, vol. 34, p. 94, 1952, new synonymy. 

Length of male 2.6 mm., of female 2.7-2.8 mm. Crown with 
median length more than one-half greater than interocular width 
and slightly less than median length of pronotum. Hind wing with 
submarginal vein not confluent with apical wing margin. Female 
genitalia as in P. curvilinea (Gillette) but with posterior margin of 
seventh sternum less convex and without dark macrosetae on pygofer. 
Male plates exceeding posterior pygofer margin. Male pygofer with 
posterodorsal portion produced posteriorly, subangulate; pygofer with 
dorsal integument al bar as in curvilinea, the apical vertical portion 
extending to middle of pygofer disc; ventral and discal processes 
wanting; tergum without differentially sclerotized area. Anal pro- 
cesses confluent with lower portion of vertical part of pygofer process. 
Style weakly biundulate in lateral aspect. Connective Y-shaped 
with apical portion expanded. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme paired, 
each arm diverging from long axis of shaft and bilobed apically; 
dorsal process laterally compressed, longer than shaft, with pair 
of asymmetrical appendages at apex. 

Ground color of crown ivory with a faint yellow tint on disc. 
Pronotum deep yellow, the lateral margins, humeral margins, posterior 
margin and two anterior extensions from it, ivory. Scutellum deep 
yellow with an ivory spot on each side of disc at end of transverse 
sulcus. Forewing lacteus, clavus with a spot at base, a ]-shaped 
marking at midlength and an anteapical dash, corium with an oblique 
dash near base, a similar one bordering anterior half of costal plaque 
and expanding at claval suture, and a line before apical cells on veins 
M and Cu, yellow, the marking near claval apex sometimes orange; 
an oblique line behind costal plaque, apex of vein R, and base of 
outer apical cell black, an oblique irregular marking from apex of 
clavus to costal margin at third apical cell, involving basal portions 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 171 

of apical cells, ivory bordered with black; apical margin broadly 
smoky. Face, venter and pleural portion of pronotum pale, the 
posttibiae with apices, and a few of spines, black. 

The female holotype and two female para types from St. Thomas, 
Virgin Islands, and the male holotype of Protalebra insularis Caldwell 
from the same island are in the U. S. National Museum. No other 
specimens have been seen. 

This species differs from the two preceding species in its lack of 
discal and ventral processes on the pygofer, its possession of paired and 
lobed aedeagal apodemes, and its lack of an omega-shaped pattern 
on the dorsum. 

Genus Balera Young 

Figures 12, 13 

Balera Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 25, 1952 (type Dikraneura pellucida 
Osborn by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein distinct and free from apical 
wing margin; posterior branch of vein R entire; vein Cu 2 confluent 
with submarginal vein near midlength of wing, much basad of vein 
m-cu. Forewing with appendix not extending around wing apex 
which is smoothly rounded; all apical cells much longer than broad, 
parallel-sided, angulate basally, their bases (except first) almost in 
same transverse line; outer apical cell almost attaining apical wing 
margin. Male plates exceeding posterior pygofer margin, slightly 
beaked apically in lateral aspect, each with single or double row of 
weak macrosetae. Pygofer produced posteriorly, occasionally form- 
ing an apical process which is not differentially sclerotized, without 
discal macrosetae, with group of small macrosetae near and parallel 
to posterodorsal margin. Ninth tergum without a tergite or differ- 
entially sclerotized area. Anal processes weak or absent. Style 
sigmoid in lateral aspect. Connective V- or Y-shaped. Aedeagus 
with preatrium present or absent; dorsal apodeme absent or present 
and variable interspeciflcally; shaft with one or two pans of apical or 
anteapical processes. Sternal abdominal apodemes slender and 
elongate, usually capitate apically, traversing one or two abdominal 
conjunctivae. Head slightly produced with apex rounded or obtusely 
angulate; ocelli on broadly rounded margin between crown and face, 
about midway between median line of head and inner eye margins. 
Pronotum more than one-half longer than head, broader or narrower 
than head including eyes; lateral margins subparallel or divergent 
posteriorly. Face flat to slightly convex, widely divergent from 
crown in profile. 

Distribution: Panama, Trinidad, Brazil, and Bolivia. 



172 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

The peculiar styles of the males, the capitate elongate sternal 
abdominal apodemes, and the chaetotaxy of the pygofer set Balera 
well apart from all other alebrine genera. 

Key to species of Balera 

1. Aedeagus with shaft greatly inflated throughout its length, with three apical 

lobes pellucida (Osborn) 

Aedeagus not so 2 

2. Aedeagus with a pair of preapical lateral keels and an apical spiniform process. 

pusilla, new species 
Aedeagus not so 3 

3. Aedeagus with two pairs of apical processes, both pairs standing out from 

shaft emarginata (Osborn) 

Aedeagus with a single pair of elongate retrorse subapical processes appressed 
to shaft caraguatae, new species 

Balera pellucida (Osborn) 

Figure 12,a-e 

Dikraneura pellucida Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 271, 1928. 
Balera pellucida; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 26, 1952. 

Length of male 2.7 mm. Crown short, triangular, the apex broadly 
rounded; median length seven-eighths interocular width and almost 
two-thirds median length of pronotum which is not as broad as head 
including eyes. Male plates each with double row of macrosetae on 
basal half. Pygofer with posterior margin produced to narrow process 
which is directed mesad and not differentially sclerotized. Style 
sigmoid in apical half, with preapical setae on ventral surface. Con- 
nective V-shaped. Aedeagus inflated, preatrium very short; dorsal 
apodeme weak; shaft keeled laterally with keels widened apically to 
form pair of membranous lobes which extend dorsolaterally and are 
continuous through a similar ventral subapical lobe which extends 
ventrad. Sternal abdominal apodemes scarcely traversing first 
conjunctiva. 

The t}^pe has faded. Original description: "Pale yellowish; vertex 
and front and anterior part of pronotum tinged with fulvous; elytra 
subhyaline; clavus tinged with yellow and with dusky apex; apical 
cells slightly smoky; beneath pale yellow." 

The holotype, a male from Bolivia, is in the Carnegie Museum. 

The form of the aedeagus will readily separate this from other 
species of the genus. 

Balera caraguatae, new species 

Figure 12,/-Z 

Length of male 3.3-3.6 mm. Crown short, triangular, the apex 
broadly rounded; median length more than two-thirds interocular 
width and more than two-thirds length of pronotum which is slightly 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



173 



wider than head including eyes; lateral pronotal margins slightly 
divergent posteriorly. Male plates each with single or double row 
of weak macrosetae on basal half. Pygofer in lateral aspect with 
posterodorsal portion produced, the posteroventral margin oblique 
and broadly convex. Style narrow, short, not greatly exceeding apex 




Figure 12. — Balera. a-e, B. pellucida (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, apex of forewing; c, 
style, lateral aspect; d, aedeagus, lateral aspect; e, pygofer, lateral aspect. /-/, B. cara- 
guatae (type):/, aedeagus, dorsal aspect; g, same, lateral aspect; h, style and connective, 
dorsal aspect; i, style, lateral aspect;/, anterior dorsum; k, sternal abdominal apodcmes, 
ventral aspect (broken lines represent abdominal conjunctivae); /, pygofer, lateral aspect. 

of connective; apical half sigmoid in lateral aspect with the apex acute 
and curved ventrad. Connective Y-shaped, the unpaired portion 
very short. Aedeagus slightly compressed dorsoventrally with 
preatrium distinct; dorsal apodeme absent, shaft heavily sclerotized 
from base to anteapical origin of paired shaft processes, the more 
distal portion of shaft lightly sclerotized; processes slender extending 
basad, appressed to shaft, acute at tips. Sternal abdominal apodemes 
traversing two conjunctivae. 



174 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Ground color of crown and pronotum dull sordid yellow to dull 
gray, occasionally with a pair of dull orange markings on pronotal 
disc. Scutellum gray, the midline paler in basal half, Forewings 
milky subhyaline, a vitta in clavus parallel to claval suture and one 
in corium in brachial cell, dull yellow; apex of clavus, a spot in apex 
of brachial cell, apex of cell R, one in apex of cell M and one in each 
base of second and third apical cells, smoky. Face sordid yellow 
with a pair of darker vittae on clypeus; remainder of venter without 
dark markings. 

Male holotype and 43 male paratypes, Rio Caraguata, Mato 
Grosso, Brazil, March 1953 (F. Plaumann), allotype, and 35 female 
paratypes in Snow Entomological Collections, University of Kansas; 8 
paratypes in U. S. National Museum. One additional specimen from 
Los Cruces, Panama, and one from Trinidad Naval Base, B. W. I., 
have been examined. 

The long recurved aedeagal processes are not found in other species 
of Baler a. 

Balera pusilla, new species 

Figure 13,a-d 

Length of male 3.3 mm. Crown short, triangular with apex sub- 
angulate; median length about two-thirds interocular width and 
about half median length of pronotum which is about as wide as head 
including eyes, with lateral margins slightly divergent posteriorly. 
Male plates with macrosetae in double row near base of plate, uniseri- 
ate in apical two-thirds, decreasing in size apically, the row extending 
to the plate apex. Pygofer produced slightly dorsad apically in a 
broadly rounded lobe. Anal process short. Style not greatly exceed- 
ing apex of connective, with preapical lobe distinct, apical extension 
strongly decurved. Connective triangular with a median keel 
apically. Aedeagus slender and elongate, preatrium distinct, dorsal 
apodeme distinct, shaft with a median ventral and paired lateral 
anteapical keels, the ventral keel produced posteriorly beneath 
gonopore in a spiniform apical process. Sternal abdominal apodemes 
as in B. caraguatae. 

Crown and pronotum greenish yellow, a darker yellow spot on 
each side of pronotum in posterior part of disc. Scutellum sordid 
yellow, the transverse sulcus bordered with ivory. Forewing hyaline 
with a faint green stripe in clavus and a similar stripe in brachial 
cell of corium; costal margin bordered with green in its basal third; 
a faint smoky spot in claval apex, in apices of cells M and Cu and in 
bases of each of inner three apical cells; wing apex tinted with smoky. 
Face and venter sordid unmarked greenish yellow. 

Holotype male from Las Palmas, Veraguas Province, Panama, 
Sept. 16, 1953; three paratypes from Aguadulce, Code Province, 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



175 



Panama, Sept. 25, 1951; and one paratype each from Chiriqui, 
Chiriqui Province, Panama; Paris, Herrera Province, Panama; Rio 
Hato, Code Province, Panama; and Fort Kobbe, Panama Canal 
Zone, all collected by F. S. Blanton and in U. S. National Museum 
(No. 62675). 




Figure 13. — Balera. a-d, B. pusilla (type): a, pygofer, lateral aspect; b, style, and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, aedeagus, caudal aspect, e-h, B. 
emarginata: e, pygofer, lateral aspect; /, apex of aedeagus, dorsal aspect; g, style, lateral 
aspect; h, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 

The male genitalia will readily distinguish this from other species 
of Balera. 

Balera emarginata (Osborn) 

Figure 13,e-h 
Empoasca emarginata Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 286, 1928. 

Length of male 3.6 mm. Crown short, very slightly produced, 
median length slightly less than interocular width and more thanfhalf 
of pronotum which is narrower than head including eyes. Male plates 
each with single row of macrosetae extending fronubasal^ fourth 

422758—57 4 



176 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

almost to apex. Pygofer with mid posterior margin produced pos- 
teriorly in gradually tapering process which is curved sharply dorsad 
at apex, the tip sharply rounded; in ventral aspect the two processes 
slightly convergent. Style short and slender, strongly sigmoid, the 
apex directed ventrad, with few small preapical setae along ventral 
surface. Connective Y-shaped. Aedeagus with preatrium short; 
dorsal apodeme elongate, slender; shaft extending caudodorsad in 
basal portion, curved and directed caudad in greater portion of its 
length, with a pair of flattened lateral processes and pair of dorsal 
cylindrical processes at apex; gonopore oval, preapical, dorsal. 
Sternal abdominal apodemes not capitate, traversing one abdominal 
conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum straw yellow. 
Forewing pale milky translucent, base of costa, entire clavus, and 
brachial cell faintly yellow, with a faint fumose spot in apex of brachial 
cell; apical veins contrasting paler. Face and venter entirely pale 
yellow. 

The type and a short series of paratypes from Bolivia are in the 
Carnegie Museum and are the only specimens known. As stated 
by Osborn in the original description, the type series appears to be 
faded. The above color description is from a topotypic male, not 
determined by Osborn, in the Carnegie Museum. 

The male genitalia will readily separate this species from other 
species of Baler a. 

Genus Brunerella Young 

Figure 14 

Brunerella Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 31, 1952 (type Brunerella 
magnifica Young by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein distinct apically, close to apical 
wing margin, extending slightly basad of apex of vein M 1+2 as a short 
spur; posterior branch of R occurring as a long spur; vein Cu 2 con- 
fluent with submarginal vein at point proximad of vein m-cu. Fore- 
wing with appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly 
rounded; inner apical cell slender, parallel-sided; second apical 
cell slender, length half or more length of inner apical cell, parallel- 
sided; third apical cell sessile, slightly broader at apex than at base; 
outer apical cell much longer than broad, its base distinctly proximad 
of base of third apical cell. Female seventh sternum more than twice 
Length of sixth, posterior margin broadly produced medially; pygofer 
with numerous irregular pale macrosetae on posterior two- thirds 
its length. Male plates short, gradually tapered, scarcely exceeding 
posterior pygofer margin, each with a longitudinal row of pale discal 
macrosetae extending from near base almost to apex. Male pygofer 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 177 

not strongly produced, with a vertical group of few macrosetae on 
disc, without processes but with differentially sclerotized rods in 
pygofer wall. Anal processes present, short. Style short, slightly 
expanded anteapically; basal portion occasionally with plate-like 
lobe extending beneath articulating portion of connective. Con- 
nective slender, shallowly V-shaped. Aedeagus with preatrium 
short, broad; atrium with a pair of lateral apodemes arising from its 
dorsal portion; shaft slender, without processes or ornamentation. 
Sternal abdominal apodemes vestigial. 

Head short, crown transverse with anterior margin very broadly 
rounded, with median length more than one-third greater than inter- 
ocular width; ocelli on broadly rounded margin between crown and 
face, closer to inner eye margins than to median line of head. Pro- 
notum short, broad, its width equal to width of head including eyes, 
lateral margins divergent posteriorly. Face broadly convex. 

Distribution: Cuba and Mexico. 

In both of the species treated below, the ventral face of the style is 
produced, plate-like, in a lobe that extends mesad beneath the articula- 
tion of the style. In males of magnified the lobe is clearly defined and 
has the appearance of a branch of the style. In the allotype of 
sciHptozona the lobe is less extensive and much less clearly defined at 
its apex. 

In a recent paper, Linnavuori (1954, p. 132) placed Typhlocyba 
flavonigra Stal in this genus, and illustrated the type, a female from 
Brazil. In general form and venation of the forewing the resemblance 
to the species treated below is close. The venation of the apex of the 
hind wing differs. No males of the Stal species are known. 

Key to species of Brunerella 

Forewing with a broad deep red angular marking in base of clavus, second apical 
cell usually about two-thirds length of first; male pygofer with posterodorsal 
margin slightly emarginate magnifica Young 

Forewing with a narrow pink marking in base of clavus, second apical cell about 
half length of first; male pygofer not emarginate posterodorsally. 

scriptozona (Van Duzee) 

Brunerella magnified Young 

Figure 14, a-f 
Brunerella magnifica Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 32, 1952. 

Length of male 3.3-3.5 mm. Crown with median length about 
one-half greater than interocular width and two-thirds median length 
of pronotum. Forewing with length of second apical cell variable, 
usually more than half length of inner apical cell. Male pygofer 
with posterior margin slightly concave. Style with distinct ventral 



178 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iq? 

lobe extending mesocaudad beneath articulation with connective. 
Aedeagus in ventral aspect with shaft narrowest at midlength, in 
lateral aspect with apical fifth curved abruptly caudodorsad. 

Head with crown ivory white with an irregular orange V-shaped 
mark in center, the arms broadly touching eyes. Pronotum san- 
guineous, posterior margin slate-gray, with a dark border between red 
and gray portions laterally. Scutellum greenish yellow, a slender 
dark transverse line just before apex. Forewing pruinose with a pale 
brick-red streak along costa near base, an angulate broad sanguineous 
vitta, its apex directed mesad, in basal half of clavus, and a contiguous 
red spot in adjacent corium, the posterior margin of both narrowly 
edged in black; apical half of clavus except extreme tip and inner half 
of adjacent corium amber, the corial portion continuing caudad, 
becoming fumose, and broadening to cover apical cells except few 
slate-gray fenestrae and brick-red apical veins; base of outer apical 
cell fumose next costal margin. Face and legs ivory, hind tibia 
narrowly embrowned apically. Female pygofer black with pale setae. 

In specimens from Cuba, the red color of the anterior portion of 
the pronotum invades the more posterior gray portion in a large 
median tooth that extends nearly to the hind margin of the pronotum, 
and the darker coloration between red and gray areas is deeper than 
in the typical variety described above. The angular red markings of 
the anterior part of the forewing are deeper red and more extensive, 
forming a deep red line across the basal fourth of wing except hyaline 
areas, one adjoining scutellum, and one astride claval suture. The 
amber yellow of the central part of the wings extends completely 
across both wings nearly as far distad as the apex of the clavus. 
The wing apices are more deeply dark and the dark markings extend 
cephalad to include the claval apex. 

The holotype, a male from Mexico near Jalapa, is in the Snow 
Entomological Collections. A series of Cuban specimens from 
Almandares Eiver, near Havana, is in the U. S. National Museum. 

Brunerella scriptozona (Van Duzee), new combination 

Figure 14,#- k 

Protalebra scriptozona Van Duzee, Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 12, 
p. 186, 1923. 

Length of both sexes (to apex of hind wing) 3.0 mm. Crown with 
median length more than one-half greater than interocular width and 
about four-fifths median length of pronotum. Forewing with second 
apical cell slightly more than half length of inner apical cell. Male 
genitalia as in B. magnified Young, but pygofer not distinctly concave 
along posterodorsal margin, aedeagal shaft not broadened ante- 
apically in ventral aspect, more gradually curved dorsocaudad in 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



179 



apical half in lateral aspect, and style with basal plate-like lobe much 
less pronounced. 

Crown dull ivory, in some specimens with a pan of faint yellow 
oblique vittae on disc. Pronotum pale gray, two angular spots on 
anterior margin and two similar spots near humeral margins, pink. 
Forewing with ground color lacteus, basal fourth with an angular vitta 
in base of clavus connected posteriorly with an undulate line extending 




Figure 14. — Brunerella. a-f, B. magnified: a, anterior dorsum; b, style and connective, 
dorsal aspect; c, style, ventrolateral aspect; d, aedeagus, ventral aspect; s, pygofer, lateral 
aspect (broken line is anal process); /, aedeagus, lateral aspect, g-k, B. scriptozona 
(allotype): g, apex of hind wing (in situ); h, anterior dorsum; i, pygofer, lateral aspect 
(broken line is anal process); /, aedeagus, ventral aspect; k, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 

from commissural margin into corium, pale red ; middle three-fifths of 
clavus and most of adjoining corium pale yellow, a spot in claval apex, 
one in apex of brachial cell, a longitudinal mark in base of appendix, 
a narrow diagonal line across midlength of inner|apical cell, a narrow 
transverse arcuate line across basal halves of secondfandjthird apical 



180 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

cells and a broad transverse band across wing apex from appendix to 
inner half of third apical cell, smoky; veins bordering apices of cells 
R and M and bases of second and third apical cells, crimson. Meso- 
sterna black in both sexes. Female with face and remainder of venter 
pale gray except pygofer which has darker markings dorsally and 
laterally; abdomen black dorsally. Male face and venter as in 
female, but venter of abdomen black. 

The holotype, a female from Ceralbo Island, Gulf of California, is 
in the California Academy of Sciences collections. The above descrip- 
tion is based on the allotype male, from Puerto Ballandra, Carmen 
Island, Gulf of California, and a female from Espiritu Santo Island, 
Gulf of California. Both were loaned by the California Academy 
of Sciences. 

Lareba, new genus 

Figure 15 

Type of genus, Protalebra variata Ruppel and DeLong. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein distinct at apex but contiguous 
with apical wing margin to apex of vein M 1+2 ; posterior branch of 
vein R entire apically; vein Cu 2 confluent with submarginal vein at 
midlength of wing, much basad of vein m-cu. Forewing with appendix 
not extending around wing apex which is smoothly rounded; inner 
apical cell broad basally, narrower in apical half; second apical cell 
broader at apex than at base, less than two-thirds length of inner 
apical cell; third apical cell triangular; outer apical cell wider than 
long, its base distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell. Male 
plates very elongate, triangular, exceeding posterior pygofer margin, 
each with a longitudinal row of macrosetae from near base to apex. 
Pygofer with posterior margin produced, disc with an irregular oblique 
row of macrosetae; pygofer process arising on posteroventral margin. 
Ninth tergum with a transverse bar but without delimiting lines of 
flection. Anal processes absent. Style elongate without preapical lobe. 
Connective relatively short, papilioniform. Aedeagus with preatrium 
distinct, dorsal apodeme strap-like, slightly expanded at apex; shaft 
laterally compressed, appearing bifurcate in lateral aspect, the dorsal 
ramus bearing the gonoduct. Head short and broad, the anterior and 
posterior margins of crown parallel; ocelli on very broadly rounded 
margin between crown and face, about midway between inner eye 
margins and median line of head. Pronotum slightly wider than head 
including eyes; lateral margins slightly divergent posteriorly. Face in 
profile with contour strongly divergent from line of crown. 

Known only from the genotype, from Mexico. 

The relationship of Lareba to other alebrine genera is not clear. 
Among the broad-headed forms with a sclerotized connective, it is 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



181 



distinct from Balera and Brunerella in its elongate styles, possession of 
pygof er processes and the venation of the f orewings ; and from Balera 
additionally in its possession of discal macrosetae on the pygof er. The 
bifurcate aedeagus in Lareba also differs from the genera mentioned 
above, and is very similar to that found in Diceratalebra but this 
feature is believed to be polyphyletic. 

Lareba variata (Ruppel and DeLong), new combination 

Figure 15 
Protalebra variata Ruppel and DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 53, p. 226, 1953. 

Length of male 3.5 mm. Crown with anterior margin broadly 
rounded, with median length approximately two-thirds interocular 
width and less than half length of pronotum. Pygof er process sickle- 
shaped, the two processes widely separated apically in ventral aspect. 
Styles half length of male plates, gradually tapered, slightly decurved 




Figure 15. — Lareba variata: a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral aspect; c, pygofer process, 
ventral aspect (midline broken); d, apex of forewing; <?, aedeagus, lateral aspect;/, style 
and connective, dorsal aspect. 



and acute apically. Aedeagus with preatrium and dorsal apodeme 
subequal in length; shaft with ventral ramus very short. Sternal 
apodemes broad, short, not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown ivory with a pan of distinct black spots on anterior portion 
of disc. Pronotum with anterior two-thirds yellow suffused with 
orange; posterior third ivory. Scutellum and ground color of fore- 
wings yellow, a spot across claval suture near base, a transverse trans- 
commissural vitta bordered with black anteriorly, crossing midclavus 



182 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

and extending through brachial cell and into cell M in each wing, a 
small spot at midlength of clavus, apices of cells R and M, outer apical 
cell and bases of first, second, and third apical cells hyaline; an oblique 
stripe extending from just behind midcosta to claval apex, thence 
bordering basal veins of inner three apical cells, and apices of inner 
three apical cells, smoky. Face and venter pale. 

The holotype, a male from Cutzamala, Guerrero, Mexico, has been 
examined from the DeLong collection. The species is known only from 
Guerrero. 

Lawsonellus, new genus 

Figure 16 

Type of the genus, Dikraneura attenuata O shorn. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein distinct at apex but forming a 
part of apical wing margin to apex of vein M 1+2 ; posterior branch of 
vein R, entire apically; vein Cu 2 confluent with submarginal vein at 
point considerably proximad of vein m-cu. Forewing with appendix 
not extending around apex which is smoothly rounded; inner apical 
cell broadened gradually towards apex; second apical cell short, less 
than half length of inner apical cell, parallel-sided; third apical cell 
sessile; outer apical cell longer than broad, not attaining apical wing 
margin, its base distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell. Male 
plates elongate, triangular, attaining posterior pygofer margin, each 
with a single row of macrosetae extending from near base almost to 
apex. Pygofer very strongly produced; macrosetae numerous and 
irregularly arranged; pygofer processes absent. Ninth tergum with 
an elongate membranous area along middorsum. Anal processes 
absent. Style short, without preapical lobe. Connective T-shaped, 
the unpaired portion directed cephalad. Aedeagus with preatrium 
greatly elongate, longer than shaft; dorsal apodeme simple, short, 
strap-like; shaft bisinuate, broader at base, with an elongate unpaired 
aciculate ventral process appearing as a continuation of the long 
preatrium. Head strongly produced; ocelli on rounded margin be- 
tween crown and face, closer to inner margins of eyes than to median 
line of head. Pronotum wider than head including e} T es; lateral 
margins slightly divergent posteriorly. Face flat in profile. 

Known only from the genotype, from Bolivia. This genus is 
dedicated to the late Dean Paul B. Lawson of Kansas University, who 
contributed much to our knowledge of Homoptera through both his 
own efforts and his encouragement of his associates. 

In 1952 (loc. cit.), with poor material at hand, I placed this species 
in Elabra because the form of the head and the venation of the fore- 
wings were similar to other species of that genus. Subsequent study 
of a perfect male from the Stettin Natural History Museum reveals 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



183 



so many differences — the bizarre aedeagus, the T-shaped connective, 
the shorter male plates relative to the pygofer, the absence of pygofer 
processes — that it is deemed advisable to erect a separate genus for 
the above species. The unpaired ventral aedeagal process suggests a 
relationship with Habralebra, but in other characters the species of 
that genus are quite distinct. 

Lawsonellus attenuutus (Osborn), new combination 

Figure 16 

Dikraneura attenuata Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 269, 1928. 

Dikraneura albidula Osborn, op. cit., p. 271. 

Elabra attenuata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 35, 1952. 

Length of male 3.7 mm. Crown with median length more than 
twice interocular width, and slightly greater than median length of 
pronotum. Male genitalia as in generic description. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes short, not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown, pronotum, and scutellum ivory, with a broad median 
sordid yellow vitta on crown expanded posteriorly and continuing over 
pronotum to its hind margin, the lateral margins suffused with orange 
on the pronotum. Forewings yellowish translucent with a poorly 
delimited deeper yellow tint along commissure to claval apex in each 




Figure 16. — -Lawsonellus attenuatus: a, anterior dorsum (type); b, pygofer, lateral aspect 
(type); c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, apex of forewing; e, apical portion of style, lateral 
aspect. 



wing and a similar marking in corium parallel to costal margin from 
base to midlength of wing; second apical cell with a yellow cloud in 
base. Face and venter pale. 

Known only from the type, the type of the synonym, both in Car- 



184 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

negie Museum, and a male specimen in the Stettin Natural History 
Museum, all from Bolivia. 

Genus Habralehra Young 

Figures 17-20 

Habralehra Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 33, 1952 (type Protalebra 
nicaraguensis Baker by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein almost or completely confluent 
with apical wing margin to apex of vein M l+2 ; posterior branch of vein 
R nearly always evanescent apically; vein Cu 2 confluent with sub- 
marginal vein at point considerably proximad of vein m-cu. Fore- 
wing with appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly 
rounded; inner apical cell almost parallel -sided; second apical cell less 
than two-thirds length of inner apical cell (exception : H. bifasciatella, 
new species); third apical cell sessile; outer apical cell triangular, its 
base opposite to or very slightly basad of base of third apical cell. Male 
plates elongate-triangular, attaining or slightly exceeding posterior 
pygofer margin, each narrowed in apical half with longitudinal row 
of macrosetae on middle half, apex lobate and turned dorsad. P3 r gofer 
with posterior margin produced or rounded, disc with single vertical 
row of macrosetae; a process usually arising near conjunctiva dorsally. 
extending ventrad; ventral margin rolled mesad and often giving rise 
to a process which is directed caudad. Ninth tergum with a trans- 
verse bar-like or triangular tergite which is almost always delimited 
laterally by a line of flection. Anal processes present or absent. 
Style with or without preapical lobe. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme 
usually well developed, Y- or T-shaped; atrium giving rise to large 
ventral unpaired atrial process (absent in bifasciata (Gillette)) that is 
usually thicker (exceptions: willinki, new species, and terminalis 
(Osborn)) than apical half of long tapering shaft. Head produced 
with apex rounded; crown with median length exceeding interocular 
width; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face, about equi- 
distant from inner eye margins and median line of head. Pronotum 
longer than crown, wider than head including eyes, lateral margins 
strongly divergent posteriorly. Face slightly convex in lateral as- 
pect. Color pale, with golden reflections, usually with black or 
orange markings. 

Distribution: West Indies, Central America, and South America. 

The relationship of Habralehra to the other alebrine genera is prob- 
lematical. Considering H. alliodorae (Caldwell and Martorell) alone, 
the almost bifurcate aedeagal shaft, the chaetotaxy of the pygofer, 
the form of the ventral pygofer processes, and the absence of a pre- 
apical lobe in the style, are suggestive of Dicer atalebra, but alliodorae 
is undoubtedly much more closely related to the other species of 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 185 

Habralebra included here. These stand as a group well apart from 
all other genera in the characteristic venation of the forewings, form 
of the aedeagus, bright golden color marked with black or orange, and 
apart from Diceratalebra particularly in the additional characters of 
the dorsal aedeagal apodeme (not elongate, as in Diceratalebra) and 
the tubular form of the aedeagal shaft, which is laterally compressed 
in Diceratalebra. 

The holotype of Protalebra transversalis Baker (Invertebrata 
Pacifica, vol. 1, p. 6, 1903), a female, has been examined and it appears 
to belong in this genus. Males are needed from the type locality, 
Acapulco, Mexico, to establish its identity. 

Key to species of Habralebra 

1. Aedeagus with unpaired ventral process wanting . . . bifasciata (Gillette) 
Aedeagus with unpaired ventral process present 2 

2. Aedeagal process less than half length of shaft 3 

Aedeagal process more than half length of shaft 4 

3. Aedeagal process vestigial, occurring as a minute tooth; py gofer process in 

lateral aspect exceeding posterior py gofer margin; style with apical ex- 
tension weakly curved terminalis (Osborn) 

Aedeagal process pronounced; py gofer process in lateral aspect not attaining 
posterior py gofer margin; style with apical extension strongly curved. 

trimacalata (Gillette) 

4. Aedeagus with unpaired ventral process elongate-setiform, narrower than 

shaft measured at midiength willinki, new species 

Aedeagus with unpaired ventral process long or short, not setiform, broader 
than shaft measured at midiength 5 

5. Aedeagal shaft in ventral aspect with apical portion appearing cruciate. 

cruciata, new species 
Aedeagal shaft not so 6 

6. Pygofer without ventral processes 7 

Pygofer with distinct ventral processes 9 

7. Style with apical extension broadly expanded at apex 8 

Style with apical extension not expanded at apex. 

bifasciatella, new species 

8. Aedeagus with preatrium elongate; ventral aedeagal process with width at 

midiength distinctly less than twice width of shaft in lateral aspect, long, 

slender and gradually tapering gillettei, new species 

Aedeagus with preatrium wanting; ventral aedeagal process with width at 
midiength distinctly greater than twice width of shaft in lateral aspect, 
short, broad, abruptly tapered at apex williamsi, new species 

9. Pygofer with ventral process exceeding posterior pygofer margin, decurved. 

alliodorae (Caldwell and Martorell) 
Pygofer with ventral process not attaining posterior pygofer margin, not 

decurved 10 

10. Style with apical extension gradually tapered at apex; pygofer process elongate 
in lateral aspect; dorsal aedeagal apodeme Y-shaped with very short 
arms 11 



186 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 307 

Style with apical extension abruptly rounded at apex; py gofer process very 
short in lateral aspect; dorsal aedeagal apodeme Y-shaped with very long 

arms amoena (Baker) 

11. Aedeagus with shaft gently curved; connective trapezoidal; ventral pygofer 
process doubly right-angled in ventral aspect . . panamensis, new species 

Aedeagus with shaft straight; connective Y-shaped; ventral pygofer process 
more smoothly curved in ventral aspect nicaraguensis (Baker) 

Habralebra nicaraguensis (Baker) 

Figure 17, a-f 

Protalebra nicaraguensis Baker, Invertebrata Pacifica, vol. 1, p. 6, 1903. 
Habralebra nicaraguensis; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 34. 1952. 

Length of male 3.1 mm. Crown with median length slightly 
more than one-third greater than interocular width and three-fourths 
median length of pronotum. Male pygofer with posterodorsal margin 
produced posteriorly and rounded apically; ventral pygofer process 
in lateral aspect extending caudodorsad, not attaining pygofer margin, 
gradually tapered from base to apex; in ventral aspect the two ventral 
processes subparallel, each process with a lateral anteapical lobe and 
a slender curved tapering apical portion; dorsal pygofer margin 
thickened and giving off a slender differentially sclerotized integu- 
mental bar directed anteroventrad to middle of pygofer disc. Ninth 
tergum with a distinct narrow transverse tergite. Anal processes 
absent. Style without distinct preapical lobe, slightly broadened at 
midlength. Connective Y-shaped. Aedeagus with preatrium dis- 
tinct; dorsal apodeme well developed, Y-shaped, the arms short and 
broad; atrium giving off an unpaired broad falcate process conspic- 
uously thicker than apical half of shaft, extending dorsad almost as 
far as shaft; shaft straight. Sternal abdominal apodemes not tra- 
versing one conjunctiva. 

Crown and pronotum ivory suffused with yellow. Scutellum 
brown, a pair of longitudinal lines before transverse sulcus, and the 
anteapical portion, black; apex and two anteapical marginal spots 
ivory. Forewing yellowish translucent with a smoky longitudinal 
vitta along commissure in basal half of clavus, the marking expanded 
laterally towards claval suture at apex; apex of clavus and of adjoining 
brachial cell, basal half of inner apical cell and base of second apical 
cell smoky, forming an hourglass-shaped pattern on the wings in 
repose; wing apices smoky. Face and venter pale yellow. 

The holotype, a female from San Marcos, Nicaragua, is in the 
Pomona College collection. The above description is based on a 
male specimen, from Mexico, in the collection of D. M. DeLong. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 187 

Habralebra panamensis, new species 

Figure 17, g-j 

Length of male 3.0-3.1 mm., of female 3.2 mm. Proportions of 
head and pronotum as in H. nicaraguensis (Baker). Female seventh 
sternum with caudolateral angles broadly rounded, posterior margin 
transverse; pygofer heavily setose with all of setae pale. Male 
pygofer with posterior margin slightly produced dorsally and sub- 
truncate; ventral pygofer process much as in nicaraguensis in lateral 
aspect; in ventral aspect curved abruptly mesad, then abruptly 
caudad, each curve through 90°; dorsal thickening of pygofer wall 
as in nicaraguensis but with the ventral portion digitiform, not 
acute apicaily. Ninth tergite as in nicaraguensis. Anal processes 
submembranous. Style as in nicaraguensis but with apex more 
rounded. Connective trapezoidal. Aedeagus as in nicaraguensis, 
but with shaft gently curved caudad throughout its length and 
exceeding the unpaired ventral process in length. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. 

Color variable. Crown and pronotum ivory suffused with 
orange. Scutellum varying from orange marked with black (type) 
as in nicaraguensis, to orange yellow with an anteapical dark spot, or 
pale yellow with basal angles gray (allotype). Forewings varying 
from the design in nicaraguensis but with the transcommissural 
claval marking hourglass-shaped and deeper hued than the more 
posterior similarly shaped marking (type) to a design where the more 
anterior transcommissural marking is orange except a black apical 
portion, or (allotype) a design in which the anterior marking is 
reduced to a dark spot in base of corium and a narrow transverse 
line at midclavus. Face and venter pale yellow. 

Holotype male, allotype female, and one male paratype from 
Mindi Dairy, Panama Canal Zone, Dec. 3, 1951 (F. S. Blanton) 
are in U. S. National Museum (No. 62677). 

H. panamensis is very closely related to nicaraguensis from which 
it may be most readily distinguished by the characters in the key, 
above. 

Habralebra williamsi, new species 

Figure 17, k-n 

Length of male 3.8 mm. Crown with median length about one- 
fourth greater than interocular width and two-thirds median length 
of pronotum. Male pygofer with posterior margin subtruncate, 
posterodorsal and postero ventral margins rounded; ventral pygofer 
process bisinuate, in ventral aspect with basal portion longer and 



188 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



vol. ior 



directed caudad, apical portion directed mesad thence caudad; with 
one dorsal pygofer process as in panamensis, and a second process 
consisting of a barlike integumental thickening extending from near 
base caudoventrad to middle of disc. Ninth tergite as in nicaraguensis 
Anal process very short, truncate apically. Style with distinct 




Figure 17. — Habralebra. a-f, H. nicaraguensis: a, anterior dorsum; b, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect; c, apex of forewing; d, style and connective, dorsal aspect; e, pygofer, lateral 
aspect;/, pygofer process, ventral aspect, g-j, 11. panamensis: g, pygofer, lateral aspect; 
h, pygofer process, ventral aspect; i, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, style and connective, 
dorsal aspect; k-n, H. williamsi (type): k, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; m, pygofer process, ventral aspect; n, style and connective, dorsal aspect. (In 
f, h, and m the broken lines represent the midventral line of the specimen.) 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 189 

preapical lobe and with apical extension strongly expanded apically, 
the apical margin obliquely truncate. Connective short Y-shaped, 
the unpaired portion broad. Aedeagus similar to that of panamensis, 
but with ventral process broader and longer. 

Crown and pronotum dull orange, the latter with a pale spot along 
each anterolateral margin. Scutellum black except dull yellow basal 
angles and anteapical short transverse vitta, extreme apex ivory. 
Forewings golden Iryaline, each with a broad transverse marking 
across midlength of clavus from claval suture to commissure and a 
conspicuous dot near base of corium, black; a broad marking along 
each commissure from claval apex to base of second apical cell, forming 
with its counterpart on opposite wing an hourglass-shaped dark smoky 
pattern; apical cells pale smoky except a narrow paler area separating 
the apical area from the darker area more cephalad. Face dull gray 
except a paler median vitta, remainder of venter pale. 

Holotype male, Tena, Ecuador, Mar. 29, 1923 (F. X. Williams), 
in collection of the Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association. 

From panamensis and nicaraguensis to which it is closely related, 
williamsi is readily distinguished by its expanded style apex and 
externally by the conspicuous black dot in the base of the corium 
of the forewing. The dot is very small in panamensis, absent in 
nicaraguensis. 

Habralebra alliodorae (Caldwell and Martorell), new combination 

Figure 18, a-d 

Protalebra alliodorae Caldwell and Martorell, Journ. Agr. Univ. Puerto Rico, 
vol 35, p. 88, 1952. 

Length of male 2.9 mm. Crown with median length one-third 
greater than interocular width and four-fifths median length of 
pronotum. Female seventh sternum with lateral angles rounded, 
posterior margin transverse, slightly emarginate at middle; pygofer 
with few elongate pale macrosetae. Male pygofer in lateral aspect 
with posterior margin broadly rounded; ventral pygofer process 
strongly arched, the apex directed caudoventrad, exceeding posterior 
pygofer margin, in ventral aspect smoothly curved mesad then caudo- 
laterad; with an additional barlike integumental thickening arising 
on disc near base extending caudoventrad beyond middle of disc. 
Ninth tergum with a distinct triangular tergite delimited by lines of 
flection. Anal processes absent. Style slender, gradually tapered, 
without a distinct preapical lobe, apex acute and slightly decurved. 
Connective a transverse bar. Aedeagus with preatrium distinct, 
dorsal apodeme elongate, T-shaped; shaft broad in basal half, apical 
half much narrower, arcuate, curving gradually caudad, with ventral 
process short, cultrate, curved strongly towards shaft. 



190 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Crown and pronotum dull gray, forewings hyaline with two trans- 
verse dark bands, the more anterior including the scutellum and basal 
third of the clavus, the more posterior in breadth extending from apex 
of clavus to midlength of inner apical cell, extending laterad, narrow- 
ing rapidly on anterior margin from middle of cell M to very narrow 
extremity on costal margin. Venter entirely pale. 




Figure 18. — Habralebra. a-d, II. alliodorae: a, pygofer, lateral aspect; b, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect; c, pygofer process, ventral aspect; d, style and connective, dorsal aspect, e-h, H. 
amoena (type): e, pygofer, lateral aspect;/, pygofer process, ventral aspect; g, aedeagus, 
lateral aspect; h, style and connective, dorsal aspect, i-m, II. bijasciatella (type): i, 
aedeagus, lateral aspect; ;', pygofer, lateral aspect; k, anterior dorsum; /, style and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect; m, style apex, lateral aspect. (In figures c and / the midventral 
line is broken.) 



LEAmOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 191 

The holotype, a male from Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico, is in the U. S. 
National Museum. A specimen has also been examined from 
Cayamas, Cuba. 

From the foregoing three species, to which it is closely related, 
alliodorae may be easily separated by its longer ventral pygofer 
process, and its very distinct aedeagus which differs in that the shaft 
and the unpaired ventral process are fused through approximately 
half the length of the former. 

Habralebra amoena (Baker) 

Figure 18,e-/i 

Protalebra amoena Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 404, 1899. 

Habralebra amoena; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 34, 1952. 

Length of male 3.5 mm. Crown with median length one-third 
greater than interocular width and three-fourths median length of 
pronotum. Male pygofer broadly rounded apically; ventral pygofer 
process short, not attaining posterior pygofer margin, with an apical 
beak directed caudad, other pygofer processes as in H. williamsi 
Young. Ninth tergite as in H. nicaraguensis (Baker). Anal processes 
absent. Style elongate with distinct preapical lobe, apical extension 
rounded at tip. Connective Y-shaped, the unpaired portion short. 
Aedeagus with preatrium absent; dorsal apodeme elongate Y-shaped; 
shaft abruptly narrowed on posterior margin near base, apical two- 
thirds slender, directed dorsad and very slightly caudad; unpaired 
ventral process stout, crescentiform, not attaining apex of shaft. 
Sternal abdominal apodemes very short, not traversing one con- 
junctiva. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum golden yellow, crown with 
discal area washed pale orange, pronotum with discal area bright 
orange. Ground color of scutellum ivory, the basal angles buff, a 
narrow anteapical transverse band black. Forewing hyaline, a small 
black dot in corium near base, an irregular vitta adjoining commissure 
in basal half of clavus, orange; an indistinct vitta in brachial cell 
extending abruptly mesad through apical half of clavus to commissure, 
pale orange ; an inverted C-shaped mark beginning at apex of brachial 
cell, extending along commissure in basal half of inner apical cell, 
then laterad into base of second apical cell, smoky ; apical portions of 
first and second apical cells broadly smoky. Venter completely pale, 
the face and pleural portion of pronotum ivory. 

This species is known only from the type, a male, from Chapada, 
Brazil, in the U. S. National Museum. 

The style apex, with its preapical lobe and apical extension not 
broadened at apex, and the aedeagal shaft, narrowed on the posterior 
margin near base, will serve to separate amoena from the foregoing 
species of Habralebra. 

422758 — 57 5 



192 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Habralebra bifasciatella, new species 

Figure lS,i-m 

Length of male 2.7 mm. Crown with medium length one-sixth 
greater than interocular width and two-thirds median length of 
pronotum. Forewing with second apical cell measured along inner 
margin more than two-thirds length of inner apical cell measured 
along its outer margin. Male pygofer with posterior margin strongly 
produced in a triangular lobe; ventral pygofer processes absent; 
disc with very few macrosetae in vertical row; dorsal margin giving 
off a slightly curved digitate process on each side, each process extend- 
ing caudoventrad slightly beyond middle of disc and free from 
pygofer wall in cephalic aspect; a short aciculate diagonal process 
consisting of thickened integument near center of disc. Ninth 
tergite as in H. nicaraguensis (Baker) . Anal process distinct, slender, 
acute apically, not attaining middle of pygofer disc. Style slender, 
elongate, with small preapical lobe and short decurved apical exten- 
sion. Connective semi-ovate. Aedeagus with preatrium wanting; 
dorsal apodeme transverse; shaft gradually tapered, regularly arched, 
the apex curved ventrad; ventral unpaired process digitiform, exceed- 
ing shaft in length, rugose anteapically. Sternal abdominal apodemes 
not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown dull yellow. Pronotum golden. Scutellum fumose with a 
small median basal yellow spot, the area on each side of the transverse 
sulcus and extreme apex, dull yellow. Forewing golden translucent 
with a broad smoky band across basal third of clavus extending into 
corium, and a broad, slightly paler band across appendix and bases 
of apical cells, becoming narrower at costal margin. Face and venter 
stramineous. 

Holotype male, Mojinga Swamp, near Fort Sherman, Panama Canal 
Zone (F. S. Blanton), in U. S. National Museum (No. 62678). 

From the preceding species of Habralebra, bifasciatella is easily 
distinguished by its lack of a ventral pygofer process. 

Habralebra willinki, new species 

Figure 19,a-e 

Length of male 3.3 mm. Crown with median length almost 
one-third greater than interocular width and two-thirds median 
length of pronotum. Female seventh sternum more than twice 
length of sixth, with lateral margins produced and rounded to hind 
margin which appears as a shallow emargination ; pygofer heavily 
setose on posterior two-thirds, with all of setae pale. Male pygofer 
with posterior margin slightly produced at midlength, the apex 
rounded; ventral pygofer process short, slightly sinuous, extending 
caudomesad, not attaining midventral line; dorsal pygofer process 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 193 

and ninth tergite as in H. nicaraguensis (Baker) . Anal process slender, 
truncate apically, not reaching middle of disc of pygofer. Style with 
distinct preapical lobe, apical extension not strongly broadened at 
apex, decurved, with a small preapical tooth on dorsal face. Con- 
nective triangular. Aedeagus with preatrium wanting; dorsal 
apodeme well developed with an anteroventrad-directed lobe and a 
pair of short lobes directed dorsad; shaft elongate, broader on basal 
portion, narrower and slightly arched caudodorsad in apical half; 
ventral process slender, aciculate, much shorter than shaft. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum golden yellow, the antero- 
lateral portions of pronotum paler. Scutellum with ground color 
ivory, basal angles golden, margined internally with dark, a preapical 
transverse marking black. Forewings transparent with golden 
reflections, a transverse vitta across commissure in basal third of 
clavus, evanescent anteriorly, becoming darker posteriorly, not 
attaining claval suture of either wing; inner anteapical portions of 
wings with dark margins in form of hourglass, apical cells faintly 
fumose. Venter entirely pale. 

Holotyle male, Ledesma, Jujuy Province, Argentina, Feb. 10, 1950 
(A. Willink and F. Monrds), in collection of Miguel Lillo Foundation, 
Tucuman, Argentina. 

A female specimen from Nova Teutonia, Brazil, is in the Snow 
Entomological Collections, University of Kansas. 

This species differs from all others in the genus in the slender 
setiform unpaired ventral process of the aedeagus. 

Habralebra trimaculata (Gillette) 

Figure 19, g-i 

Alebra trimaculata Gillette, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 20, p. 712, 1898. 
Habralebra trimaculata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 34, 1952. 

Length of female 3.5 mm. Crown with median length one-third 
greater than interocular width, and two-thirds median length of 
pronotum. Female seventh sternum very large, more than three 
times length of sixth sternum, posterolateral portions broadly rounded, 
posterior margin gradually and very slightly produced and rounded at 
middle; pygofer with numerous irregularly arranged pale macrosetae 
over apical two-thirds. Male pygofer in lateral aspect with ventral 
pygofer process short, having pronounced lateral lobe, apical portion 
slender, curved gradually posterolaterad, acute apically; with dorsal 
and oblique discal processes as in H. williamsi Young. Ninth tergite 
as in H. nicaraguensis (Baker). Anal processes arcuate, acute apical- 
ly, not attaining middle of pygofer disc. Style elongate, with distinct 
preapical lobe and apical extension curved laterad, apex quadrate. 



194 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Connective triangular. Aedeagus with preatrium distinct; dorsal 
apod erne Y-shaped, the unpaired portion elongate; ventral process 
short, broad, not half length of shaft which is broader in basal half, 
slender, and slightly arched posterodorsad in apical half. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown, pronotum, and scutellum golden yellow tinged with ivory. 
Forewing transparent with golden reflections at base, along claval 
suture and along basal portion of costal margin; a commissural spot 
at apex of basal third of clavus and an oval one at apex of clavus, 
extending into brachial cell, black, a transverse spot through inner 
apical cell at midlength, extending into basal portion of second apical 
cell, smoky. Venter entirely pale except dark tarsal claws. 

This species is known only from the type, a female, from Chapada, 
Brazil, in the U. S. National Museum, and a male from Ledesma, 
Jujuy Province, Argentina, in the collection of the Miguel Lillo 
Foundation, Tucuman, Argentina. It is not certain that the sexes 
are correctly associated, but the male agrees with the type in almost 
every detail. 

The distinct but short unpaired aedeagal process, less than half the 
length of the shaft, will separate trimaculata from other species of 
Habralebra. 

Habralebra terminalis (Osborn) 

Figuee 19,j-n 
Alebra terminalis Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 15, p. 451, 1924. 

Length of male 3.6 mm. Crown with median length subequal to 
interocular width, and one-half median length of pronotum. Male 
pygofer with ventral portion of posterior margin produced and 
rounded; ventral pygofer process acute apically, exceeding posterior 
pygofer margin, arched in ventral aspect, the two processes appearing 
like reversed parentheses. Style not greatly exceeding connective in 
length, with preapical lobe distinct. Connective large, Y-shaped 
with unpaired portion very short. Aedeagus with preatrium short, 
dorsal apodeme small, shaft smoothly curved caudad, gradually 
tapered, with a minute denticle near its base on ventral surface. 
Sternal abdominal apodemes short, not exceeding two conjunctivae. 

Ground color of crown yellowish ivory, a pair of discal spots deeper 
yellow. Pronotum golden with three submarginal oval ivory spots 
near anterior margin. Scutellum golden yellow with basal angles 
dull yellow and transverse sulcus broadly bordered behind with ivory. 
Forewing hyaline with indefinite yellow suffusions outlining paler 
areas from wing base to claval apex; apical portions of first and second 
apical cells, and base of second apical cell, smoky. Face and venter 
dull yellow. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



195 




Figure 19. — Habralebra. a-e, H. willinki: a, pygofer, lateral aspect (broken line is anal 
process); b, pygofer process, ventral aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, style apex, 
lateral aspect; e, style and connective, ventral aspect, g-i, H. trimaculata: g, pygofer, 
lateral aspect (broken line is anal process); h, aedeagus, lateral aspect; i, style and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect. /— », H. terminalis (type):/, pygofer, lateral aspect; k, left side 
of pygofer, ventral aspect; /, style and connective, dorsal aspect; m, style apex, lateral 
aspect; n, aedeagus, lateral aspect, o-r, H. bifasciata (type): o, pygofer, lateral aspect 
(broken line is anal process); p, pygofer process, ventral aspect; q, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect; r, style and connective, dorsal aspect. (In b, k, and p the midline of the specimen 
is represented by a broken line.) 



196 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Known only from the type, a male from Bolivia, in the Carnegie 
Museum. 

This species, in the vestigial toothlike unpaired ventral aedeagal 
process, differs drastically from other species of Habralebra. 

Habralebra bifasciata (Gillette) 

Figure 19, o-r 

Alebra bifasciata Gillette, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 20, p. 711, 1898. 
Habralebra bifasciata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 34, 1953. 

Length of male 3.3 mm., of female 3.5 mm. Crown with median 
length approximately one-sixth greater than interocular width and 
about three-fourths median length of pronotum. Female seventh 
sternum more than twice length of sixth, hind margin produced and 
broadly rounded; pygofer setae as in H. trimaculata (Gillette). Male 
pygofer in lateral aspect with posterodorsal margin broadly rounded, 
post ero ventral margin forming an almost right-angled lobe; ventral 
pygofer process short, acute apically, the two processes shaped like 
reversed parentheses; dorsal pygofer process extending ventrad past 
middle of pygofer disc; with an anterior oblique barlike process before 
middle of disc. Ninth tergum with triangular tergite. Anal processes 
weak. Style slender andfelongate, without distinct preapical lobe. 
Connective broadly U-shaped. Aedeagus with preatrium elongate, 
dorsal apodeme short, Y-shaped, the arms widespread, shaft slender, 
short, gradually decurved, provided with dispersed minute basally- 
directed projections, ventral process rudimentary, occurring as short, 
broad rounded projection. 

Entirely pale yellow except two broad transverse brownish black 
stripes on dorsum, one across basal portion of forewings and entire 
scutellum, its hind margin traversing clavus at about apex of basal 
third length of latter; the other across anteapical portion of fore- 
wings, over apex of clavus and basal half of inner apical cell, abruptly 
narrowed at costal extremity. 

This species is known only from the male type and a female paratype 
in the U. S. National Museum. Both were collected in Chapada, 
Brazil; the former in April, the latter in August. The other specimens 
in the type series belong to another species. 

The complete absence of an impaired ventral aedeagal process 
serves to set this species apart from others in the genus. 

Habralebra gillettei, new species 

Figuee 20, a-c 
Alebra bifasciata (part.) Gillette, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 20, p. 711, 1898. 

Length of male 3.2-3.5 mm., of female 3.3-3.5 mm. Crown with 
median length slightly greater than interocular width and three- 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



197 



fourths median length of pronotum. Female seventh sternum with 
a broad median keel ending posteriorly in a blunt tooth; lateral 
margins produced posteriorly, each into a distinct rounded lobe; 
pygofer setae as in H. panamensis Young. Male pygofer in lateral 
aspect with posterodorsal portion slightly produced in a short lobe; 
ventral pygofer process wanting; dorsal process extending ventrad 
beyond middle of pygofer disc; disc with a short barlike integumental 




Figure 20. — Habralebra. a-c, H. gillettei (type): a, pygofer, lateral aspect; b, aedeagus, 
lateral aspect; c, style and connective, dorsal aspect, d-h, H. cruciata: d, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; e, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, apex of aedeagus, caudal aspect; g, style and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect; k, style, lateral aspect. (In a and d the broken line represents the 
anal process.) 

thickening. Ninth tergite as in H. nicaraguensis (Baker). Anal 
process as in H. bifasciatella Young. Style short, with distinct 
preapical lobe and with short foot-shaped apical extension that is 
variable apically, either with apical margin broadly convex or shal- 
lowly concave (type). Connective V-shaped. Aedeagus with pre- 
atrium elongate, dorsal apodeme short T-shaped, shaft broad in 



198 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

basal third, slenderly cylindrical in apical two-thirds; unpaired ventral 
process strongly divergent from shaft, expanded basally, gradually 
tapered to acute apex. Sternal abdominal apodemes very short, not 
traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum pale j^ellow to sordid orange. 
Scutellum, except pale yellow to white basal angles and median basal 
spot, black, apex ivory. Forewings translucent lacteus to trans- 
parent, each with basal third of clavus, an adjoining dot on corium 
(occasionally absent), a small spot near costal margin in basal third, and 
a large blotch along commissural margin extending from apex of 
clavus to midlength of inner apical cell and from commissure to base 
of outer cell, black, the apical blotches of the forewings in repose 
shaped like an hourglass. Venter entirely pale, the discal portion 
of the face occasionally slightly darker. 

Holotype male (USNM 62679) from Chapada, Brazil, April, and 
paratype male, same data (both misdetermined paratypes of Alebra 
bifasciata Gillette), in U. S. National Museum; paratype male from 
Campinas, Brazil, in Pomona College collection; numerous male 
paratypes from Kio Caraguata, Mato Grosso, Brazil, March 1952 
(F. Plaumann), in U. S. National Museum and in Snow Entomologi- 
cal Collections; female paratypes from Salta Province, Argentina, 
Jan. 9, 1949 (M. Aczel), and Ledesma, Jujuy Province, Argentina, 
Feb. 10, 1950 (A. WilHnk and F. Monros), and two male paratypes 
from Salta Province, Argentina, Jan. 31, 1950 (K. Golbach) in collec- 
tion of Miguel Lillo Foundation, Tucuman, Argentina; and one male 
paratype from Provincia del Sara, Bolivia, in Stettin Natural History 
Museum. 

This species is closely related to cruciata but differs in the expanded 
apex of the style and the aedeagal shaft which lacks the transverse 
expansion found in cruciata. The more anterior transcommissural 
marking of the forewings is orange in cruciata. 

Habralebra cruciata, new species 

Figure 20, d-h 
Length of male 3.5 mm. Crown with length about one-fourth 
greater than interocular width and about two-thirds median length of 
pronotum. Male pygofer with posterior margin broadly rounded, 
weakly bilobate; ventral and discal processes absent; dorsal process 
as in H. gillettei Young but not attaining middle of disc of pygofer. 
Ninth tergite occurring as a transverse rod, not delimited by a line 
of flection laterally. Anal processes submembranous. Style elon- 
gate, with weak preapical lobe and with apical extension gradually 
curved ventrad, its dorsal surface with a small protuberance near 
midlength; style apex rounded. Connective shallowly U-shaped. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 199 

Aedeagus with preatrium wanting, atrium with lateral margins 
flared cephalolaterad; dorsal apodeme very short T-shaped; shaft 
bisinuous with a pair of auriculiform appendages near midlength, 
the shaft appearing cruciate in caudal aspect; ventral aedeagal process 
as long as shaft, abruptly curved caudad before apex. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes traversing two conjunctivae. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum pale 3^ellow, a broad pink 
spot on disc of pronotum. Scutellum with basal angles dull yellow, 
the intervening area brown, apical half ivory, a transverse anteapical 
stripe and a pair of triangles, one on each side before middle of lateral 
margin, black. Forewings hyaline, a large transcommissural brick- 
red spot across claval bases, its hind margin bordered with black; 
apical cells, except outermost, fumose, the darker area extending 
cephalad into claval apex, apex of brachial cell and adjacent portion 
of cell M; an indistinct streak along basal portion of costal margin 
and a similar area in brachial cell, golden yellow. Venter entirely 
pale. 

Holotype male, Campinas, Brazil, in Pomona College collection. 

Omegalebra, new genus 

Figures 21-23 

T}^pe of the genus, Protalebra vexillifera Baker. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein usually confluent with apical wing 
margin; posterior branch of vein R evanescent apically; vein Cu 2 
confluent with submarginal vein at point much proximad of vein 
m-cu. Forewing with appendix not extending around wing apex 
which is smoothly rounded; inner apical cell broader at base than at 
apex; second apical cell usually parallel-sided, its length measured 
along inner margin two-thirds or more length of inner apical cell 
measured along the common margin; third apical cell stalked; outer 
apical cell longer than broad, not attaining apical wing margin; 
cells R and M with anteapical widths about equal; color including a 
conspicuous omega-shaped marking (exception: lenticula). Female 
seventh sternum greatly produced posteriorly, in length equal to 
or greater than length of exposed portion of ovipositor in those species 
in which female is known; pygofer with numerous well dispersed pale 
macrosetae except near base, a few of these contrasting black in some 
species. Male plates elongate, triangular, at least attaining, usually 
exceeding, posterior pygofer margin, each with a longitudinal row 
of pale macrosetae which either extends full length of plate or occupies 
only the middle half, in some species with some of the setae contrasting 
black. Male pygofer with dispersed macrosetae, not in rows (excep- 
tion: ogloblini); pygofer processes present, their origin variable 
interspecifically but not arising on dorsal pygofer margin. Ninth 



200 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

tergum with a pair of dorsolateral lines of flection. Anal processes 
present or absent. Style with a distinct preapical lobe. Connective 
U-, V-, or Y-shaped, usually extending caudad one-half length of 
shaft or more. Aedeagus variable interspecifically. Head produced, 
triangular, crown with median length equal to or exceeding interocular 
width; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face. Pronotum 
longer than crown, wider than head including eyes, lateral margins 
divergent posteriorly; posterior margin usually bisinuately concave, 
occasionally smoothly concave. 

Distribution: West Indies, Central America, and South America. 

In addition to the species included in the key below, Protalebra 
omega Van Duzee (Bull. Buffalo Soc. Nat. Sci., vol. 8, p. 75, 1907), 
described from females and of which additional females have been 
examined from Jamaica during this study, should be placed here. 

The omega-shaped markings of the fore wings are also found in 
Protalebra and Paralebra. 

Key to species of Omegalebra 

1. Aedeagus with a large ventral process which is forked apically and with a pair 

of processes arising at base of shaft ogloblini, new species. 

Aedeagus without such processes, occasionally with processes arising apically 
or anteapically on shaft 2 

2. Aedeagus strongly arched in lateral aspect 3 

Aedeagus straight or very slightly curved, not strongly arched 4 

3. Male pygofer process arising ventrally, unbranched; pygofer with postero- 

dorsal portion not strongly produced; aedeagal shaft unarmed; length of 
male 3.2-3.3 mm.; anterior portion of omega-shaped marking completely 

bordered with black matogrossana, new species 

Male pygofer process arising dorsally, bifurcate; pygofer with posterodorsal 
portion strongly produced; aedeagal shaft with a few retrorse anteapical 
teeth on dorsal margin; length of male 3.8-3.9 mm.; anterior margin of 
omega-shaped marking with black border interrupted medially. 

barbata, new species 

4. Pygofer process arising ventrally, or apically and with a posteroventral thick- 

ening of pygofer wall; aedeagus with minute processes on shaft 5 

Pygofer processes arising apically and without posteroventral thickening of 
pygofer wall; aedeagus without processes 7 

5. Aedeagal processes anteapical and lateral on shaft; connective thickly U- 

shaped balloui, new species 

Aedeagal process apical, laterally compressed; connective Y-shaped with un- 
paired portion thick 6 

6. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme T-shaped, shaft undulate apically, the dorsal 

and ventral apical processes asymmetrical; posterior border of transverse 

portion of omega-shaped marking not red morrisoni, new species 

Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme laterally compressed; shaft straight, the apical 
processes symmetrical, posterior border of transverse portion of omega- 
shaped marking red blantoni, new species 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 201 

7. Py gofer with process bifurcate; dorsal aedeagal apodeme circular in caudal 

aspect; transverse portion of omega-shaped marking red-bordered posteriorly 

vexillifera (Baker) 
Not with above characters 8 

8. Pygof er process longer, arising as a thickening of posterodorsal pygofer margin ; 

dorsal aedeagal apodeme saddle-shaped in lateral aspect; extreme apex of 

style not notched lenticula (Osborn) 

Pygofer process short, arising apically on the posterior pygofer margin, the 
margin not thickened; dorsal aedeagal apodeme not saddle-shaped in lateral 
aspect; extreme apex of style notched cordiae (Osborn) 

Omegalebra vexillifera (Baker), new combination 

Figure 21,a-h 
Protalebra vexillifera Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 404, 1899. 

Length of male 3.4 mm. Crown with apex sharply rounded; 
median length approximately equal to interocular width. Pronotum 
with median length almost twice median length of crown; posterior 
margin smoothly or sinuately concave. Ocelli about midway between 
inner margins of eyes and median line of head. 

Male plates gradually tapered, extending as far caudad as posterior 
pygofer margin, each with row of macrosetae from near base to apex. 
Pygofer with posterior margin broadly rounded; pygofer process 
arising on posterior pygofer margin, biramous, the ventral branch 
more elongate and extending mesad. Ninth tergite present, bounded 
laterally and apically by lines of flection. Anal processes short, weak, 
expanded apically, not attaining middle of pygofer disc. Style with 
foot-shaped apical extension. Connective Y-shaped, the unpaired 
portion broad, extending caudad more than half length of shank of 
style. Aedeagus with preatrium short, dorsal apodeme semicircular, 
shaft slender, short, nearly straight, without processes. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum ivory, a V-shaped 
marking on anterior portion of pronotum, and a short submarginal 
vitta near and parallel to humeral margin on each side, pale orange; 
a marginal black spot on each side of scutellum and a preapical trans- 
verse stripe, black. Forewing with ground color pale yellowish trans- 
lucent, with a conspicuous omega-shaped lacteus marking crossing 
commissure at scutellar apex on each wing, attaining costal wing 
margin opposite midclavus, thence extending along vein M to its apex 
thence directed laterad and ending in apex of cell R, the transverse 
portion bordered anteriorly with black, posteriorly with crimson; 
veins forming bases of apical cells pale, margined with dull yellow, 
the yellow coloration darkening laterally and becoming fumose and 
filling third apical cell. Face and venter pale except bases of post- 



202 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

tibial spines and some of spines themselves, black. Pleural portion 
of pronotum pink. 

Known from the type series, from Chapada, Brazil, in the U. S. 
National Museum. 

Omegalebra lenticula (Osborn), new combination 

Figure 21 ,i-k 
Protalebra lenticula Osborn, Journ. Dep. Agr. Porto Rico, vol. 13, p. 103, 1929. 

Length of both sexes 2.8-3.1 mm. Crown with apex obtusely 
rounded, median length slightly greater than interocular width. 
Pronotum with median length about one-third greater than median 
length of crown. Ocelli closer to median line than to eyes. Female 
pygofer without contrasting black macrosetae. Male plates exceed- 
ing apex of posterior pygofer margin, each with row of macrosetae 
from near base almost to apex. Male pygofer with ventral half of 
posterior margin produced posteriorly in short weak lobe; pygofer 
process arising along posterodorsal margin, extending ventrad, the 
apical half elongate-triangular, the apex extending ventrad slightly 
beyond ventral pygofer margin; macrosetae in irregular arrangement 
parallel to dorsal and posterior pygofer margin. Ninth tergite 
absent. Anal processes absent. Style short, with short curved 
apical extension which bears a protuberance near its base. Connec- 
tive Y-shaped with unpaired portion short. Aedeagus with preatrium 
short, dorsal apodeme saddle-shaped in lateral aspect, slightly flat- 
tened on dorsal surface; shaft slender, almost straight, without 
processes. Sternal abdominal apodemes not attaining first 
conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum ivory; disc ol 
crown with broad triradiate pale yellow to orange marking, its lateral 
arms attaining inner margins of eyes, its posterior arm attaining 
posterior margin of crown; pronotum with broad U-shaped similarly- 
colored marking extending from anterior margin to posterior half of 
disc, posterolateral angles yellow to orange; scutellum with basal 
angles yellow to ivory, transverse sulcus narrowly, a triangle on each 
lateral margin slightly basad of transverse sulcus and a broad ante- 
apical transverse stripe, black. Forewings with omega-shaped 
marking obsolete, ground color whitish translucent, a transverse 
band, narrow at base of costal plaque, gradually broadened mesally 
and occupying basal third of clavus, fuscous posteriorly, abruptly 
fading anteriorly; apical half of clavus except tip, and adjacent 
corium pale yellow, the intervening claval suture contrastingly 
paler; a diagonal black vitta, interrupted on disc, extending from 
posterior margin of costal plaque caudomesad, becoming gradually 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



203 




Figure 21. — Omegalebra. a-h, 0. vexillifera: a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer process, 
ventral aspect (broken line is midline of specimen); c, pygofer, lateral aspect; d, style 
and connective, ventral aspect; e, style apex, mesal aspect; /, same, caudal aspect; g, 
aedeagus, lateral aspect; h, aedeagus, ventral aspect, i-k, 0. lenticula: i, aedeagus, 
lateral aspect; /, pygofer, lateral aspect; k, style and connective, dorsal aspect, l-p, 
0. cordiae: I, pygofer, lateral aspect; m, pygofer process, ventral aspect (broken line is 
midline of specimen); n, aedeagus, lateral aspect; o anterior dorsum; p, style and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect. 



204 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

broader, to commissure in region of claval apex, thence caudolaterad 
along and outlining paler bases of second, third, and fourth apical 
cells to costal margin, thence gradually fading, extending parallel to 
and near apical wing margin, not attaining inner apical cell; inner 
apical cell weakly fumose in apical half. Ivory to pale yellow beneath, 
the pleural portion of the pronotum marked with orange to a variable 
degree. 

This species is known only from Puerto Rico. The type is in the 
Herbert Osborn collection at the Ohio State University. 

Omegalebra cordiae (Osborn), new combination 

FlGUKE 21, l-p 

Protalebra cordiae Osborn, Journ. Dep. Agr. Porto Rico, vol. 13, p. 102, 1929. 

Length of male 2.8 mm.; of female 2.7-3.0 mm. Crown with apex 
more broadly rounded than in 0. vexillifera (Baker) ; median length 
one-fourth greater than interocular width. Pronotum with median 
length slightly greater than median length of crown. Ocelli about 
midway between inner eye margins and median line. Female seventh 
sternum as long as exposed portion of ovipositor; posterior margin 
angular but with apex truncate; pygofer with all macrosetae pale. 
Male plates exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with row of 
macrosetae in middle half. Male pygofer in lateral aspect with pos- 
terodorsal portion slightly produced; with a posterodorsal submar- 
ginal group of few macrosetae; pygofer process arising near middle of 
hind margin, extending caudad, short, obliquely truncate apically in 
lateral aspect, bifid with short rami in ventral aspect. Ninth tergite 
as in vexillifera. Anal processes absent. Style with distinct preapical 
lobe and boot-shaped apical extension. Connective large, Y-shaped, 
extending caudad more than half length of shank of style. Aedeagus 
with preatrium well developed; dorsal apodeme T-shaped; shaft 
slender, straight, without processes. 

Crown entirely dull yellow or dull yellow with ivory spots at base 
and apex. Pronotum dull yellow or ivory with diffuse yellow discal 
spots, humeral margins faintly pink. Scutellum yellow or ivory with 
a very narrow anteapical transverse black band. Forewings with 
ground color translucent yellow to hyaline, the chief marking a large 
omega-shaped design involving both wings, crossing commissural 
margins in their basal thirds, extending laterad on each wing to costal 
margin near its midlength thence mesocaudad to apex of cell M, 
thence slightly laterad to apex of cell R, contrasting bright yellow or 
lacteus, the transverse portion of the design bordered anteriorly with 
contrasting black, the longitudinal portions similarly bordered later- 
ally, mesally and apically; occasionally with faint additional longi- 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 205 

tudinal dark markings in basal and apical portions of clavus; apical 
half of brachial cell usually with a faint longitudinal dark vitta; 
veins at bases of apical cells black-bordered; apical portions of second, 
third and fourth apical cells darkly ftimose. Face and venter pale 
except dark spots at base of posttibial spines and dark apices of 
posttibiae. Pleural portion of pronotum occasionally faint pink. 
Sternal abdominal apodemes attaining second conjunctiva. 

The type, from Aguirre, Puerto Rico, is in the Ohio State University 
collection. Other specimens have been examined from Ponce and 
Cayey, Puerto Rico, from Vieques Island, and from St. Thomas, 
Virgin Islands. The host plant was reported to be Cordia alliodora 
by Martorell {in Caldwell and Martorell, 1952, p. 93). 

Omegalebra blantoni, new species 

Figuee 22,a-d 

Length of male 2.8-2.9 mm., of female 3.1 mm. Crown with apex 
broadly rounded; median length one-fourth greater than interocular 
width. Pronotum with median length approximately one-half greater 
than median length of crown; posterior margin shallowly, sinuately 
concave. Hind wing with submarginal vein not confluent with wing 
apex. Ocelli closer to eyes than to median line of head. Female 
seventh sternum as long as exposed portion of ovipositor, truncate 
apically ; pygof er with a few macrosetae contrasting black. Male plates 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a row of macrosetae, 
some of which are conspicuous and black, on middle half. Male 
pygofer with posterior margin broadly rounded, disc with few irregu- 
larly arranged macrosetae near dorsal portion of posterior margin; 
pygofer process arising along ventral pygofer margin, curved abruptly 
mesad thence caudomesad at apex, apical portion gradually tapered 
and acute. Ninth tergite absent. Anal processes as in 0. vexillifera 
(Baker). Style as in 0. lenticula (Osborn). Connective thick, 
V-shaped, extending caudad to point opposite midlength of shank of 
style. Aedeagus with preatrium short; dorsal apodeme laterally com- 
pressed; shaft elongate, slender, with laterally compressed flange at 
apex. Sternal abdominal apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum ivory; crown with 
a transverse discal orange or gray marking extending from eye to eye, 
and a pair of gray spots anteriorly; pronotum with a Y- (type) or 
V-shaped dull orange marking on anterior half of disc, humeral 
margins narrowly red; scutellum as in vexillifera. Forewing with 
ground color dull yellow, markings as in vexillifera. Face, venter and 
pleural portion of pronotum as in vexillifera but with antennal bases 
orange. 



206 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Holotype male, Tocumen, Panam& Province, Panama, July 1, 1953 
(F. S. Blanton), in U. S. National Museum (No. 62680), paratypes 
from Fort Clayton, Mojinga Swamp, and Mindi Dairy, Panama 
Canal Zone, and from El Retiro and Rio Hato, Code Province, Panama. 

0. blantoni is similar to balloui, new species, in the form of the 
pygofer and its processes and in the form of the style, and to morrisoni, 
new species, in the last feature and in the form of the aedeagal shaft. 
From balloui, blantoni may be separated by its laterally compressed 
aedeagal apex and distinct aedeagal apodeme; from morrisoni by the 
form of the pygofer processes (see illustrations) and the characters 
mentioned in the key. 

This species is named for its collector, who collected the type series 
and whose extensive collections in Panama have provided material for 
a greater understanding of the Western Hemisphere leafhopper fauna 

Omegalebra balloui, new species 

Figuee 22,e-i 

Length of female 3.3 mm. Female with apex of crown rounded; 
median length approximately one-fifth greater than interocular width. 
Pronotum of female with median length one-half greater than median 
length of crown; posterior margin shallowly, sinuately concave. 
Ocelli as in 0. vexillifera (Baker). Female seventh sternum as long 
as exposed portion of ovipositor, posterior margin strongly produced 
with an apical subquadrate lobe; pygofer without contrasting black 
macrosetae. Male plates gradually tapering, exceeding posterior 
pygofer margin, each with a row of macrosetae on middle half. Male 
pygofer with posterior margin broadly rounded, posterior portion of 
disc with few irregularly arranged macrosetae; pygofer process arising 
along ventral margin, its free portion extending caudomesad from 
middle of posterior pygofer margin, short, slender, acute apically. 
Ninth tergite not differentiated. Anal process weak, almost attaining 
middle of pygofer disc. Style short, with preapical lobe strong, very 
short apical extension. Connective thickly U-shaped, extending 
distad almost as far as style apices. Aedeagus with preatrium dis- 
tinct; dorsal apodeme wanting; shaft elongate, slender, with pair of 
anteapical processes which are rolled ventrad. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. 

Color, based on females: Ground color of crown, pronotum and 
scutellum dull yellow, crown with a faint spot at apex and one on each 
side on anterior margin, pronotum with a submarginal spot at middle 
of anterior margin, a faint longitudinal vitta on each side of disc and 
a transverse submarginal area at middle of posterior margin, dull 
ivory. Scutellum yellowish white, the basal angles yellow, a black 
spot at midlength of each lateral margin. Forewings with ground 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 207 

color yellowish hyaline, the omega-shaped marking lacteus, crossing 
commissure in basal half of clavus, not contiguous with apex of 
scutellum, the transverse portion bordered anteriorly with black, the 
longitudinal portion partially bordered with black on outer and inner 
margins; each wing with cross veins mostly pale, bordered with 
smoky, third apical vein covered by a black mark which extends 
mesad along apical wing margin to inner apical cell. Face and 
venter pale, antennal bases and pleural portion of pronotum yellow, 
a spot at apex of posttibia and at apex of first hind tarsomere, black. 

Holotype female and female paratype, San Pedro de Montes de 
Oca, Costa Rica, January 1937 (C. H. Ballou), in U. S. National 
Museum (No. 62681). The illustrations have been made from a 
topotypic male specimen represented only by wings and abdomen, 
the remainder having been lost from the cardboard point. 

The relationships of this species are discussed under blantoni, 
above. 

Omegalebra morrisoni, new species 

Figure 22J-Z 

Length of male 2.8 mm. Crown with apex sharply rounded; 
median length one-fourth greater than interocular width. Pronotum 
with median length one-third greater than median length of crown; 
posterior margin shallowly sinuately concave. Ocelli nearer to inner 
eye margins than to median line of crown. Male plates gradually 
tapered, exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with row of macro- 
setae on middle half. Pygofer with posterior margin not produced, 
its posterodorsal portion shallowly emarginate; disc with sparse, 
irregularly arranged macrosetae on dorsal portion; pygofer process 
arising on posterior margin, short, stout extending mesad and 
ventrad, acute apically. Ninth tergite absent. Anal processes 
membranous. Style as in 0. blantoni Young. Connective Y-shaped, 
unpaired portion broad. Aedeagus with preatrium distinct, dorsal 
apodeme T-shaped in cephalic aspect, apex expanded as in blantoni 
but not symmetrical as in that species. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum dull ivory; crown 
with a faint bilobed discal transverse orange vitta; pronotal markings 
as in 0. vexillifera (Baker); scutellum with basal angles and an anteapi- 
cal median marking pale yellow, a very narrow transverse anteapical 
stripe, black. Forewings with ground color gray, the apical two-thirds 
of claval suture and the omega-shaped marking hyaline, the latter 
crossing commissure in basal half of clavus, not contiguous to scutel- 
lum, its transverse portion narrowly bordered anteriorly with black 
with a pale orange more anterior border, bordered posteriorly with 
pale yellow, its longitudinal portions bordered with gray except 
for black border at costal margin of wing; cross veins, except black 

422758—57 6 



208 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. ior 

base of outer apical cell, pale, dark-margined, the wing apex black- 
margined from third apical cell to outer margin of apex of first apical 
cell; a fumose area near midlength of first and second apical cells. 

Holot3^pe male, "Duarte, Santo Domingo City, Republic of Domi- 
nica, July 21, 1917" (Harold W. Morrison), in U. S. National Museum 
(No. 62682). 

The relationships of morrisoni are discussed above, under blantoni. 

This species is dedicated to its collector, who has collected many 
leafhoppers in the Caribbean area and who has made major contri- 
butions to homopterous taxonomy. 

Omegalebra oglohlini, new species 

Figuee 22,m-<? 

Length of male 3.5 mm. Similar to 0. vexillijera (Baker) in all gross 
features except anterior margin of crown which is more rounded in 
dorsal aspect. Male plates slightly exceeding posterior pygofer mar- 
gin, each with row of macrosetae over middle half. Pygofer with 
posterodorsal portion produced posteriorly and emarginate at apex, 
with an oblique row of macrosetae on posterior portion of disc and 
two additional submarginal ones near base of dorsal margin; pygofer 
process arising at apex from an elongate horizontal integumental 
thickening over disc, extending caudomesad, short, slightly sinuate, 
gradually tapered. Ninth tergite absent. Anal processes strong, 
cultrate. Anterior margin of ninth tergum with a pair of conspicuous, 
anteriorly directed apodemes. Style with short, decurved apical ex- 
tension. Connective V-shaped with a pair of small apical dorsal 
lobes. Aedeagus with preatrium short, dorsal apodeme trilobate; 
shaft inconspicuous, straight, simple-tubular, extending posterodor- 
sad, with a pair of minute, lateral processes and with a single large 
ventral process which is gradually tapered and curved dorsad to the 
apex which is bifid, the branches approximate. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum ivory, each with a V-shaped 
discal marking, that of crown yellow, of pronotum, orange; pronotum 
with a pair of widely-spaced round spots on posterior half of disc, 
dull yellow, humeral margins pink. Scutellum with ground color dull 
ivory, basal angles dull orange, a median Y-shaped marking gray, a 
spot at midlength of each lateral margin, and apex, black. Forewings 
with ground color gray with a lacteus omega-shaped marking crossing 
commissure distinctly behind apex of scutellum, its lateral and apical 
portions as in vexillijera, the transverse portion bordered sharply with 
black anteriorly, with a narrow triundulate red border posteriorly; 
apical third of clavus pale grayish translucent; a dark gray undulate 
longitudinal marking on each wing forming an inner border to longi- 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



209 




Figure 22. — Omegalebra. a-d, 0. blantoni (type): a, pygofer, lateral aspect; b, pygofer 
process, ventral aspect; c, style and connective, dorsal aspect; d, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 
e- i, 0. balloui: e, style and connective, dorsal aspect;/, pygofer, lateral aspect; g, pygofer 
process, ventral aspect; h, aedeagus, lateral aspect; i, aedeagus, ventral aspect. ;-/, 
0. morris oni: j, aedeagus, lateral aspect; k, pygofer, lateral aspect; /, style and connective, 
dorsal aspect. tn-q y 0. ogloblini: m, pygofer process, ventral aspect; n, aedeagus, caudal 
aspect; o, pygofer, lateral aspect; p, style and connective, dorsal aspect; q, style apex, 
lateral aspect. (In b y g, and m the broken line represents the midline of the specimen.) 



210 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

tudinal portion of the omega-shaped marking, attaining commissure 
just behind claval apex, extending thence caudolaterad along bases of 
apical cells, filling apical portion of third apical cell, thence extending 
submarginally around wing apex and fading, ending in inner apical 
cell, a faint fumose marking in first and second apical cells near their 
midlengths. Face ivory, antennal bases orange; posterior part of 
pleural portion of pronotum pink; posttibiae as in vexillifera. 

Holotype male, Lore to, Misiones Province, Argentina, Dec. 6, 1931, 
(A. A. Ogloblin), in U. S. National Museum (No. 62716); male para- 
type, Santa Catarina, Nova Teutonia, Brazil, Apr. 29, 1950 (F. Plau- 
mann) , in Snow Entomological Collections. 

The bizarre form of the aedeagus and the presence of the dorsal 
apodemes on the anterior margin of the ninth tergum are distinctive 
features. 

The species is named in honor of Mr. Ogloblin, who has collected 
many interesting species in Argentina. 

Omegalebra matogrossana, new species 

Figuee 23,a-d 

Length of male 3.2-3.3 mm. Crown with apex broadly rounded; 
median length equal to interocular width. Pronotum with median 
length more than one-half greater than median length of crown; 
posterior margin shallowly concave. Ocelli closer to inner eye mar- 
gins than to median line of crown. Male plates gradually tapered, 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a row of pale macro- 
setae on middle half. Pygofer with caudoventral margin strongly 
produced at midlength ; disc with few irregularly arranged macrosetae ; 
pygofer process arising ventrally, extending dorsocaudad, exceeding 
posterior pygofer margin, in lateral aspect slightly expanded on ventral 
margin near midlength, gradually tapered in apical half; pygofer wall 
with a diagonal, differentially sclerotized rod extending from antero- 
dorsal portion of disc posteroventrad to pygofer process near its mid- 
length. Ninth tergum with a basal transverse sclerotized rod and a 
pair of lateral membranous lines, roughly delimiting a tergite which is 
not delimited apically. Anal processes short, weak. Style elongate, 
with slight preapical lobe and unmodified apical extension. Connec- 
tive as in 0. vexillifera (Baker) but with unpaired portion narrower. 
Aedeagus with preatrium very short; dorsal apodeme short, T-shaped, 
shaft short, recurved. Sternal abdominal apodemes not traversing 
one conjunctiva. 

Dorsum as in vexillifera, but with posterior portion of omega-shaped 
marking narrowly double-margined medially, singly margined with 
black and with veins forming apical cells margined with black. Face, 
venter and pleural portion of pronotum as in vexillifera. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



211 



Holotype male and 12 male para types, Rio Caraguata, Brazil, 
March 1953 (F. Plaumann), in Snow Entomological Collections and 
five male paratypes, same data, in U. S. National Museum. In addi- 




Figure 23. — Omegalebra. a-d, 0. matogrossana: a, pygofer, lateral aspect (broken line 
represents anal process); b, style and connective, dorsal aspect; c, style apex, lateral 
aspect; d, aedeagus, lateral aspect, e-i, 0. barbata: e, style, lateral aspect and connec- 
tive; /, style, ventral aspect; g, anterior dorsum; k, pygofer, lateral aspect; *, aedeagus, 
lateral aspect. 

tion to the type series, a teneral male from Sao Paulo, Brazil, was ex- 
amined from the U. S. National Museum. 

Omegalebra barbata, new species 

Figure 23, e-i 

Length of male 3.8-3.9 mm., of female 4.0 mm. Crown with apex ob- 
tusely rounded ; median length slightly greater than interocular width. 
Pronotum with median length more than one-half greater than median 
length of crown; posterior margin varying from rectilinear to very 
shallowly concave. Ocelli as in 0. vexillijera (Baker). Female seventh 
sternum with posterior margin greatly attenuate and truncate apically, 
more than three times length of exposed portion of ovipositor; pygofer 



212 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

with a few of the macrosetae contrasting black. Male plates each 
slightly flared apically, exceeding posterior pygofer margin, with row 
of pale macrosetae from near base to apex. Male pygofer greatly 
produced posteriorly, posterior margin rounded; dorsal portion of 
disc with numerous irregularly arranged macrosetae; pygofer process 
arising on posterodorsal pygofer margin, biramous, the ventral ramus 
more elongate and directed ventrad. Ninth tergum consisting of a 
narrow, heavily sclerotized ring dorsally. Anal processes absent. 
Style with preapical lobe present but not pronounced; apex curved 
ventrad. Connective broadly V-shaped, not extending caudad to 
apex of basal half of shank of style. Aedeagus with preatrium elon- 
gate; dorsal apodeme a narrow collar dorsally, expanded latero ventrad 
into an auriculiform process on each side; shaft crescentiform, the 
dorsal margin with several short, retrorse anteapical teeth. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum, and scutellum bright ivory, a 
pair of dots, and a more posterior pair of dashes on disc of crown, a 
Y-shaped discal marking and a submarginal row of dots near anterior 
and lateral margins of pronotum, and basal angles of scutellum yel- 
lowish gray; humeral margins of pronotum pink; apex of scutellum 
black. Forewings with omega-shaped marking as in vexillifera but 
with the transverse portion much more angular, its black anterior 
and red posterior borders consisting of oblique lines on each wing; 
humeral portions of wing gray, the triangular area enclosed by the 
arms of the "omega" tan, and extending caudolaterad along contrast- 
ingly paler bases of apical cells, completely filling the triangular third 
apical cell; outer apical cell and an adjoining submarginal area, lacteus. 
Face, venter and posttibiae as in vexillifera. Apex of female seventh 
sternum black. 

Holotype male, allotype female, and male paratype, Santa Catarina, 
Nova Teutonia, Brazil, May 4, 1950 (F. Plaumann), in Snow Ento- 
mological Collections; paratype male, same data, in U. S. National 
Museum. A specimen from Campinas, Brazil, in the Pomona College 
collection has also been examined. 

Erabla 9 new genus 

Figure 24 

Type of the genus, Protalebra lineola Osborn. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing mar- 
gin; posterior branch of vein E entire, ending in costal margin before 
apex; vein Cu 2 confluent with submarginal vein at point much basad 
of vein m-cu. Fore wing with appendix not extending around wing 
apex which is smoothly rounded; inner apical cell much broader in 
basal third than in remainder of length; second apical cell with length 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



213 



measured along inner margin more than two -thirds length of inner 
apical cell measured along the common margin; second and third 
apical cells triangular and petiolate; outer apical cell not attaining 
apical wing margin, with length exceeding width. Cells R and M 
about equal in length and anteapical width. Male plates triangular, 
in length exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a multiseriate 
group of pale macrosetae in basal half. Pygofer with apical processes 
and a vertical row of anteapical macrosetae. Ninth tergum heavily 




Figure 24. — Erabla lineola (paratype): a, anterior dorsum; b, style and connective, dorsal 
aspect; c, apex of hind wing; d, apex of forewing; <?, right sternal abdominal apodeme, 
ventral aspect; /, aedeagus, lateral aspect; g, pygofer, lateral aspect. 



sclerotized along median line but without a distinct tergite. Anal 
processes absent. Style with distinct preapical lobe. Connective 
transverse. Aedeagus with distinct preatrium, dorsal apodeme and 
ventral unpaired process. Sternal abdominal apodemes short, not 
traversing one conjunctiva. Head slightly produced and rounded 
anteriorly with median length of crown about equal to interocular 
width; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face, equidistant 
from eyes and median line of head. Pronotum wider than head includ- 
ing eyes; lateral margins divergent posteriorly. Face slightly convex 
in lateral aspect, strongly divergent from contour of crown. 
Distribution : Guatemala. 



214 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Erabla lineola (Osborn), new combination 

Figure 24 
Protalebra lineola Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 263, 1928. 

Length of male 2.9 mm. Crown with median length subequal to 
interocular width. Pronotum with median length almost twice me- 
dian length of crown. Male pygofer with posterior margin produced 
and with a deep, curved emargination; with few macrosetae in vertical 
row on upper half of pygofer. Connective in a transverse vertical 
plane. Aedeagus with preatrium broad and flat; dorsal apodeme 
laterally compressed; shaft slender, tubular, elongate, the apex curved 
slightly cephalad, with an aciculate, unpaired basal process extending 
caudad near its origin, sharply curved through 90° and extending 
dorsad beyond apex of shaft. 

Crown, pronotum and scutellum dull yellowish brown, the basal 
angles and median line of scutellum darker. Forewing yellowish 
translucent before apical cells, with a transverse marking, narrow at 
midcostal margin, becoming broader towards commissural margin, 
with three slender oblique vittae extending basad from its anterior 
margins, one in clavus, two in corium, black; apical cells fumose with 
hyaline areoles in outer, and base of inner apical cells, and a transverse 
hyaline anteapical area from third apical cell through appendix. 
Face and venter dull yellow. 

Known only from the type series from Los Amates, Guatemala, in 
the Ohio State University collection. The above description is based 
on a male para type loaned through the kindness of Dr. J. N. Knull 
of that institution. 

Genus Rahela Young 

Figure 25 

Rabela Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 21, 1952 (type Protalebra tabebuiae 
Dozier, by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein obsolete apically ; posterior branch 
of vein R occurring as a short spur; vein Cu 2 confluent with sub- 
marginal vein at point much proximad of vein m-cu. Forewing with 
appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly rounded; veins 
R and M concurrent before inner basal angle of outer apical cell, all 
the apical veins thus arising from cell M; inner apical cell narrower 
basally than at apex; second apical cell parallel-sided; third apical 
cell long-stalked; outer apical cell longer than broad, not attaining 
apical wing margin. Female seventh sternum with posterior margin 
produced posteriorly in a triangular projection which is rounded api- 
cally; pygofer with multiseriate pale macrosetae near ovipositor along 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 215 

posterior two-thirds its length. Male plates elongate triangular, ex- 
ceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with an oblique double row of 
pale macrosetae in basal two-thirds. Male pygofer with posterior 
margin produced posteriorly, with an apical pygofer process, with 
one or few macrosetae along posterodorsal margin. Ninth tergum 
heavily sclerotized along middorsal line but without a tergite. Anal 
processes short and spine-like or absent. Style with preapical lobe 
well developed or not, apex expanded and truncate in broadest aspect. 
Connective Y-shaped, with apex slender or very broad. Aedeagus 
with preatrium distinct; dorsal apodeme bilobed or not; elongate, 
slender, curved strongly cephalad, without processes. Head with 
median length of crown exceeding interocular width ; ocelli on margin 
between crown and face, closer to eyes than to median line of head. 
Pronotum at least one-half longer than crown; broader than head in- 
cluding eyes; lateral margins divergent posteriorly. Face slightly 
convex, its profile strongly divergent from contour of crown. 

Distribution: Florida, West Indies, and South America. 

This genus does not appear to be very closely related to the others 
treated here. The chaetotaxy of the male pygofer and the presence 
of the preapical lobe of the style are suggestive of a relationship to 
Rhabdotalebra Young, but in Rabela the characteristic nearly semi- 
circular form of the aedeagal shaft and the expanded apical portion 
of the style are quite distinctive. 

Key to species of Rabela 

Fore wing with commissure fuscous in basal half of clavus; male with sternal 
apodemes conspicuous and traversing two conjunctivae; aedeagus with dorsal 
apodeme bilobed tabebuiae, (Dozier) 

Fore wing with commissure not dark-margined in basal half of clavus; male with 
sternal apodemes inconspicuous and traversing one conjunctiva; aedeagus with 
a single process extending caudad from dorsal portion of apodeme. 

australis, new species 

Rabela tabebuiae (Dozier) 

Figure 25,a-g 

Protalebra tabebuiae Dozier, Journ. Dep. Agr. Porto Rico, vol. 10, p. 260, 1927- 
Proialebra bicincia Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 259, 1928. 
Rabela tabebuiae; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 22, 1952. 

Length of male 2.7-2.8 mm., of female 2.9-3.0 mm. Head very 
weakly produced, with anterior margin broadly rounded; median 
length about one-third greater than interocular width. Male pygofer 
with a submarginal row of four macrosetae near posterodorsal margin, 
with posteroventral margin produced posteriorly in a short process 
that is directed dorsocaudad, the two processes parallel in caudal 
aspect. Anal processes absent. Style with preapical lobe well 



216 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

developed, with apical extension somewhat expanded and truncate 
at apex in broadest aspect. Connective with length and least width 
of the unpaired portion and arms subequal. Aedeagus with cephalic 
portion of dorsal apodeme giving off a pair of short lobes, each extend- 
ing ventrolaterad ; shaft very long, slender, curved through 180°, 
its apex directed anteroventrad. Sternal abdominal apodemes con- 
spicuous, fused medially, extending caudad across two abdominal 
conjunctivae. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum ivory, a median longitudinal 
vitta extending full length of crown and continued over most of 
pronotum and a pair of broad submarginal vittae, one along each 
lateral pronotal margin, pale orange. Scutellum unmarked yellow. 
Forewing translucent, with yellow reflections in portion from base to 
claval apex, a narrow dark line extending along anal wing margin, 
continuing apicad along commissural margin to midlength of clavus, 
thence abruptly laterad to costal margin, broken at claval suture and 
in corium, a similar transverse black line extending from apex of 
clavus to costal margin through base of outer apical cell; second and 
third apical cells heavily black-bordered. Face and venter pale. 

The type, a male from Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico, is in the U. S. 
National Museum. Other specimens have been examined from 
Miami, Fla.; several Puerto Rico localities; St. Thomas, Virgin 
Islands; and Cayamas, Cuba. 

This species occurs on Tabebuia pallida. 

Rabela australis, new species 

Figure 25, h-l 

Length of male 3.0 mm., of female 3.1 mm. Head more angularly 
produced than in R. tabebuiae (Dozier), the apex rounded; median 
length almost one-third greater than interocular width. Male 
pygofer with a single macroseta near posterodorsal margin in apical 
third, with posterior margin strongly produced near midlength, 
giving off spine-like pygofer process that is directed caudad and 
slightly mesad, the two processes very slightly convergent in ventral 
aspect. Anal processes short, spine-like. Style with preapical lobe 
poorly developed, apex curved laterad, expanded and truncate apically. 
Connective with unpaired portion much broader than either of the 
short arms. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme laterally compressed, 
with a dorsoventrally flattened apical lobe extending caudad, shaft 
crescentiform, shorter than in tabebuiae, not decurved apically, 
gonopore on posterior surface in basal third. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes short, triangular, not fused, extending caudad to point 
slightly beyond one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum dull orange; 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



217 



crown with disc and a pair of anterior lobes dull ivory; pronotum 
bordered narrowly with gray posteriorly, with an interrupted arcuate 
black stripe between gray margin and disc; scutellum with basal 
angles and a broad median longitudinal marking, smoky, a transverse 




Figure 25. — Rabela. a-g, R. tabebuiae: a, anterior dorsum (type); b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, sternal abdominal apodemes (broken lines represent 
conjunctivae); e, apex of hind wing (above) and entire forewing (below);/, style and 
connective, ventral aspect; g, style apex, ventrolateral aspect, h-l, R. australis: h, style 
and connective, dorsal aspect (type); i, anterior dorsum (paratype); ;, pygofer, lateral 
aspect (broken line represents anal process) (type); k, sternal abdominal apodemes 
(broken line represents conjunctiva); /, aedeagus, lateral aspect (type). 



anteapical area black, apex ivory. Forewing with ground color 
greenish brown to claval apex, thence hyaline to wing apex, a bilob- 
ate transverse area in basal half of clavus, a spot at claval midlength , 



218 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

extending laterad through corium and broadening to include costal 
plaque, gray narrowly margined with black; costal cell with black 
irrorations anteapically; apex of brachial cell with a yellow areole; 
second, third and fourth apical veins black; a broad fumose marking 
covering all of appendix but apex, and all of first and second apical 
cells but their bases and apices. Face and venter pale; pleural 
portion of pronotum dull orange to gray; ovipositor black at base 
and apex, pale in most of apical half. 

Holotype male, May 4, 1950; allotype female, May 5, 1950; two 
male paratypes, May 4, 5, 1950, and three female paratypes, May 
5, 1950, from Santa Catarina, Nova Teutonia, Brazil (F. Plaumann), 
in Snow Entomological Collections, and one male paratype, May 5, 
1950, and two female paratypes, May 4, 5, 1950 (other data as in 
holotype), in U. S. National Museum. 

This species can be readily distinguished from tabebuiae by its 
color and the characters mentioned in the key. Its shorter aedeagal 
shaft which is not decurved apically, the much broader style apices 
and the absence of paired apodemal processes on the aedeagus will 
also separate australis from the genotype. 

Genus Elabra Young 

Figures 26, 27 

Elabra Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 35, 1952 (type Protolebra eburneola 
Osborn, by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing 
margin or nearly so; posterior branch of vein R entire apically; vein 
Cu 2 confluent with submarginal vein at point much basad of crossvein 
m-cu. Forewing with appendix not extending around apex which is 
usually smoothly rounded; inner apical cell narrower at base than at 
apex (exception: costaricensis) ; second apical cell usually parallel- 
sided or nearly so, with length less than two-thirds length of inner 
apical cell; third apical cell as long as or longer than second apical cell 



Figure 26. — Elabra. a-c, E. eburneola: a, pygofer, lateral aspect (pygofer process and 
anal process not shown); b, style and connective, dorsal aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 
d-h, E. parana: d, anterior dorsum; e, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, apex of forewing; g, 
style and connective, dorsal aspect; h, pygofer, lateral aspect, i-m, E. parallela: i, 
anterior dorsum; ;, style and connective, dorsal aspect; k, style apex, lateral aspect; /, 
aedeagus, lateral aspect; m, pygofer, lateral aspect, n-q, E. morrisoni (type): n, pygofer, 
lateral aspect; 0, style and connective, dorsal aspect; p, sternal abdominal apodemes 
(broken lines represent conjunctivae); q, aedeagus, lateral aspect, r-s, E. morrisoni 
isthmusi (type): r, style and connective, dorsal aspect; s, aedeagus, lateral aspect. (In 
h. m. and n the broken lines represent the anal process.) 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



219 




Figure 26. — For explanation see facing page. 



220 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

(exception : -parallela) ; outer apical cell with length equal to or greater 
than width; cell M wider apically than cell K. Male plates triangular, 
exceeding posterior py gofer margin, each with an oblique row of 
macrosetae some of which are conspicuously larger and black (excep- 
tion : eburneola) . Pygof er with posterior margin produced or smoothly 
rounded; with irregularly arranged macrosetae on disc, processes 
present or absent. Ninth tergite wanting. Anal processes usually 
present (absent in sarana), their length variable interspecifically. 
Style usually without preapical lobe, with apex slightly decurved. 
Connective usually in form of crossbar but occasionally shallowly 
U-shaped or triangular. Aedeagus with preatrium usually present 
and elongate; dorsal apodeme distinct and bilobed; shaft very slender 
(exception: sarana), with or without processes. Head strongly 
produced, median length of crown at least one-half greater than 
interocular width; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face, 
equidistant from inner eye margins and median line of head or slightly 
closer to inner eye margins. Pronotum wider than head including 
eyes, lateral margins divergent posteriorly. Face strongly divergent 
from contour of crown in profile. Sternal abdominal apodemes 
variable interspecifically. Color pale with various markings. 

Distribution: Puerto Eico, Central America, and South America. 

The relationships of this genus with others are problematical. 
The elongate, sinuous aedeagus in some species is suggestive of certain 
species of Barela, but the more produced head, the short apical cells of 
the forewing and the transverse dorsal aedeagal apodeme set the 
species of Elabra well apart. 

Key to species and subspecies of Elabra 

1. Aedeagus with processes 2 

Aedeagus without processes 7 

2. Aedeagal process occurring on basal half of shaft; length of male 3.0 mm. 

(Brazil) parana (Osborn) 

Aedeagal processes arising on apical half of shaft; length of male 3.2-3.6 mm . 3 

3. Male py gofer with processes arising on posterior margin and extending ventrad; 

aedeagus without preatrium (Bolivia) sarana (Osborn) 

Male py gofer without processes; aedeagus with preatrium elongate 4 

4. Aedeagal processes arising on apical third of shaft (Bolivia). 

eburneola (Osborn) 
Aedeagal processes arising basad of apical third of shaft 5 

5. Aedeagal shaft slender, elongate, bisinuate; length of male 3.6 mm.; forewing 

with third apical cell triangular (Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador). 

parallela (Osborn) 

Aedeagal shaft much shorter, straight; length of male 3.2 mm.; forewing with 

third apical cell sessile morrisoni, new species . . 6 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 221 

6. Male with anal process strongly foot-shaped apically; dorsal portion of py gofer 

differentially sclerotized (British Guiana). . . . morrisoni, new subspecies 

Male with anal process weakly foot-shaped apically ; dorsal portion of pygofer 

not differentially sclerotized (Panama) .... istkmusi, new subspecies 

7. Aedeagal shaft gradually tapered from base to apex; dorsum marked with 

fumose only in base of second apical cell of f orewing (Puerto Rico) . 

aureovittata (DeLong) 

Aedeagal shaft abruptly narrowed in basal half; fumose markings on dorsum 

more extensive (Costa Rica) costaricensis, new species 

Elabra eburneola (Osborn) 

Figuee 26, a-c 

Prolalebra eburneola Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus. vol. 18, p. 257, 1928. 
Elabra eburneola; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 35, 1952. 

Length of male 3 mm. Fore wing with second apical cell less 
than half length of first. Male plates without contrasting black 
macrosetae. Pygofer with posterior margin broadly rounded, disc 
with fairly numerous irregularly arranged macrosetae on dorsal 
portion of posterior half; pygofer process short, acute apically in 
caudal aspect, arising from dorsal portion of caudal margin, directed 
mesad. Anal processes slender, short, weakly sclerotized. Aedeagus 
with preatrium elongate; dorsal apodeme semicircular in cephalic 
aspect; shaft slender and elongate, weakly bisinuate, with a pair of 
short, obliquely divergent acute processes arising at base of apical 
fifth; gonopore terminal. 

Color: "Ivory-white; elytra tinged with fulvous, a little darker 
on the apex, with milky-hyaline spots on the cross-nervure and in 
first and second areoles. Beneath whitish or ivory-white; abdomen 
a little more tinged with yellow, tarsal claws dusky." (Osborn, 
loc. cit.) 

Known only from the type series from Provincia del Sara, Bolivia, 
in Carnegie Museum. 

Elabra parallela (Osborn) 

Figure 2Q,i-m 

Dikraneura parallela Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 274, 1928. 
Elabra parallela; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 35, 1952. 

Length of male 3.6 mm. Forewing with second apical cell less 
than half length of first. Male plates with a few of the macrosetae 
large, contrasting black. Pygofer with posterodorsal margin strongly 
produced, setae as in E. eburneola (Osborn) ; without pygofer processes 
or differentially sclerotized integumental areas. Anal processes 
strong, extending ventrad beyond middle of disc of pygofer. Aedeagus 
with preatrium elongate; dorsal apodeme transverse with a decurved 
lobe on each side; shaft as in eburneola but with the processes arising 



222 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

slightly distad of midlength and truncate apically. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes vestigial. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum sordid yellow, 
a median vitta the length of crown, a pah* of longitudinal vittae the 
full length of pronotum traversing disc, outlines of basal angles of 
scutellum, the lateral margins anteapically and the scutellar apex, 
orange. Forewing translucent yellow, a longitudinal commissural 
vitta occupying inner half of clavus in its basal half, entire clavus 
in apical half except extreme apex, an oblique vitta beginning at 
base of costa and extending to middle corium at midlength of latter, 
a vitta bordering inner margin of cell M apically, a spot including 
base of outer apical cell, and the apical veins, orange; a spot in apex 
of brachial cell, a spot in base of second apical cell and an oblique 
costal vitta opposite claval apex, smoky. Face and venter pale 
yellow; legs pale yellow beneath, suffused with orange above, apical 
hind tarsomere black. 

The t}^pe, a male from Provincia del Sara, Bolivia, is in the Carnegie 
Museum. Males have been examined from Rio Caraguata, Brazil, 
and Tena, Ecuador. Apparently the apex of the shaft of the aedeagus 
of the type is missing. 

From eburneola, to which it is closely related, parallela differs in the 
location of the aedeagal processes which are closer to midlength 
of shaft, the more produced posterior pygofer margin of the male, the 
more strongly produced head, and the presence of conspicuous black 
setae in the row of macrosetae on the male plate. From parana, 
parallela differs in its truncate aedeagal processes and their more 
distal origin on the shaft. 

Elabra parana (Osborn) 

Figure 26,d-A 

Dikraneura parana Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 268, 1928. 
Elabra parana; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 35, 1952. 

Length of male 3.0, of female 3.3 mm. Forewing with second 
apical cell less than half length of first. Female seventh sternum with 
hind margin slightly produced posteriorly at middle, transverse and 
slightly convex on both sides of the produced portion; pygofer with a 
conspicuous group of black macrosetae behind midlength. Male 
plates with some of the macrosetae larger and conspiculously black. 
Male pygofer with posterior margin produced at midlength, disc with 
numerous irregularly arranged macrosetae on apical half; no pygofer 
processes or differentially sclerotized integumental areas. Anal 
processes extending ventrad beyond middle of disc of pygofer. 
Aedeagus with preatrium elongate; dorsal apodeme T-shaped, the 
vertical portion short; shaft as in E. eburneola (Osborn) but with 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 223 

processes arising before midlength, appressed to shaft in ventral aspect. 
Sternal abdominal apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown, pronotum and scutellum ivory, a pair of longitudinal 
vittae over disc of pronotum and extending over basal angles of scu- 
tellum, pale yellow. Forewing milky translucent with a faint yellow 
area along claval commissural margin, and a similarly suffused area 
in brachial cell. Face and venter pale. 

Known only from the holotype and allotype, from Para, Brazil, 
in the Carnegie Museum collection. 

Although closely related to eburneola and parallela, E. parana can 
be distinguished readily from these by the position of the processes 
of the aedeagal shaft. 

Elabra morrisoni, new species 

Figure 2Q,n-s 

Length of male 3.2 mm., of female 3.3 mm. Forewing with second 
apical cell less than half length of first. Female seventh sternum 
with posterior margin transverse; pygofer with numerous pale macro- 
setae and a pair of black setae on each side of ovipositor near its 
midlength. Male plates with several contrasting black macrosetae. 
Male pygofer with numerous irregularly arranged macrosetae. Anal 
processes strong, boot-shaped, extending ventrad to middle of disc of 
pygofer. Aedeagus with preatrium elongate; dorsal apodeme T- 
shaped, the vertical portion very short; shaft straight, short compared 
to foregoing species of Elabra, with a pair of acute processes near base 
of apical half. 

E. morrisoni can be readily distinguished from the preceding species 
of Elabra by its shorter, straighter aedeagal shaft. 

Elabra morrisoni morrisoni, new subspecies 

Figure 26,n-g 

Male pygofer wall with differentially sclerotized bar extending 
along dorsal p}^gofer margin and ventrad near posterior pygofer 
margin, ending opposite lobe of posterior margin; macrosetae 
occurring generally over disc except near dorsal margin. Anal 
process foot-shaped with the "toe" large. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes attaining second conjunctiva. 

Dorsum entirely pale yellowish white, the forewings more deeply 
tinted with yellow. Venter white, the hind tibiae darker at apices 
and apical hind tarsomere black. 

Holotype male and allotype female, Demerara River bank, 2 miles 
from Georgetown, British Guiana, Sept. 22, 1918 (H. Morrison), in 

422758 — 57 7 



224 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

U. S. National Museum (No. 62683). Specimens have also been 
examined from Caroni River, Trinidad. 

Elabra morrisoni isthmusi, new subspecies 

Figures 26,r,s; 27,a 

Male pygofer with dorsal margin not differentially sclerotized; 
macrosetae occurring on dorsal portion of posterior half of disc. 
Anal process similar to that of typical subspecies, but with toe of 
foot-shaped portion less pronounced. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum ivory; disc of 
crown suffused with dull yellow; pronotum with pair of longitudinal 
yellow vittae, diverging posteriorly and continuous posteriorly with 
yellow basal angles of scutellum. Forewing yellowish transparent; 
apical cells fumose, the second apical cell with a darker spot in basal 
half. Venter and legs as in typical subspecies. 

Holotype male, Peiia Blanca, Panamd Province, Panama, Oct. 27, 
1952 (No. 62684); male para type, El Retiro, Code Province, Panama, 
Nov. 10, 1952; and a paratype of each sex, Rio Hato, Code Province, 
Panama, Jan. 15, 1952; all collected by F. S. Blanton and in U. S. 
National Museum. 

Elabra sarana (Osborn) 

Figure 27, b-g 

Dikraneura sarana Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus. vol. 18, p. 268, 1928. 
Elabra sarana; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 35, 1952. 

Length of male, 3.2 mm. Forewing with second apical cell 
more than half length of first. Male plates without contrasting black 
setae. Pygofer with posterior margin rounded, disc with setae 
arranged as in E. eburneola (Osborn) ; pygofer process arising along 
caudal margin, extending anteroventrad. Anal processes absent. 
Aedeagus with preatrium absent; dorsal apodeme T-shaped, the 
vertical portion very short; shaft tapered gradually in lateral aspect, 
constricted near midlength in caudoventral aspect, with a pair of 
flat, truncate anteapical processes that are divergent from shaft in 
lateral aspect. Sternal abdominal apodemes absent. 

Crown dull orange except sordid white anterior margin. Pronotum 
and scutellum ivory, with a pair of longitudinal vittae extending over 
pronotum to hind margin ; basal angles of scutellum brown. Forewing 
milky translucent, a narrow longitudinal claval commissural vitta in 
basal two-thirds of clavus and an oblique vitta extending from near 
base of wing through brachial cell longitudinally, and continued 
through second apical cell almost to apical wing margin, orange. 
Face and venter pale. 

This species is known only from the type, a male, from Provincia 
del Sara, Bolivia, in the Carnegie Museum. 



LEAFHOPPER TEIBE ALEBRINI — YOTOJG 



225 




Figure 27. — Elabra, a, E. morrisoni isthmusi, pygofer, lateral aspect, b-g, E. sarana 
(type): b, pygofer, lateral aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, apical portion of style, 
lateral aspect; e, same, dorsal aspect; /, apical portion of forewing; g, anterior dorsum. 
h-k, E. aureovittata: h, apical portion of forewing; j, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, anterior 
dorsum; k, pygofer, lateral aspect, l-p, E. costaricensis: /, pygofer, lateral aspect; m, style 
and connective, dorsal aspect; n, style apex, lateral aspect; o, aedeagus, lateral aspect; 
p, anterior dorsum (type). (In a, k, and / the broken lines represent the anal process.) 



226 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Elabra aureovittata (DeLong), new combination 

Figure 27, h-k 

Alebra aureoviitatus DeLong, in Wolcott, Journ. Dep. Agr. Porto Rico, vol. 7, 

p. 267, 1923. 
Protalebra pallida Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 260, 1928. 

Length of both sexes 3.3 mm. Forewing with second apical 
cell less than half length of first. Female seventh sternum with 
posterior margin weakly trilobate, the median lobe more pronounced 
than lateral ones; pygofer with numerous pale macrosetae and with a 
pair of black macrosetae each side of ovipositor near its midlength. 
Male plates with some of the macrosetae contrasting black, con- 
spicuous. Male pygofer with posterior margin rounded, disc with 
irregularly arranged macrosetae extending from near middle of disc 
caudad, the group broadening near posterior margin ; without pygofer 
processes or differentially sclerotized integument al areas. Anal 
processes distinct, extending ventrad beyond middle of disc of pygofer. 
Aedeagus with preatrium elongate; dorsal apodeme transverse, 
T-shaped, the vertical portion very short, the extremities each with 
a vertical lobe; shaft slender, elongate, tapering, bisinuous, without 
processes. Sternal abdominal apodemes not attaining second con- 
junctiva. 

Dorsum pale yellow to yellowish green, forewing with basal part 
of commissural margin and brachial cell slightly deeper green; second 
apical cell with a dusky spot in its base. Face and venter pale, 
unmarked. 

A co type of Alebra aureovittatus DeLong, from the DeLong collec- 
tion, bearing the label "Ace. 221-1922, Ciales, P. E., Aug. 22, 1922, 
G. N. Wolcott, collector," and the label "holotype," is here designated 
lectotype. 

Osborn (Journ. Dep. Agr. Porto Rico, vol. 13, p. 105, 1929) and 
Caldwell (in Caldwell and Martorell, 1952, p. 90) are followed in 
placing the Osborn name in synonymy. The types of Protalebra 
pallida have not been examined. Martorell (loc. cit.) states that the 
species occurs in association with Cordia sulcata. Known only from 
Puerto Rico. 

E. aureovittata differs from the preceding species of Elabra in its 
lack of aedeagal processes. 

Elabra costaricensis, new species 

Figure 27,l~p 

Length of male 3.8-3.9 mm., of female 3.9-4.0 mm. Forewing with 
length of second apical cell half or less than half length of first which 
is of about same width at apex as at base. Female seventh sternum 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 227 

short, posterior margin transverse; pygofer with numerous pale setae 
on posterior half and a group of four contrasting black macrosetae 
near ovipositor slightly distad of its midlength. Male plates with 
a few of the macrosetae large, contrasting black. Male pygofer 
with posterodorsal margin produced in a slight lobe, posterior margin 
truncate or slightly concave, disc with numerous irregularly arranged 
macrosetae on posterior half; without pygofer processes or differ- 
entially sclerotized integumental areas. Anal processes extending to 
middle of pygofer disc. Aedeagus with preatrium elongate; dorsal 
apodeme a transverse bar; shaft broad basally, abruptly narrowed 
at basal third its length, the apical two-thirds slender and weakly 
sinuate, without processes. Sternal abdominal apodemes traversing 
one conjunctiva. 

Crown yellowish brown except a dull ivory area next anteromesal 
margin of each eye, the brown color deepening posteriorly and con- 
tinued and broadening over disc of pronotum, where it is weakly 
amber-margined laterally, and including the whole scutellum; lateral 
margins of pronotum broadly ivory. Forewing transparent, suffused 
with yellow in costa, brachial cell, and before bases of apical cells, a spot 
at base of commissural margin, a larger, poorly defined one at mid- 
clavus, a costal area in basal half of costal cell and an oblique vitta 
in its apical half, base of inner apical cell and of adjacent appendix, 
and wing apex weakly fumose; a spot in base of second apical cell 
black. Face and venter pale, apex of hind tibiae and apical hind 
tarsomere, black. 

Holotype male, allotype female, seven male and seven female 
para types, San Pedro de Montes de Oca, Costa Rica, Aug. 14, 1936 
(C. H. Ballou), collected from Vernonia brachiata, Tabebuia penta- 
phylla, and "Comutia cymosa," in U. S. National Museum (No. 
62685). 

The abruptly narrowed aedeagal shaft of costaricensis is unlike all 
other species of the genus. 

Genus Rhabdotalebra Young 

Figures 28-30 

Rhabdotalebra Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 36, 1952 (type Protalebra 
octolineata Baker, by original designation. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin ; 
posterior branch of vein R, evanescent apically; vein Cu 2 confluent 
with submarginal vein at point much basad of vein m-cu. Forewing 
with appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly rounded; 
inner apical cell broader in basal third than in apical half; second 
apical cell slender, triangular or not, usually narrower at base than at 
apex; third apical cell stalked, outer apical cell with width exceeding 



228 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

half length, not attaining apical wing margin, its base distinctly proxi- 
mad of base of third apical cell. Male plates elongate, triangular, 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin, with macrosetae confined to basal 
half. Pygofer with uniseriate, usually oblique group of few submar- 
ginal macrosetae along posterodorsal or posterior margin; pygofer 
process present (exception: plummeri), but occasionally not differen- 
tially sclerotized, usually directed mesad. Style with preapical lobe 
present, occasionally weak. Connective transverse, in form of cross- 
bar or shallowly U-shaped. No ninth tergite or anal processes. 
Aedeagus with preatrium distinct; dorsal apodeme well developed, 
saddle-shaped in lateral aspect, usually bilobed at base; shaft smoothly 
curved dorsad, with or without terminal processes; gonopore variously 
located. Head usually produced, apex rounded ; in profile with contour 
of crown rounded to line of face which is regularly convex; ocelli 
present, indistinct in some species, on margin between crown and face. 
Pronotum much longer than crown, wider than head, including eyes; 
lateral margins divergent posteriorly. 

In a recent paper, cited above, the writer stated that ocelli were 
absent in this genus, an observation since found to be erroneous. In 
some species the ocelli are difficult to see, but they have now been 
observed in all the species. 

One group of species, consisting of octolineata, signata, jamaicensis 
and monrosi, has a color pattern involving slender longitudinal or 
oblique black lines on the anterior half of the forewing. Except the 
last named, all of these lack processes on the aedeagal shaft. R. mon- 
rosi and the remainder of the species have retrorse shaft processes, and 
hambletoni, plummeri, brunnea and ornata are characterized by a 
transverse transcommissural color pattern on the forewings. 

In addition to the species treated below, Protalebra lineatella Osborn 
(Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 257, 1928) is placed here provisionally 
(new combination) on the basis of an examination of the female type, 
from Santa Lucia, Guatemala, in the Ohio State University collection. 
The color pattern of the type is similar to that of signata. Topotypic 
males are needed to characterize this species. 

Key to species and subspecies of Rhabdotalebra 

1. Chief color markings of anterior two-thirds of forewings consisting of longi- 

tudinal or oblique narrow black vittae which are not transcommissural ... 2 

Chief color markings of anterior two-thirds of forewings transcommissural, not 

consisting of longitudinal or oblique narrow black vittae 5 

2. Forewings each with single black U-shaped marking; pronotum with longi- 

tudinal orange vittae; aedeagus with shaft narrowed abruptly in apical half . . 3 

Forewings each with a double black U-shaped marking; pronotum without 

longitudinal orange vittae; aedeagus with shaft gradually tapered 4 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 229 

3. Male with pygofer process bifid apically; aedeagal shaft with narrowed portion 

not more than three times as long as wide monrosi, new species 

Male with pygofer process not bifid; aedeagal shaft with narrowed portion more 
than three times as long as wide signata (McAtee) 

4. Male pygofer process bifurcate apically in lateral aspect, not decurved. 

jamaicensis, new species 
Male pygofer process not bifurcate apically, slightly decurved. 

octolineata (Baker) 

5. Chief color marking of dorsum an hourglass-shaped white commissural mark- 

ing; male without pygofer processes . . plummeri (Ruppel and DeLong) 
Chief color markings of dorsum otherwise; male pygofer with processes (occa- 
sionally not differentially sclerotized) 6 

6. Chief color markings of dorsum an inverted "T" extending over pronotum, 

scutellum and basal half of f orewings hambletoni, new species 

Chief color markings of dorsum otherwise 7 

7. Chief transcommissural markings of dorsum not attaining costal margins of 

wings; male with apical processes of aedeagus retrorse . . ornata, new species 

Posterior marking crossing commissure near midclavus, attaining wing margins 

at costal plaque of each wing; apical aedeagal process extending laterad, not 

oppressed to shaft brunnea (Oman) . . 8 

8. Forewings with ground color tan; anterior transcommissural marking extending 

without interruption to costal plaque of each wing; sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing three conjunctivae . . . subspecies brunnea (Oman) 
Forewings with ground color deep red; anterior transcommissural marking 
ending slightly laterad of claval suture on each wing; sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing two conjunctivae colorata, new subspecies 

Rhabdotalebra octolineata (Baker) 

Figuke 2S,a-d 

Protalebra octolineata Baker, Invertebrata Pacifica, vol. 1, p. 7, 1903. 
Rhabdotalebra octolineata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 36, 1952. 

Length of male 2.7-2.8 mm., of female 2.9-3.0 mm. Crown with 
apex broadly rounded; median length almost equal to interocular 
width; posterior margin regularly shallowly concave. Pronotum 
with median length almost twice median length of crown. Ocelli 
weak, occasionally observed only with great difficulty, closer to 
median line of head than to inner margin of eyes. Female seventh 
sternum short, the posterior margin regularly shallowly concave; 
pygofer with multiseriate pale macrosetae on posterior two-thirds, 
the group conspicuously narrowed at its midlength. Male plates 
gradually tapered from base to apex, greatly exceeding posterior 
pygofer margin, each with a transverse group of pale macrosetae 
near base and one or a few macrosetae more distad in basal half. 
Male pygofer short, subtriangular in lateral aspect, with a submar- 
ginal row of few macrosetae near posterodorsal margin; pygofer 
process arising on posteroventral margin, tapered, acute apically, 
curved dorsocaudad in lateral aspect, the two processes convergent 
but not contiguous in ventral aspect. Style with conspicuous pre- 



230 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



apical lobe and slightly curved apical extension. Connective a 
transverse bar. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme bilobed at base; 
shaft slender, gradually tapering without processes, gonopore ter- 
minal on anterior face of shaft. Sternal abdominal apodemes not 
attaining first conjunctiva. 




Figure 28. — Rhabdotalebra. a-d, R. octolineata (lectotype): a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, 
lateral aspect; c, style and connective, dorsal aspect; d, aedeagus, lateral aspect, e-i, 
R. signata: e, anterior dorsum (type);/, sternal abdominal apodemes (broken lines repre- 
sent conjunctivae); g, pygofei process, caudoventral aspect; h, aedeagus, lateral aspect; 
i, pygofer, lateral aspect, j-m, R. jamaicensis: j, anterior dorsum (type); k, pygofer 
process, caudal aspect (para type); /, pygofer, lateral aspect (type); m, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect (paratype). (In g and k the midline of the specimen is represented by a broken 
line.) 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 231 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum dull yellowish 
green, frequently with a median longitudinal dark stripe on scutellum, 
occasionally continuous with a similar pronotal stripe that is less 
commonly present. Forewings greenish hyaline, each with an 
elongate U-shaped marking of darker green bordered internally and 
externally with black on basal two-thirds of wing; an obtuse triangular 
yellow marking traversing commissure at claval apex; inner apical 
cell of each wing with a black spot touching outer margin in basal 
third, and a similar spot on vein between third and fourth apical 
cells. Face and venter pale greenish yellow; posttibial spines uni- 
formly pale; apex of tibiae, apical hind tarsomere, and a median 
posterior spot on female seventh sternum gray to black. 

A male cotype, selected from approximately 95 cotypes in the 
Pomona College collection, from San Marcos, Nicaragua (collected 
by Baker), is here designated lectotype. Additional male specimens 
have been examined from Granada, B. W. I.; Coban, Guatemala (on 
Lantana camara) ; Middlesex, British Honduras (on Lantana camara) ; 
New Amsterdam, British Guiana, and Rio Tabasara, Chiriqui 
Province, Panama. 

Rhabdotalebra signata (McAtee) 

Figuhe 28,e-i 

Protalebra oclolineata var. signata McAtee, Journ. New York Ent. So a, vol. 34, 

p. 148, 1926. 
Rhabdotalebra signata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 36, 1952. 

Length of male 2.6-2.7 mm., of female 2.8-3.0 mm. Crown more 
produced than in R. octolineata (Baker), apex broadly rounded; 
median length more than half greater than interocular width; pos- 
terior margin regularly concave. Pronotum with median length 
less than one-half greater than median length of crown. Ocelli 
about equidistant from inner eye margins and median line of head. 
Female seventh sternum with posterior margin slightly convex; 
pygofer with transverse group of close-set pale macrosetae at mid- 
length, and few more sparsely arranged macrosetae near apex; male 
plates each with a transverse group of pale macrosetae near base. 
Pygofer more produced than in octolineata, with apical margin 
smoothly rounded; pygofer setae and process similar to octolineata 
but with apical free portion of latter almost straight in lateral aspect, 
not or very slightly curved; in caudoventral aspect the two processes 
subparallel. Other genital characters as in octolineata but with 
aedeagal shaft abruptly narrowed in apical third and with extreme 
apex curved cephalad, gonopore terminal. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing two abdominal conjunctivae. 



232 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum pale yellow, a pair 
of longitudinal vittae extending caudad from near anterior margin of 
crown, bordering inner margin of each eye, extending caudolaterad 
across disc of pronotum to its hind border, orange, the vittae occa- 
sionally obsolete on crown; a narrow median longitudinal black stripe 
on pronotum and scutellum; basal and apical angles of scutellum deep 
yellow. Forewing hyaline tinged with transparent yellow; a thin, nar- 
rowly U-shaped mark involving both clavus and corium in basal three- 
fifths of wing; commissural line narrowly, a diagonal vitta near apex 
of cell K, a transverse vitta in base of outer apical cell, and a blotch 
over vein bordering third and fourth apical cells, black, the blotch ex- 
tended mesad over basal portions of first and second apical cells as a 
fumose area, an arcuate marking subtending outer portion of wing 
apex and a pair of transcommissural arcs at level of claval apex en- 
closing a narrow transverse lenticular hyaline area, fumose. Face and 
venter yellow, a pink stripe over pleura and pleural portion of prono- 
tum on each side; ovipositor black. 

The holotype, from Anc6n, Panama Canal Zone, has the abdomen 
missing. It is in the U. S. National Museum. Additional male 
specimens have been examined from Costa Eica (on Tabebuia penta- 
phylla (L.)), from Panama Canal Zone, from Darien, Panamd, and 
Los Santos Provinces, Panama; and from El Valle, Venezuela. 

This species is related to R. monrosi, new species (q. v.), below. 

Rhabdotalebra jamaicensis, new species 

Figure 28,j-m 

Length of male 2.7-2.8 mm., of female 2.8-3.0 mm. Crown with 
apex broadly rounded; median length equal to interocular width; pos- 
terior margin regularly shallowly concave. Pronotum with median 
length more than half greater than median length of crown. Ocelli as 
in R. octolineata (Baker). Female seventh sternum, pygofer and male 
plates as in octolineata. Male pygofer more produced than in octoline- 
ata, but with similarly arranged macrosetae, posterior margin smoothly 
convex; pygofer process short, arising on ventral pygofer margin near 
apex, extending dorsomesad, bifurcate apically, each process with few 
anteapical teeth on inner margin in caudal aspect. Style, connective 
and aedeagus as in octolineata, but shaft of aedeagus slightly broader 
in lateral aspect. Sternal abdominal apodemes as in octolineata. 

Color as in octolineata, but slightly more suffused with yellow 
throughout and with pronotal median dark stripe always present. 

Holotype male, allotype female, four female paratypes and two male 
paratypes, Kingston, Jamaica, Sept. 9, 1917 (Harold Morrison), in 
U. S. National Museum (No. 62686). 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 233 

This species is very closely related to octolineata, from which it 
differs conspicuously in its short bifurcate pygofer process. 

Rhabdotalebra monrosi, new species 

Figure 29,a-e 

Length of male 3.0 mm. Crown with median length about equal 
to interocular width; posterior margin regularly concave. Pronotum 
with median length more than one-half longer than median length of 
crown. Ocelli on broadly rounded margin between crown and face, 
about equidistant from inner eye margins and median line of head. 
Male plates as in R. octolineata (Baker). Pygofer with posterior mar- 
gin weakly produced slightly below midlength; pygofer process arising 
from ventral pygofer margin, directed mesad thence dorsad, distinctly 
bifid at apex, the two processes subparallel in caudoventral aspect. 
Style with preapical lobe well-developed. Connective somewhat U- 
shaped. Aedeagus with shaft laterally compressed, in lateral aspect 
very broad to short cylindrical apex which is directed dorsocaudad and 
bears two pairs of short anteapical teeth, gonopore terminal. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes as in R. signata (McAtee). 

Crown uniform pale yellow. Pronotum yellowish white with a pair 
of posteriorly diverging longitudinal orange vittae from anterior to 
posterior margin. Scutellum pale orange, the apex dark. Forewings 
as in signata, but with transcommissural lenticular area at claval apex 
wider. Face and venter pale, an orange stripe over pleura and pleural 
portion of pronotum on each side. 

Holotype male, Ledesma, Jujuy, Argentina, Feb. 10, 1950 (Willink 
and Monr6s), in collection of Miguel Lillo Foundation, Tucuman, 
Argentina. 

From signata, which it resembles in color pattern and the abruptly 
narrowed aedeagal shaft, monrosi differs in its laterally compressed 
aedeagal shaft, bifurcate pygofer processes, two pairs of very short 
processes on the aedeagal shaft, and, in color pattern, in the wider 
transcommissural lenticular black-margined area at the claval apex. 

Rhabdotalebra plummeri (Ruppel and DeLong), new combination 

Figure 29,f-j 

Protalebra plummeri Paippel and DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 53, p. 226, 1953. 

Length of male 2.6 mm. Crown well produced, apex rounded; 
median length more than twice interocular width; posterior margin 
angularly concave. Pronotum with median length subequal to 
median length of crown. Ocelli closer to inner eye margins than to 
median line of head. Female seventh sternum with posterior margin 
transverse with a very short rounded median lobe; setae as in R. 



234 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



octolineata (Baker). Male plates gradually tapered from base to 
apex, greatly exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a quadrate 
group of macrosetae in basal half. Male pygofer with posterodorsal 




Figure 29. — Rhabdotalebra. a-e, R. monrosi (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, aedeagus, caudal aspect; e, pygofer process, caudal 
aspect (broken line represents midline of specimen), f-j, R. plummeri: f, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; g, apex of aedeagus, caudal aspect; h, aedeagus, lateral aspect; i, style and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect;/, anterior dorsum, k-n, R. hambletoni (type): k, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; /, aedeagus, lateral aspect; m, style and connective, ventral aspect; n, anterior 
dorsum. 

margin broadly convex; ventral margin enlarged apically, forming 
slight ventral pygofer lobe; pygofer processes absent. Style as in 
octolineata. Connective broadly U-shaped. Aedeagus with dorsal 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 235 

apodeme laterally compressed, not bilobed at base; shaft slender, 
with pair of anteapical retrorse processes which are not appressed to 
shaft; gonopore anteapical on caudal surface. 

Crown dull yellow with faint paler yellow transverse marking in 
apical half. Pronotum and scutellum orange, the former with 
trilobate gray marginal area along posterior margin, with black 
markings on each side of each lobe; scutellum with anteapical trans- 
verse black stripe, apex white. Forewings with basal portions of 
clavus and corium concolorous with scutellum, the orange area 
undulate and margined with black posteriorly, the dark margin 
extending diagonally and undulate posteromesad on each wing to 
claval suture in basal portion of apical half, recrossing claval suture, 
thence curved posteromesad to claval apex, outlining a transcom- 
missural, hourglass-shaped, cream-colored area; costal plaque and 
adjoining corium pale translucent, the translucent area extending into 
clavus; a confluent marking in anteapical portions of cells R and M, 
with reversed C-shaped extension into brachial cell, an extension 
forming a loop in cell R, and an extension to costal margin behind 
costal plaque, apical veins broadly, except apical portions of first 
and second apical veins, smoky. Face and venter pale yellow except 
an orange spot below each eye, confluent with orange propleura, and 
a longitudinal smoky vitta across meso- and metapleura. 

The holotype female, from Mexico, in the DeLong collection, has 
been examined through the kindness of Dr. DeLong. A single male 
from Caracas, Venezuela, is in the U. S. National Museum. 

Rhabdotalebra hambletoni, new species 

Figuee 29, k -n 

Length of both sexes 2.9-3.0 mm. Crown with apex broadly 
rounded; median length one-fourth greater than interocular width; 
posterior margin regularly concave. Pronotum with median length 
about one-half greater than median length of crown. Ocelli closer 
to inner margins of eyes than to median line of head. Female seventh 
sternum, pygofer and male plates as in R. octolineata (Baker). Male 
pygofer with a submarginal group of macrosetae along posterodorsal 
pygofer margin; pygofer process arising at apex of posteroventral 
margin, tapered, acute apically, extending dorsocaudad, the two 
processes subparallel in ventral aspect. Style broadest before apex 
but without definite preapical lobe; apical portion short, curved 
slightly caudoventrad. Aedeagus with dorsal apodeme laterally 
compressed, weakly bilobed anteroventrally at base; shaft slender, 
curved dorsad, with pair of slender recurved lateral subapical processes, 
gonopore terminal on caudal face of shaft. 



236 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Crown sordid yellow (holotype) to brown, unmarked. Pronotum 
and scutellum black, with dark markings of basal half of forewing 
forming a conspicuous inverted black "T", the transverse portion of 
which is narrowed towards the costal margins and involves the middle 
half of the claval commissure; pronotum with lateral margins nar- 
rowly pale, and with an indistinct median submarginal pale spot along 
anterior margin. Ground color of forewings yellowish translucent; 
apical cells cloudy except hyaline spot in base of inner and outer 
apical cells and anteapical transverse hyaline area extending from 
anterior to posterior wing margin and through appendix. Face and 
venter pale except apex of hind tibiae and of ovipositor which are 
black. 

Holotype male, allotype female, one male paratype and three 
female paratypes, Sao Paulo, Brazil (E. J. Hambleton), in U. S. 
National Museum (No. 62687). 

Rhabdotalebra ornata, new species 

Figuee 30, a-f 

Length of male 2.8-2.9 mm., of female 3.0-3.1 mm. Head with 
apex sharply rounded, median length almost one-half greater than 
interocular width; posterior margin regularly shallowly concave. 
Pronotum with median length one-half greater than median length of 
crown. Ocelli about midway between inner eye margins and median 
line of crown in male ; closer to eye margins in female. Female seventh 
sternum short, the hind margin transverse or shallowly concave on 
each side of a median, slightly produced, strap-like process; pygofer 
with setae on posterior half, arranged as in R. octolineata (Baker). 
Male plates abruptly narrowed near midlength, slightly exceeding 
posterior pygofer margin, each with a quadrangular group of macro- 
setae in basal half. Pygofer with posterodorsal margin oblique, with 
group of few submarginal macrosetae; apical portion turned mesad, 
forming short differentially sclerotized process which is rounded 
dorsally, the two processes approximate but not contiguous in caudal 
aspect. Style with conspicuous preapical lobe, and strongly curved 
apical extension. Connective a transverse bar. Aedeagus with dorsal 
apodeme laterally compressed, weakly bilobed ventrally at base; 
shaft slender in lateral aspect, curved dorsad, with pair of slender, 
apical retrorse processes, each of which has a lateral toothlike extension 
near its base ; gonopore subapical on caudal face of shaft. Sternal ab- 
dominal apodemes short but traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown pale orange. Pronotum, scutellum and ground color of 
basal half of forewings bright orange, the basal scutellar angles yellow- 
ish. Forewings with a transcommissural, opaque creamy spot in basal 
halves of clavi and extending laterad into each brachial cell, its anterior 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 237 

margin rectilinear, its posterior margin convex, and a similarly 
colored transcommissural spot at claval apices extending laterad on 
each wing through the brachial cell, bordered anteriorly with deep 
orange, laterally with pale orange, posteriorly with smoky. Costal 
plaque translucent pale yellow bordered narrowly with black on mesal 
and posterior margins. Apex of cell R with a large, translucent yellow 
spot. Wing apices smoky except an areole in apex of cell R, third 
and fourth apical cells, and apices of first and second apical cells, 
all of which are hyaline. Face yellow except a pink spot below each 
eye on gena; propleural area pink; venter pale to pink except margin 
of apical process of female seventh sternum and a spot on lower por- 
tion of male pygofer on each side, which are black. 

Holotype male, allotype female, Apr. 29, 1950, two male paratypes 
and one female para type, May 5, 1950, and two female paratypes, 
May 4, 1950, in Snow Entomological Collections; and one female para- 
type, May 5, 1950, and one male para type and one female paratype, 
May 4, 1950, in U. S. National Museum; all from Santa Catarina, 
Nova Teutonia, Brazil (F. Plaumann). 

Rhabdotalebra brunnea (Oman) 

Figure SO, g-q 

Protalebra brunnea Oman, Journ. Agr. Univ. Puerto Rico, vol. 21, p. 567, 1937. 
Rhabdotalebra brunnea; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 36, 1952. 

Length 2.6-2.8 mm. Crown with posterior margin obtusely angu- 
late. Pronotum with median length about one-half greater than 
median length of crown. Male plates triangular, gradually tapered 
from base to apex, exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a 
quadrate group of macrosetae in basal half. Pygofer with a sub- 
marginal row of macrosetae along posterodorsal margin; posterior 
margin produced mesad in a process that is truncate dorsally, the two 
processes approximate in caudal aspect but not contiguous. Connec- 
tive a transverse bar. Style with poorly defined preapical lobe; 
apical extension slightly decurved. Aedeagus with gonopore ante- 
apical on caudal surface ;*a pair of Jshort,fstronglyf divergent, slender, 
acute processes arising opposite gonopore on anterior surface, extend- 
ing laterad. Sternal abdominal apodemes well developed. Color 
pattern including two narrow transclaval, translucent bands. 

Rhabdotalebra brunnea brunnea (Oman) 

Figure 30, g-m 

For literature citation see synonymy under R. brunnea^ above. 

Length of male 2.6 mm., of female 2.7-2.8 mm. Crown with 

median length slightly greater than interocular width. Ocelli as in 

R. octolineata (Baker). Female seventh sternum short, the posterior 

margin slightly produced and rounded at middle. Male with dorsal 



238 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

aedeagal apodeme bilobed at base. Sternal abdominal apodemes 
traversing three conjunctivae. 

Ground color of dorsum pale tan; posterior margin of pronotum 
narrowly dull gray; apex of scutellum white; forewings with a trans- 
versely oval, translucent lacteus marking crossing commissure an- 
teriorly at scutellar apex, posteriorly slightly beyond claval midlength, 
the design bordered narrowly with black before and behind, and 
involving the costal plaques laterally, twice narrowly interrupted with 
black on each wing at the intersections of the claval suture ; an oblique 
vitta extending from costal margin to inner angle of base of outer 
apical cell, base and apex of outer apical cell, and anterior margin of 
transverse, transcommissural oval hyaline areole at claval apex, 
black; remaining apical veins, a broad area at midlengths of first and 
second apical cells smoky, their apices hyaline; third apical cell 
occasionally smoky. Face and legs pale yellow; pleural portion of 
pronotum dull gray; remainder of venter black; apical portion of 
ovipositor pale. 

The holotype, from Villalba, Puerto Rico, is in the U. S. National 
Museum. The subspecies is known only from Puerto Rico. 

Rhabdotalebra brunnea colorata, new subspecies 

Figure S0,n-q 

Length of both sexes 2.7 mm. Crown with median length more 
than one-third greater than interocular width. Ocelli distinct, about 
equidistant from inner eye margins and median line of head. Female 
seventh sternum short, the posterior margin with a short, triangular 
median projection. Male with dorsal aedeagal apodeme not bilobed 
at base. 

Crown pale gray, the margin between crown and face broadly pale 
red. Pronotum deep red, the humeral and posterior margins narrowly 
gray. Scutellum buff, the apex milky. Forewings with ground color 
opaque red to claval apex, an interrupted circular design in basal 
halves of two wings lacteus bordered with black, the circular pattern 
crossing commissure at apex of scutellum and in apical half of clavus, 
interrupted with red on each wing anteromesad of costal plaque and 
narrowly with black at two intersections of claval suture with design, 
and at outer margin of brachial cell; an oblique vitta extending from 
costal margin to inner angle of base of outer apical cell, the veins 
bordering outer apical cell, and third apical cell, basal portions of 
first and second apical cells, and margins of a transverse, transcom- 
missural oval hyaline areole at claval apex, black; a broad area at 
midlength of first and second apical cells smoky, their apices hyaline. 
Face yellow; pleural portion of pronotum red; legs pale; male abdom- 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



239 




Figure 30. — Rhabdotalebra. a-f, R. ornata: a, style and connective, dorsal aspect (type); 
by anterior dorsum (para type); c, pygofer, lateral aspect (type); d, same, apex of right side, 
caudal aspect; e, aedeagus, lateral aspect (type); /, apex of aedeagus, caudal aspect. 
g-m, R. brunnea: g, apex of aedeagus, caudal aspect; h, sternal abdominal apodemes; 
i t anterior dorsum; /, style and connective, dorsal aspect; k, pygofer apex, right side, 
caudal aspect; /, aedeagus, lateral aspect; m, pygofer, lateral aspect, n-q, R. brunnea 
colorata: n, pygofer, lateral aspect; o, apex of aedeagus, caudal aspect; p, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect; q, sternal abdominal apodemes. (In h and q the broken lines represent conjunc- 
tivae.) 



422758— 5"3 



240 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io7 

inal venter dark basally, dull yellow apically, except darker ninth 
sternum and basal portion of plates; female venter dark except for 
median spot on sixth sternum and the entire seventh sternum except 
apex, yellow; apical fourth of ovipositor pale yellow or pink. 

Holotype male, allotype female, two male and three female para- 
types, Santa Catarina, Nova Teutonia, Brazil, Apr. 29, 1950 (F. 
Plaumann), in Snow Entomological Collections; one male paratype in 
same collections, and two male and two female para types, May 5, 
1950 (other data same as holotype), in U. S. National Museum. 

This subspecies may be distinguished readily from the typical 
subspecies by color pattern and the form of the sternal abdominal 
apodemes, which are longer in R. b. brunnea. 

Abrela, new genus 

Figure 31 

Type of the genus, Alebra robusta Gillette. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing 
margin; posterior branch of vein R evanescent apically; vein Cu 2 con- 
fluent with submarginal vein at point proximad of vein m-cu. Fore- 
wing with appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly 
rounded; inner apical cell broader near base than in apical half; 
second apical cell parallel-sided, its width at midlength greater than 
adjacent width of inner apical cell; third apical cell sessile, sub tri- 
angular; outer apical cell longer than broad, not attaining apical wing 
margin, its base distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell. Male 
plates exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with longitudinal 
group of macrosetae on middle half of length. Pygofer with posterior 
margin truncate; macrosetae uniseriate, near and parallel to hind 
margin; pygofer process arising from ventral pygofer margin; pygofer 
wall with a distinct barlike thickening. Ninth tergum with a dis- 
tinct triangular sclerite, separated from remainder of tergum by a 
line of flection. Anal process vestigial. Style elongate, slender, 
without preapical lobe. Connective a transverse bar. Aedeagus 
without dorsal apodeme; apex of shaft bifid. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. Head not strongly produced, 
crown with median length less than interocular width; anterior margin 
broadly rounded in dorsal aspect; ocelli on broad margin between 
crown and face, closer to inner eye margins than to median line of 
head. Pronotum much longer than head; wider than head including 
eyes; lateral margins strongly divergent posteriorly. Face slightly 
convex in lateral aspect. 

This genus may be closely related to the Protalebrella generic com- 
plex, which follows. Such a relationship is suggested by the bifurcate 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



241 



aedeagus which is found in Beamerulus and Diceratalebra, and by the 
presence of a distinct ninth tergite which occurs in some stage of 
development in each genus of the Protalebrella complex (there de- 
limited by integumental thickening, instead of line of flection, how- 
ever). The lack of a dorsal aedeagal apodeme, a prominent structure 




Figure 31. — Abrela robusta: a, anterior dorsum (type); b, style and connective, dorsal aspect; 
c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, pygofer, lateral aspect; e> apex of forewing (in situ). 

in the Protalebrella complex, the presence of the integumental thicken- 
ing of the pygofer wall, and the difference in the ninth tergite serve 
to set Abrela apart from the complex. 



Abrela robusta (Gillette), new combination 

Figure 31 

Alebra robusta Gillette, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 20, p. 712, 1898. 
Diceratalebra robusta; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 27, 1952. 

Length of female 3.7 mm. Crown with median length slightly 
less than interocular width. Pronotum with median length twice 
median length of crown. Female seventh sternum narrow, posterior 
margin abruptly produced in a conspicuous truncate median tooth; 
pygofer with macrosetae mostly white, limited to apical half, a few 
black ones near ovipositor at its midlength. Male pygofer short; 
anterior portion of disc with pronounced diagonal differentially 



242 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

sclerotized integumental thickening; pygofer processes elongate, 
slender, nearly straight, directed caudad and greatly exceeding pos- 
terior pygofer margin, the two processes subparallel in ventral aspect. 
Connective broadly V-shaped with a strong dorsal longitudinal keel. 
Aedeagus with preatrium elongate, troughlike; shaft bifid apically 
with the gonoduct in the longer dorsal ramus, dorsal margin in lateral 
aspect with slight anteapical indentation. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum dull yellowish white, an apical 
and a pair of discal spots on crown and two longitudinal vittae on 
pronotum extending from near anterior margin to posterior margin, 
thence slightly laterad along margin, dull orange. Scutellum dull 
yellow with a broad median gray stripe. Forewings with ground color 
reddish black except hyaline apical portions of inner three apical 
cells, an inverted median V-shaped vitta across commissure near 
midlengths of clavi, four large costal blotches and one in apical half 
of brachial cell on each wing orange-red ; veins in apical half of corium 
contrasting red; outer apical cell hyaline at base and apex, smoky at 
middle. Face and venter entirely pale. 

Known only from the type, a male from Chapada, Brazil, and a 
pair of topotypic specimens bearing the same data as the type, all in 
the U. S. National Museum. 

Beamerulus, new genus 

Figure 32 

Type of the genus, Beamerulus beameri, new species. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein distinct at apex but forming a part 
of apical wing margin to apex of vein M i+2 ; posterior branch of vein R 
evanescent apically; vein Cu 2 confluent with submarginal vein at 
point considerably proximad of vein m-cu. Forewing with appendix 
not extending around apex which is smoothly rounded; inner apical 
cell slender, not greatly wider in basal third than in apical half; 
second apical cell parallel-sided; third apical cell triangular or short- 
petiolate; outer apical cell longer than broad, not attaining apical 
wing margin, its base distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell; 
color pattern including a zigzag vitta of red, orange or black. Male 
plates elongate-triangular, equalling or exceeding posterior pygofer mar- 
gin, each with single row of setae in apical two-thirds, some of these con- 
spicuously black near middle of row, some fine and elongate apically. 
Pygofer with posterodorsal margin produced; macrosetae not in rows, 
arranged roughly parallel to posterior and posteroventral pygofer 
margin; pygofer process arising on ventral pygofer margin, slender 
and elongate, crossing mid ventral line in caudoventral aspect. Ninth 
tergum with a triangular area before anal tube bounded by distinct 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 243 

integumental thickening both laterally and apically. Anal processes 
distinct, elongate, slender, almost attaining ventral pygofer margin. 
Style elongate, without preapical lobe. Connective triangular or 
shallowly U-shaped. Aedeagus with preatrium distinct; dorsal 
apodeme as long as shaft or longer; shaft bifurcate or abruptly nar- 
rowed apically. Head strongly produced, crown with median length 
exceeding interocular width ; ocelli on rounded margin between crown 
and face, about equidistant from inner eye margins and median line 
of head. Pronotum at least one-half longer than crown, wider than 
head including eyes; lateral margins strongly divergent posteriorly. 
Face slightly convex in lateral aspect. 

This genus is dedicated to Dr. R. H. Beamer of the University of 
Kansas, who collected two of the three known species. 

Distribution: Mexico. 

Beamerulus is closely related to Diceratalebra, from which it may be 
distinguished by its larger size, its color pattern, and its clearly 
delimited tergal area of the ninth segment. From Protalebrella, to 
which it is also closely related, Beamerulus can be distinguished by 
its distinct anal processes, its larger size and distinctive forewing 
markings, and its rounded forewing apices. 

Key to species of Beamerulus 

1. Forewing with brown vittae, crown and pronotum unmarked; male pygofer 

process without a distinct anteapical tooth on mesal margin in caudoventral 

aspect uniceratus, new species 

Forewing with red vittae, crown and pronotum with orange markings; male 
pygofer process with a distinct anteapical tooth on mesal margin in caudo- 
ventral aspect 2 

2. Crown with a pair of submarginal oblique orange markings near anterior 

margin; aedeagal shaft bifurcate apically beameri, new species 

Crown with discal markings only; aedeagal shaft not bifurcate apically. 

morelosensis, new species 

Beamerulus uniceratus, new species 

Figure 32,a-d, 

Length of male 4.2 mm. Crown with median length one-fifth 
greater than interocular width. Pronotum with median length one- 
half greater than median length of crown. Male plates scarcely 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin . Pygofer with posterodorsal margin 
strongly produced, subangulate; pygofer process in ventral aspect 
elongate, slender, gradually curved mesad, crossing midventral line 
in apical fifth, the mesal margin slightly excavated apically. Aedeagus 
without a ventral ramus, the ventral margin of shaft, in lateral aspect, 
narrowing abruptly in apical third of its length; dorsal apodeme 
elongate, as long as shaft, slightly expanded apically in lateral aspect. 



244 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Crown and scutellum ivory, the latter with basal angles dull yellow. 
Pronotum gray, the humeral areas paler and suffused with brown. 
Forewing hyaline with a chocolate brown zigzag vitta beginning in 
base of clavus, extending in clavus along claval suture to midlength, 
there giving off a short mesal branch to commissural margin, crossing 
claval suture at midlength and extending posterolaterad to a dark 
spot at midlength of costa, thence caudomesad, ending in apex of 
brachial cell; wing apex with an arcuate, deep smoky vitta beginning 
in basal third of inner apical cell, extending laterad through base of 
second apical cell, caudad along third apical vein, thence caudad 
along costal margin into apex of second apical cell. Beneath as in 
B. beameri Young (below) but without markings on pleural portion 
of pronotum. 

Holotype male, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico, Oct. 21, 1941 
("K. 57") (DeLong, Good, Caldwell and Plummer), in collection of 
D. M. DeLong. 

Beamerulus beameri, new species 

Figure 32,e-j 

Length of both sexes 4.0 mm. Crown with median length one- 
fifth greater than interocular width. Pronotum with median length 
one-half greater than median length of crown. Female seventh 
sternum with posterior margin broadly convex each side of prominent 
median tooth which is blunt apically and dark margined; pygofer 
with three or four black macrosetae on each side of ovipositor near 
its midlength, in addition to the usual pale macrosetae. Male 
plates exceeding posterior pygofer margin. Male pygofer with 
posterodorsal apex rounded; pygofer process appearing crescentiform 
in caudoventral aspect, chelate apically. Aedeagal shaft bifurcate 
at apex with ventral ramus greatly reduced, much less than half 
length of dorsal ramus; dorsal apodeme elongate, exceeding apex of 
aedeagus. Sternal abdominal apodemes short, not traversing one 
conjunctiva. 

Ground color of dorsum pale cream, crown with two pairs of spots 
adjoining inner eye margins, the more anterior elongate, submarginal, 
the more posterior, short, oval, slightly behind middle of disc, pink; 
pronotum with a transverse vitta across disc before midlength giving 
off a short straight anterior, and an oblique, longer posterior extension 
at each end, the anterior extensions not attaining anterior pronotal 
margin, the posterior extensions attaining and expanded along 
humeral margins, sanguineous. Scutellum usually with a quadrate, 
sanguineous median marking at base (absent in holotype) . Forewing 
with a zigzag sanguineous vitta extending from base along claval 
suture to commissural margin at midclavus, thence posterolaterad 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



245 




Figure 32. — Beamerulus. a-d, B. uniceratus (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; c, pygofer process, caudoventral aspect; d f aedeagus, lateral aspect, e-j, B. 
beameri: e, anterior dorsum (type);/, pygofer, lateral aspect; g, pygofer process, caudo- 
ventral aspect; h, apex of forewing; i, aedeagus, lateral aspect (type); /, style and con- 
nective, dorsal aspect, k-m, B. morelosensis (type): k, pygofer, lateral aspect; /, aedeagus, 
lateral aspect; m, pygofer process, caudoventral aspect. (In b, /, and k the broken lines 
represent anal processes; in c, g, and m, the midline of the specimen.) 



246 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

through corium to a black spot behind midlength of costa, thence 
arched posterornesad to inner basal angle of inner apical cell and 
posterolaterad to base of third apical cell; corium with a short arched 
longitudinal vitta near base of costa, pink to sanguineous; a small 
spot at claval apex, an arch extending from basal third of inner 
apical cell posterolaterad through base of second apical cell, along 
apex of outer apical cell to apical wing margin, along margin through 
apex of second apical cell, and outer portion of base of outer apical 
cell, black. Face and venter pale stramineous, apices of hind tibiae 
black; pleural portion of pronotum with an oblique, sanguineous 
dash. 

Holotj^pe male, allotype female, and two male paratypes, 10 km. 
north of Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico, Dec. 28, 1949 (R. H. Beamer), 
in Snow Entomological Collections; male and female paratypes, same 
data, in U. S. National Museum. 

Beamerulus morelosensis, new species 

Figure 32,k-m 

Length of male 4.5 mm. Crown with median length one-sixth 
greater than interocular width. Pronotum with median length one- 
seventh greater than median length of crown. Male plates scarcely 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin. Pygofer with posterodorsal 
apex rounded, pygofer processes in caudo ventral aspect rounded 
apically, convergent, each with a pair of mesal anteapical protuber- 
ances, the more apical one much longer, slender, slightly curved, 
crossing the midventral line. Aedeagal shaft with a dorsal apical 
process, ventral ramus absent; dorsal apodeme exceeding apex of 
aedeagus, greatly expanded in lateral aspect, its least width exceeding 
greatest width of shaft. Sternal abdominal apodemes short, not 
attaining second conjunctiva. 

Ground color of dorsum lacteus, head with a narrow line on margin 
between crown and face, interrupted at apex, and a pair of quadrate 
discal spots on crown behind middle, touching inner eye margins, 
pronotum with marking similar to B. beameri Young, orange. Scutel- 
lum lacteus medially, basal angles very pale yellow, apex black. 
Forewing with a zigzag vitta as in beameri, orange in basal half, 
sanguineous in apical half, the apical portion twice interrupted basad 
of apical cells, the base of the vitta, in clavus, extending mesad to 
point opposite apex of scutellum; corium with basal costal vitta as 
in beameri, orange, dark markings as in beameri but outer apical cell 
almost completely dark margined; clavus with a diffuse pink spot 
near midlength of apical half; basal fourth of inner apical cell and 
adjoining appendix pale smoky. Face and venter as in beameri. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRIJSTI — YOUNG 247 

This species is closely related to and can be easily confused with 
beameri. The styles, the general form of the pygofer processes, 
the anal processes, the shape of the pygofer and its setal pattern, 
as well as the color are strongly similar to beameri, and force its in- 
clusion in the same genus with beameri. From the latter morelosensis 
is distinct in its lack of a ventral aedeagal ramus, its expanded dorsal 
aedeagal apodeme, the details of the pygofer process and minor 
details of the color pattern. The aedeagus strongly suggests a rela- 
tionship to Protalebrella. 

Holotype male, 10 km. north of Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico, 
Dec. 28, 1949 (R. H. Beamer), in Snow Entomological Collections. 

Genus Diceratalebra Young 

Figures 33, 34 

Diceratalebra Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 26, 1952 (type Alebra san- 
guinolinea Baker, by original designation). 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin 
or not; posterior branch of vein R usually entire apically; vein Cu 2 
confluent with submarginal vein at point proximad of vein m-cu. 
Forewing with appendix usually not extending around wing apex 
which is rounded; inner apical cell broad basally, narrower in apical 
half (exception: pusilla Young); second apical cell narrow basally, 
lateral margins almost parallel; third apical cell usually triangular or 
petiolate; outer apical cell short, not attaining wing apex, its base 
distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell; color pale marked 
with orange and black. Female seventh sternum large, posterior 
margin broadly convex or with a distinct median tooth. Male plates 
elongate, slender, exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with single, 
longitudinal row of macrosetae. Pygofer with posterodorsal portion 
produced posteriorly, disc with a vertical or oblique group of macro- 
setae, and occasionally with other additional macrosetae; pygofer 
process arising on ventral or caudoventral margin or on disc near 
margin. Ninth tergum with tergite clearly delimited laterally or not, 
not delimited apically. Anal processes present, usually short, not 
ending near ventral pygofer margin. Style short, without distinct 
preapical lobe, slightly curved at apex. Aedeagus short, laterally 
compressed, appearing bifid at apex, the dorsal ramus containing the 
gonoduct, dorsal apodeme strongly developed. Head produced with 
apex rounded. Ocelli on broadly rounded margin between crown and 
face, about equidistant from inner margins of eyes and median line. 
Pronotum wider than head including eyes, lateral margins divergent 
posteriorly. Face in profile with contour usually strongly divergent 
from line of crown. 



248 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Distribution: Southwestern United States, Mexico, Islas Revilla 
Gigedo, Central America. 

The relationship of Diceratalebra to Protalebrella and Beamerulus 
is discussed in the generic descriptions of those genera. It is also 
closely related to Barela, new genus, no species of which have the 
bifurcate aedeagal shaft characteristic of Diceratalebra. 

Key to species of Diceratalebra 

1. Forewing with appendix extending partially around wing apex; ground color 

of dorsum olive green, without orange markings; male with pygofer process 
extending caudodorsad almost parallel to caudoventral pygofer margin 

(occurs in Texas) interrogata (Knull) 

Forewing with appendix extending to apex but not around it; ground color 
unmarked pale yellowish or pale yellowish marked with orange; male pygofer 
process not as above 2 

2. Male pygofer process branched apically or with a short anteapical spur ... 3 
Male pygofer process not so 4 

3. Aedeagus with dorsal ramus more than twice length of ventral ramus; male 

pygofer process with a short anteapical spur; pronotum with short discal 
parallel orange markings (occurs on Socorro Island) . . . sola, new species 
Aedeagus with the two rami of about equal length; male pygofer process bifur- 
cate apically; pronotum with semicircular orange band (occurs in Mexico). 

quadricerata, new species 

4. Male pygofer process arising ventrally, extending dorsocaudad 5 

Male pygofer process arising along caudoventral margin, extending caudo- 

ventrad sanguinolinea (Baker) 

5. Crown of male with median length exceeding interocular width; forewing with 

third apical cell triangular; dorsum marked with yellow, orange, and black. 

caldwelli (Ruppel and DeLong) 

Crown with median length less than interocular width; forewing with third 

apical cell quadrilateral; dorsum unmarked pale yellow . pusilla* new name 

Diceratalebra sanguinolinea (Baker) 

Figure 33,a-e 

Alebra sanguinolinea Baker, Invertebrata Pacifica, vol. 1, p. 5, 1903. 

Protalebra cubana Osborn, Ann. Ent. Soc. Amer., vol. 19, p. 353, 1926, new 

synonymy. 
Protalebra montana Caldwell, Journ. Agr. Univ. Puerto Rico, vol. 34, p. 96, 1952, 

new synonymy. 
Diceratalebra sanguinolinea; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 27, 1952. 

Length of male 3.2 mm., of female 3.3 mm. Crown with median 
length almost one-half greater than interocular width. Pronotum 
with median length one-third greater than median length of crown; 
lateral margins slightly divergent posteriorly. Forewing with appendix 
not extending around apex. Hind wing with submarginal vein conflu- 
ent with apical wing margin; posterior branch of vein R entire. Face 
broadly convex in lateral aspect. Female seventh sternum with 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 249 

posterior margin broadly convex. Male plates triangular, gradually 
tapered from base to apex, with a row of macrosetae extending from 
near base to apex. Pygofer with process discal, arising on inner surface, 
slender, short, curved ventrolaterad. Anal process not attaining 
middle of disc of pygofer. Connective elongate, triangular with 
apex rounded, almost attaining style apex, appearing jointed before 
midlength. Aedeagus short, broad, preatrium wanting, ventral apical 
ramus shorter and broader than dorsal ramus. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum, and scutellum dull yellowish 
white, the pronotum marked with a broad, marginal, orange-red band 
along anterior and lateral margins. Forewings milky translucent, 
a vitta in basal half of clavus extending along claval suture, thence 
abruptly bent mesad to commissure, an irregular oblique vitta 
extending from near base of coastal margin caudomesad to slightly 
beyond midlength of brachial cell, a similar oblique vitta extending 
from coastal plaque to apex of brachial cell, concolorous with pronotal 
band, apical half of clavus with a faint yellow commissural spot, 
apical portions of first, second, and third apical cell smoky. Venter 
entirely dull yellow 

Six co types from San Marcos, Nicaragua, in the Pomona College 
collection, have been examined and cotype labels have been affixed. 
A male cotype from the series is here designated lectotype. Specimens 
have also been examined from Chinandega, Nicaragua. 

The new synonymy above is based on examination of the types of 
the names involved. The Osborn type and the Caldwell type are in 
the U. S. National Museum. 

Diceratalebra sola, new species 

Figuee S3,f-h 

Length of male 2.7 mm., of female 2.8 mm. Crown with median 
length one-fourth greater than interocular width. Pronotum with 
median length one-fourth less than median length of crown; with 
lateral margins not strongly divergent posteriorly. Forewing with 
appendix not extending around wing apex. Hind wing with sub- 
marginal vein confluent with wing apex; posterior branch of vein R 
entire. Female seventh sternum with posterior margin broadly 
convex. Male plates each with longitudinal row of small macrosetae 
on basal half. Pygofer with vertical row of macrosetae extended 
slightly anteroventrad at lower end; pygofer process arising on 
caudo ventral pygofer margin, short, divergent from posterior pygofer 
margin in lateral aspect, with a short, ventral spur at midlength; 
pygofer processes parallel in ventral aspect. Anal process extending 



250 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

ventrad to middle of pygofer. Connective trapezoidal. Aedeagus 
similar to that of D. interrogate!, (Knull) (below), but with preatrium 
and dorsal ramus longer, dorsal apodeme shorter. Sternal abdominal 
apodemes traversing two conjunctivae. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum, scutellum and clavus dull yellow; 
crown with median longitudinal paler vitta; pronotum with four large 
orange spots across disc; scutellum unmarked; clavi with a pair of 
parentheses-shaped vittae (occasionally interrupted) in basal half 
and each clavus with a spot next apex of scutellum, orange, a faint 
yellow spot in apical half of clavus. Corium hyaline, a faint yellow, 
irregular, transverse band opposite claval apex, curved slightly 
cephalad, terminating laterally in a narrow smoky oblique dash 
bordering hind margin of costal plaque; apical veins pale bordered 
with sharply contrasting black; apical portions of first, second and 
third apical cells smoky. Face and venter pale, bases of posttibial 
spines apices of posttibiae, and a mesal spot in apical half of each 
male plate, black. 

Holotype male, allotype female, and male paratype, Socorro Island, 
Kevilla Gigedo group, 2,000 ft., May 9, 1925 (H. H. Keifer). Holo- 
type and allotype in collection of California Academy of Sciences, 
paratype in U. S. National Museum. 

This species is closely related to D. sanguinolinea but differs in the 
branched pygofer process not present in the latter. Externally the 
two species may be readily distinguished by the orange markings of 
the pronotum forming an inverted "U" in D. sanguinolinea; longi- 
tudinal vittae in D. sola. 

Diceratalebra interrogate (Knull) 

Figure 33,z-ra 

Alebra interrogate/, Knull, Ent. News, vol. 51, p. 291, 1940. 

Dicer atelebra interrogate/,; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 27, 1952. 

Length of male 2.9 mm., of female 3.1 mm. Crown slightly pro- 
duced, the apex rounded ; median length slightly less than interocular 
width. Pronotum with lateral margin strongly divergent; posterior 
margin smoothly, shallowly concave or subangulate. Hind wing with 
submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin ; posterior branch 
of vein R entire apically. Forewing with appendix extending partly 
around apex; venation as in D. sanguinolinea (Baker). Female 
seventh sternum with posterior margin strongly convex. Male 
pygofer with vertical row of discal rnacrosetae extended anteroven- 
trad; pygofer process slender and tapered, parallel to posteroventral 
pygofer margin, the two processes parallel in ventral aspect. Anal 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



251 




Figure 33. — Diceralalebra. a-e, D. sanguinolinea: a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect (dorsal broken line represents anal process); c, style, lateral aspect; d, style and 
connective, dorsal aspect; e, aedeagus, lateral aspect, f-h, D. sola (type) :/, pygofer, lateral 
aspect, g, anterior dorsum; h, aedeagus, lateral aspect, i-m, D. interrogata: i, anterior 
dorsum;/, sternal abdominal apodemes and phragma (conjunctiva represented by broken 
line); k, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, pygofer, lateral aspect; m, pygofer process, caudo- 
ventral aspect (broken line represents midline of specimen). 



252 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

process not attaining middle of disc of pygofer. Connective weak, 
subtrapezoidal. Aedeagus as in D. sanguinolinea but with dorsal 
apodeme more elongate and with dorsal ramus much longer in com- 
parison to ventral ramus. Sternal abdominal apodeme traversing 
one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum, scutellum, clavus and basal half 
of corium dull yellowish green, a dull white median vitta extending 
full length of crown, and continued over pronotum as dull gray vitta, 
extending laterad along posterior pronotal margin; lateral margins of 
pronotum broadly dull gray. Forewing with conspicuous hyaline 
spots at midlength of clavus, near base of corium, and in brachial cell 
and cell M near midlength of wing; costal plaque hyaline; apical 
third of wing hyaline, the apical veins contrasting ivory bordered with 
black; apical portion of each of inner three apical cells smoky. Face 
and venter pale. 

The type, a male from Starr County, Tex., is in the collection of 
Dr. D. J. Knull. The above description is based on topotypic para- 
types in the U. S. National Museum. The species is known from 
Texas and northeastern Mexico. 

Diceratalebra pusilla, new name 
Figuee 34, a-f 

Protalebra pallida Ruppel and DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 53, p. 228, 1953 
(nee Osborn, 1928, p. 260), new synonymy. 

Length of male 3.3 mm. Crown with median length about one- 
sixth less than interocular width. Pronotum with median length 
almost twice median length of crown. Forewing with appendix not 
extending around apical wing margin; inner apical cell broadest at 
midlength, not distinctly broader at base than at apex; second apical 
cell about half length of inner apical cell; third apical cell quadrangu- 
lar. Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing 
margin; posterior branch of vein R entire apically. Male plates 
triangular, scarcely exceeding posterior pygofer margin in ventral 
aspect, each with a row of macrosetae extending over middle half. 
Pygofer process arising from ventral pygofer margin near base, in 
lateral aspect extending posterodorsad and curved caudad in apical 
third, in caudo ventral aspect the two processes contiguous at their 
acute apices. Anal process not attaining middle of disc of pygofer. 
Connective a transverse bar. Aedeagus shorter than dorsal aedeagal 
apodeme ; preatrium distinct ; ventral ramus of aedeagal apex less than 
one-fourth length of dorsal ramus. 

Ground color of dorsum pale yellow, the forewing translucent, with 
an areole at apex of cell R and of cell M, and areoles of all apical cells, 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



253 



hyaline; a spot at base of second apical cell, an oblique dash before 
midlength of first apical cell, and vein at base of outer apical cell, 
fumose. Face and venter entirely pale yellow. 




Figure 34. — Diceratalebra. a-J, D. pusilla (type) ; a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, style and connective, ventral aspect; t, pygofer 
process, caudoventral aspect;/, apex of forewing (in situ), g-h, D. quadricerata: g, aedea- 
gus, lateral aspect; k, pygofer, lateral aspect, i-l, D. caldwelli (type): i, anterior dorsum; 
/, pygofer, lateral aspect; k, aedeagus, lateral aspect; /, style and connective, dorsal aspect. 
(In by A, and/ the broken lines represent anal processes; in e, the midline of the specimen.) 



254 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

This species is known only from the type, a male from Iguala, 
Guerrero, Mexico, in the DeLong collection. The above description 
is based on the type, which was examined through the kindness of 
Dr. DeLong. 

Diceratalebra quadricerata, new species 

Figuke M,g,h 

Length of male 3.0 mm. Crown with median length one-third 
greater than interocular width. Pronotum with median length less 
than one-half greater than median length of crown. Forewing as in 
D. sanguinolinea (Baker). Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent 
with wing apex; posterior branch of vein R entire. Male plates exceed- 
ing posterior pygofer margin ; row of macrosetae extending from near 
base almost to apex. Pygofer with irregular, oblique group of macro- 
setae parallel to caudoventral margin; process arising on postero- 
ventral margin, short, stout, bifurcate apically, directed caudoventrad. 
Anal process weak, not attaining middle of disc of pygofer. Con- 
nective in form of cross-bar. Aedeagus with preatrium well developed, 
shaft bifid apically, the dorsal ramus more slender and longer than 
ventral ramus. Sternal abdominal apodemes traversing two con- 
junctivae. 

Crown ivor}^. Pronotum, scutellum and forewings translucent 
white, an arcuate marking on pronotum extending along anterior 
margin from one humeral margin to other, each forewing with a con- 
stricted vitta in basal half of clavus, an oblique angulate vitta from 
basal fourth of costa to claval suture at midlength, and an oblique 
vitta from midcosta to claval apex, orange, the last vitta darkened 
at costal margin; a pale yellow commissural spot in apical half of 
clavus; apical veins bordered with and first and second apical cells 
filled with fuscous. Face and venter pale. 

Holotype male, "M. B. 260," Mexico (A. Dampf), in collection 
of D. M. DeLong. 

The arcuate orange pronotal band readily separates this species 
from D. sola, the only other species in the genus with a forked pygofer 
process. 

Diceratalebra caldwelli (Ruppel and DeLong), new combination 

Figure 34,*— Z 

Protalebra caldwelli Ruppel and DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 53, p. 228, 1953. 

Length of male 3.2 mm. Head strongly produced; crown with 
median length almost one-third greater than interocular width. 
Pronotum with median length about one-sixth greater than median 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 255 

length of crown. Forewing with appendix not extending around 
wing apex; third apical cell triangular. Hind wing with submarginal 
vein confluent with wing apex; posterior branch of vein R evanescent 
apically. Face broadly convex in lateral aspect, weakly divergent 
from profile of crown. Male plates triangular, gradually tapered 
from base to apex, each with longitudinal row of conspicuous black 
spatulate macrosetae on middle half of length. Pygofer with process 
arising on ventral margin near base, elongate, tapering, acute apically, 
curving dorsomesad, thence caudad. Anal process attaining middle 
of disc of pygofer. Connective a transverse bar. Aedeagal shaft 
shorter than dorsal aedeagal apodeme, preatrium distinct, ventral 
apical ramus consisting of a very short tooth. 

Dorsum dull, pale yellowish, the forewings translucent, a spot in 
basal half of clavus and one before apex, two faint spots in basal half 
of corium and a portion of costal margin before outer apical cell, 
faint yellow; claval apex and a curved marking extending through 
base of third apical cell, an area at apex of outer apical cell, thence 
narrowing along costal margin to near apex, black; bases of first and 
second apical cells narrowly smoky; apices of cells R and M orange. 
Face and venter pale, apical hind tarsomeres and the spatulate 
macrosetae of the male plates contrasting black. 

This species is known only from the type series, from Mexico. 
The holotype has been examined through the kindness of Dr. DeLong. 

Genus Protalebrella Young 

Figures 35, 36 

Protalebrella Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 38, 1952 (type Protalebra 
brasiliensis Baker, by original designation) . 

Hind wing with submarginal vein not distinct from apical margin; 
posterior branch of vein R entire apically, vein Cu 2 confluent with 
submarginal vein near midlength of wing. Forewing with apex 
obliquely truncate or falcate, appendix not extending around apical 
wing margin; second apical cell parallel-sided; third apical cell tri- 
angular or petiolate; outer apical cell broad, short, not attaining wing 
apex, its base distinctly proximad of base of third apical cell. Male 
plates elongate-triangular, exceeding pygofer, each with longitudinal 
group of macrosetae throughout length. Pygofer with few macro- 
setae; pygofer process arising dorsally or along posterior pygofer 
margin. Ninth tergite and anal processes absent. Style usually 
short, with or without preapical lobe. Connective usually a transverse 
bar. Aedeagus entirely without processes, with dorsal apodeme 
slender and elongate, preatrium usually well developed. Head 
transverse or triangular, the apex rounded or acute in dorsal aspect; 

422758 — 57 9 



256 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

in lateral aspect with face convex and strongly divergent from contour 
of crown; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face, equi- 
distant from inner eye margin and median line of head, or slightly 
nearer the latter. Pronotam with lateral margins divergent poste- 
riorly, posterior margin broadly, shailowly concave. 

Distribution: Neotropical Region. 

Protalebrella is closely related to Beamerulus, in the above dis- 
cussion of which distinguishing characters are mentioned. It is 
also closely related to Barela and Dicer atalebra, neither of which 
contains species with the forewing apices truncate or falcate, with 
anal processes completely absent, or with pygofer processes arising 
dorsally or caudally on the pygofer, all of these features being char- 
acteristic of Protalebrella. From Dicer atalebra, Protalebrella is further 
differentiated by its lack of a distinct ventral process at the apex 
of the aedeagal shaft, although the abrupt narrowing of the shaft 
suggests that such a process has been lost phyletically. None of the 
species of Protalebrella are marked with orange or green diagonal 
vittae, of common occurrence in Barela and Dicer atalebra. The 
orange-marked species of Protalebrella have transverse markings. 

As this paper goes to press, a new species of Protalebrella, P. scha- 
chovskoyi Torres (Neo tropica, vol. 1, p. 89, 1955) comes to hand. 
Torres' species is very closely related to P. iris, new species, below, 
but the latter appears distinct in its single row of macrosetae on the 
male plate and its shorter sternal abdominal apodemes. 

Key to species of Protalebrella 

1. Forewing with anal margin bordered with black 2 

Forewing not so 3 

2. Length 3 mm. or less; crown with median length equal to or slightly less than 

interocular width; male pygofer process not bifurcate at apex. 

brasiliensis (Baker) 
Length 3.3 mm.; crown with median length almost one-half greater than 
interocular width; male pygofer process bifurcate apically. 

conica (Ruppel and DeLong) 

3. Chief color marking of dorsum an inverted sagittate transcommissural figure; 

forewing with second apical cell less than half length of first; male pygofer 

process arising dorsally, extending caudoventrad iris, new species 

Chief color marking of dorsum consisting of undulate transverse vittae; fore- 
wing with length of second apical cell half or more length of first; male 
pygofer process not extending caudoventrad 4 

4. Male with pygofer processes elongate, extending caudad much beyond posterior 

pygofer margin; aedeagus not abruptly narrowed at midlength. 

terminata (Baker) 
Male pygofer processes not as above, aedeagus abruptly narrowed near mid- 
length 5 

5. Male pygofer with an elongate process extending ventrad in addition to short 

bifurcate process parana, new species 

Male pygofer with short bifurcate process only. . . panamensis, new species 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 257 

Protalebrella brasiliensis (Baker) 

Figure 35, a-f 

Protalebra brasiliensis Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 405, 1899. 

Protalebrella brasiliensis; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 39, 1952. 

Length of male 2.7-3.0 mm., of female 2.9-3.0 mm. Head only 
slightly produced, median length of crown equal to or slightly less than 
interocular width. Pronotum with median length one-half greater 
than median length of crown ; width exceeding width of head including 
eyes. Ocelli about midway between inner margin of eye and median 
line of head. Female seventh sternum large, posterior margin trans- 
verse, broadly convex, with a very minute median tooth. Male plates 
each with a single submarginal row of macrosetae. Male p3^gofer 
short, in lateral aspect with posterodorsal margin produced posteriorly 
in a rounded lobe that gives rise to an elongate, slender pygofer process 
directed ventrad and slightly mesad, the apex acute and exceeding 
posteroventral pygofer margin. Style short, preapical lobe present, 
apical extension curved slightly post ero ventrad. Connective in form 
of transverse bar. Aedeagus with preatrium short; shaft tapering in 
basal half, slender and very slightly arched caudad in apical half. 
Sternal abdominal apodemes not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown straw yellow to sordid yellow with a median short dark 
marking near posterior margin; disc with a pair of ocellus-like darker 
markings near anterior margin. Pronotum, except yellow lateral 
margins, black, with three submarginal spots behind disc of crown 
yellow, with four longitudinal narrow streaks extending from near 
midlength to hind margin dull yellow to bluish gray. Scutellum con- 
colorous with pronotum, the median line and a dot on each side along 
transverse sulcus, yellow. Forewing with ground color golden yellow, 
a streak along anal margin and basal half of commissure ending beyond 
midlength of clavus in a dark-bordered translucent areole, black, a 
broad black vitta extending from costal plaque caudomesad to touch 
claval suture opposite end of claval vitta, thence narrowly caudad in 
brachial cell almost to its apex thence laterad to include entire ante- 
apical portion of the wing including the apices of the anteapical cells, 
enclosing translucent areoles near clavus, in apex of cell K and of cell 
M, in base of first and of second apical cells, and in outer apical cell; 
wing apex narrowly translucent. Venter entirely pale except a dark 
spot along mesal margin near midlength of each male plate. Abdom- 
inal dorsum with a black marking near base and another near apex. 

Some variation has been noted in the length of the pygofer processes 
of the male (fig. S5,b,d), but supporting evidence is lacking for con- 
sidering the males with atypically shorter processes as distinct taxa, 
and males with such processes have been found in samples from popu- 
lations tj-pical in the character. 



258 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

The type, a male from Chapada, Brazil, is in the U. S. National 
Museum. Male specimens have been examiDed from the following 
localities: United States : Georgia: Savannah. Florida: Orlando, San- 
ford, Biscayne Bay, LaBelle, Key Largo. Cuba: Caimito, Habana, 
Santiago de las Vegas, Baracoa, Santo Tom as, Taco Taco, Balua 
Honda. Haiti: Port au Prince. Dominican Republic: Santo Do- 
mingo, San Crist6bal. Puerto Rico: Mayagiiez, Adjuntas, Baya- 
mon, Aquadilla, Utuado, Arecibo, Rio Piedras, Carite Mountain, El 
Pastilli, Aibonito, Cambalache, Loiza, Vieques Island. Virgin 
Islands: St. Thomas. British West Indies: Trinidad. Jamaica: 
Kingston, "I. Baron Trelawney." British Honduras: Punta Gorda. 
Venezuela: Caracas, El Valle. Ecuador: Tena. Brazil: Cam- 
pinas, Rezende, Nova Teutonia, Belem, Escada, Niteroi, Chapada, 
Rio Caraguata. Paraguay: Villarica. Argentina: Tucuman, Chaco 
Province, Santa Fe Province. Panama: Code, Darien, Herrera, Los 
Santos, and Panama Provinces. Bolivia: Provincia del Sara. 

This species has been taken from grasses and bushes. 

Protalebrella conica (Ruppel and^DeLong), new combination 

Figure 35,0-,; 
Protalebra conica Ruppel and DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 53, p. 228, 1953. 

Length of both sexes 3.3 mm. Crown narrowly triangular with 
apex rounded, median length about one-half greater than interocular 
width. Pronotum short, broad, median length less than one-half 
greater than median length of crown; lateral margins strongly diver- 
gent posteriorly. Ocelli closer to median line than to inner eye 
margins. Female seventh sternum large, hind margin strongly pro- 
duced medially, the apex acute or sharply rounded. Male plates 
gradually tapered from base to apex, each with a single row of mac- 
rosetae. Male pygofer with posterior margin concave, posteroventral 
angle extending mesad as a short process, acute and recurved apically ; 
pygofer process arising dorsally near posterior pygofer margin, 
extending ventrad, widely bifurcate at apex. Style without distinct 
preapical lobe, bisinuate in lateral aspect, the apex acute and curved 
caudoventrad. Connective Y-shaped, the unpaired portion short 
and thick. Aedeagus with preatrium well developed; dorsal apodeme 
much broader, the shaft shorter and broader than in P. brasiliensis 
(Baker). 

Color greatly variable in intensity. The following description refers 
to well-marked specimens. Ground color of crown, pronotum and 
forewings pale yellow. Pronotum with a broad median longitudinal 
black vitta extending from margin to margin, the median line con- 
trastingly paler throughout. Scutellum black, the median line 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



259 




Figure 35. — Protalebrella. a-f, P. brasiliensis: a, anterior dorsum (paratype); b, pygofer, 
lateral aspect (specimen from Havana, Cuba); c, aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, pygofer, 
lateral aspect (specimen from Belem, Para, Brazil); e, sternal abdominal apodemes 
(broken line represents conjunctiva); /, style and connective, dorsal aspect, g-j, P. conica: 
g, anterior dorsum; h, pygofer, lateral aspect (specimen from Branford, Fla.); i t apex of 
pygofer (specimen from Sierra Rangel, Cuba); /, aedeagus, lateral aspect, k-m, P. iris 
(type): £,f pygofer, lateral aspect; /, style and connective, dorsal aspect; m, aedeagus, 
lateral aspect. 



260 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

narrowly, and a spot on each side at midlength, paler. Forewing 
markings and venter as in P. brasiliensis. 

A single specimen in the U. S. National Museum from Sierra Rangel 
(1,500 ft.), Cuba, was examined and found to have slight differences 
in the shape of the pygofer and its processes (fig. 35 ,i) and in the dorsal 
aedeagal apodeme, which was narrower than in typical members of 
this species. A form from several localities in Panama and the Canal 
Zone differs from the typical form in that the dorsal ramus of the 
pygofer process is curved slightly caudodorsad. It seems advisable 
to leave these forms undescribed until the degree of intraspecific 
intergradation can be established. 

The holotype, a female from El Naranjo, San Luis Potosi, Mexico, 
is in the Snow Entomological Collections. A topotypic male, not 
mentioned in the original description, has been studied. Other 
specimens have been examined from Branford and Sanford, Florida; 
Brownsville, Texas; Cordoba, Mexico; and Santa Ana and El Cacao, 
Costa Rica. 

This species superficially resembles P. brasiliensis and has been 
included under that name in some collections and in some older 
descriptions. 

Protalebrella iris, new species 

Figure 35,k-m 

Length of male 3.6 mm., of female 3.7 mm. Head well produced 
but with apex broadly rounded, crown with median length less than 
one-fourth greater than interocular width. Pronotum large, median 
length more than one-half greater than median length of crown; 
wider than head including eyes. Forewing unusual in the genus in 
that width of broadest anteapical portion of cell M is greater than 
that of cell R, and in that the fork of vein M occurs at point opposite 
the apical half of the inner apical cell; apical margin slightly falcate. 
Ocelli as in P. brasiliensis (Baker). Female seventh sternum tri- 
angular, well produced, the apex angulate. Male plates with a 
single row of macrosetae. Pygofer with posterior margin weakly 
bilobed; pygofer process arising along posterior pygofer margin, short, 
gradually tapered, vertical near base, curved slightly caudoventrad 
in apical portion. Style short, without preapical lobe, in lateral 
aspect bisinuate, the apical portion tapered to acute tip which is 
curved slightly ventrad. Connective in form of cross-bar. Aedeagus 
similar to that of P. brasiliensis but with longer preatrium. Sternal 
abdominal apodemes not traversing one conjunctiva. 

Ground color of crown and pronotum sordid yellow, an indistinct 
median longitudinal vitta on crown and two similar parallel longi- 
tudinal vittae on pronotum, dull orange. Scutellum gray, the median 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 261 

line, an intersecting, transverse anteapical vitta, a spot on each 
margin opposite end of transverse sulcus, dull ivory. Fore wings with 
ground color milky opaque, an inverted sagittate marking on basal 
region to the claval apex, beginning as a bright orange vitta parallel 
to anal margins, becoming narrowly bordered externally with black 
near its base, extending caudad and widening along commissure, 
intersecting midlength of claval suture and extending laterad on both 
wings to costal plaque, thence caudomesad to claval apex, the internal 
portion of "head" of the arrow and an adjoining short area more 
basad along commissure, translucent, marked with dark gray dots 
and vermiculations, apex from claval apex to basal half of outer 
apical cell and all region more distad except paler extreme apex, 
fumose, with pale areoles in apex of cell M and in disc of outer apical 
cell. Venter entirely pale. 

Holotype male and allotype female, Rio Caraguata, Mato Grosso, 
Brazil (F. Plaumann), in Snow Entomological Collections, University 
of Kansas. 

Protalebrella terminata (Baker) 

Figure 36, a-c 

Protalebra terminata Baker, Psyche, vol. 8, p. 404, 1899. 

Protalebrella terminata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 39, 1952. 

Length of male 3.2 mm. ; of female 3.2-3.6 mm. Head well produced 
but with apex broadly rounded; median length about one-fourth 
greater than interocular width. Pronotum with median length 
slightly less than one-half greater than median length of crown; 
width exceeding width of head including eyes. Ocelli as in P. brasi- 
liensis (Baker) . Female seventh sternum large, hind margin strongly 
produced medially, the apex acute or sharply rounded. Male plates 
each with a double row of macrosetae through most of length. Male 
pygofer in lateral aspect with posterodorsal margin shallowly concave, 
postero ventral margin extended ventrad in a short rounded lobe; 
pygofer process arising dorsally on posterior margin extending mesad, 
thence caudolaterad, gradually tapered throughout its length to 
acute apex which greatly exceeds posterior pygofer margin in lateral 
aspect. Style short, in lateral aspect bisinuate, the apex acute and 
directed postero ventrad, preapical lobe absent. Connective and 
aedeagus as in P. brasiliensis, but aedeagus with elongate preatrium 
and with shaft gradually tapered from base to apex. Sternal abdomi- 
nal apodemes as in P. brasiliensis. 

Ground color of crown, pronotum and scutellum dull yellowish 
white, of forewings, golden, a narrow median vitta on apical half of 
crown, a U-shaped marking on anterior two-thirds of pronotum and 



262 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

occasionally a lateral vitta on each side of this, a bisinuate vitta in 
basal third and a pair of parentheses-like arcs near midlength of 
clavus, a dot near base, a V-shaped vitta in basal third, an irregular 
lobate vitta at midlength on mesal half (often wanting) and two 
strongly undulate transverse vittae in apical half of corium, orange. 
Apical cells variously and irregularly marked with black, frequently 
with several paler areoles outlined. Venter entirely pale. 

In a pale variety of this species, the undulate markings of the 
forewings are narrow and pale gray, instead of orange. 

The type, a male from Chapada, Brazil, is in the U. S. National 
Museum. Specimens have also been examined from Rio Caraguata, 
Mato Grosso, Brazil; Campinas, Brazil; Villarica, Paraguay; and 
Provincia del Sara, Bolivia. 

Protalebrella parana, new species 

Figure 36, d-g 

Length of male 3.0 mm. Head distinctly produced with apex 
broadly rounded; crown with median length one-fourth greater than 
interocular width. Pronotum wider than head including eyes, with 
median length one-third greater than median length of crown. Ocelli 
slightly closer to median line of head than to inner margins of eyes. 
Male pygofer with a weakly developed process along ventral margin, 
and a double process arising along posterior margin, the double 
process consisting of an outer, short, curved process that is bifid 
apically and an elongate inner process that is directed ventrad. Style 
without distinct preapical lobe. Connective transverse, strongly 
joined to aedeagus. Aedeagus with preatrium short, shaft abruptly 
narrowed on anterior margin before apical fifth which is slender and 
slightly arcuate. Sternal abdominal apodemes not tranversing one 
conjunctiva. 

Crown dull gray with a faint orange median discal spot. Pronotum 
lacteus with a pair of longitudinal orange vittae, broadened and 
approximate near anterior margin, extending to posterior margin. 
Scutellum chalky with basal angles darker. Forewing milky-trans- 
lucent, an oblique vitta in base of clavus parallel to lateral margin of 
scutellum, an arcuate transcorial vitta in basal third, an undulate 
transverse vitta extending from midlength of costa caudomesad to 
claval suture, thence cephalad to midlength of clavus and mesad to 
commissure, and an oblique vitta from inner basal angle of outer 
apical cell through anteapical portions of cells R and M but not into 
apex of clavus, orange; apical cells faintly fumose except an areole 
near midlength of inner cell, and central portion of outer cell. Face 
and venter pale yellow; anterior coxae and hind tibiae at apices, 
orange. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 



263 



Holotype male, from Jabaty, Para, Brazil, May 1924 (F. X. Wil- 
liams), in collection of Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association. 

Protalebrella panamensis, new species 

Figure S6,h-k 

Length of male 3.0 mm. Crown produced, triangular, the apex 
narrowly rounded, median length one-fourth greater than interocular 
width. Pronotum wider than head including eyes, with median length 




Figure 36. — Protalebrella. a-c, P. terminata (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral 
aspect; c, aedeagus, lateral aspect, d-g, P. parana (type): d, anterior dorsum; e, pygofer; 
lateral aspect; /, pygofer apex, left side, caudoventral aspect (broken line represent, 
midline of specimen); g, aedeagus, lateral aspect, h-k, P. panamensis: h, anterior dorsums 
i, pygofer, lateral aspect; /, pygofer process, ventrolateral and slightly caudal aspect; 
k, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 



264 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

one-half greater than median length of crown. Forewing obliquely 
truncate apically; second apical cell slightly more than half length 
of inner apical cell; third apical cell short-petiolate. Female seventh 
sternum with hind margin convex on both sides of slightly produced 
median portion. Male pygofer with posterior margin broadly 
rounded, slightly notched at origin of pygofer process near midlength 
of posterior pygofer margin; pygofer process short, extended cau- 
domesad, with a short basal tooth. Connective a transverse bar. 
Aedeagus with shaft shorter than dorsal apodeme, abruptly narrowed 
near midlength. 

Crown brownish (probably result of post-mortem change) . Prono- 
tum yellowish white. Scutellrm dull yellow tinged with darker in 
basal angles and anteapically. Forewing hyaline, an undulate, 
transverse marking near base, narrowing towards commissure, trans- 
lucent pale yellow margined with dark, and a similar broader trans- 
verse band attaining commissural margin in apical third of clavus; 
an irregular marking beginning in apex of cell B, and outer apical 
angle of cell M extending distad through basal half of second apical 
cell and extending slightly into adjoining apical cells, broadening 
apically to form a transverse band across inner apical cell and to fill 
most of third apical cell, smoky. Face and venter pale. 

Holotype male, Kio Hato, Code Province, Panama, Nov. 9, 
1951 (F. S. Blanton), in U. S. National Museum (No. 62688), and an 
additional pair from same locality. One additional male examined 
from Pese, Herrera Province, Panama. 

Barela, new genus 

Figures 37, 38 

Type of the genus, Protalebra decorata Osborn. 

Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical wing margin; 
posterior branch of vein R entire apically; vein Cu 2 confluent with 
submarginal vein at point basad of vein m-cu. Forewing with 
appendix not extending around apex which is smoothly rounded; 
inner apical cell distinctly wider in basal than in apical half; second 
apical cell variable interspecificaHy; third apical cell triangular, 
usually stalked; outer apical cell longer than broad, not attaining 
apical wing margin, its base distinctly proximad of base of third 
apical cell; color markings orange, greenish, or smoky. Male plates 
elongate, triangular, attaining or exceeding posterior pygofer margin. 
Pygofer in lateral aspect with posterodorsal margin produced and 
rounded, disc with a vertical group of irregularly arranged macrosetae 
on apical half; pygofer process arising near middle of disc or along 
ventral pygofer margin. Ninth tergum with or without a tergite, 
if present not delimited posteriorly by integumental thickening. 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 265 

Anal processes weak, not extending ventrad beyond middle of disc of 
pygofer. Style simple, not greatly elongate, preapical lobe occasion- 
ally present but not strongly developed. Connective triangular or 
papilioniform. Aedeagus with preatrium elongate; dorsal apodeme 
usually long and slender; shaft long, slender, without processes. 
Head not strongly produced, apex rounded in dorsal aspect; crown 
with median length equal to or less than interocular width; ocelli on 
rounded margin between crown and face, usually about equidistant 
from inner eye margins and median line of head. Pronotum at least 
one-half longer than median length of crown, wider than head includ- 
ing eyes; lateral margins strongly divergent posteriorly. 

Distribution: Mexico, Jamaica, and Central America. In addi- 
tion to the species included in the key below, Protalebra apicalis Van 
Duzee (Bull. Buffalo Soc. Nat. Sci., vol. 8, p. 74, 1907) appears to 
belong to this genus. A female paratype from Mandeville, Jamaica, 
was examined from the collections of the California Academy of 
Sciences. 

Barela is closely related to Protalebrella and Diceratalebra, distin- 
guishing characters for which have been discussed under the respec- 
tive generic treatments. It is also closely related to Beamerulus, 
of which specimens are larger, possess a zigzag pattern on the fore- 
wings, have anal processes extending almost to ventral pygofer margin, 
and a ninth tergite delimited posteriorly by in tegumental thickening; 
all of these features in contrast to Barela. 

Key to species of Barela 

1. Crown dull yellow to sordid gray; male pygofer with process elongate, in lateral 

aspect directed caudodorsad decorata (Osborn) 

Crown with distinct markings, or with an orange tint, male pygofer process not 
as above 2 

2. Forewings marked with angular orange vittae; ninth tergite present; male with 

pygofer process longer (fig. 37, h) . . . aureocosta (Ruppel and DeLong) 

Forewings marked with green or black; ninth tergite absent; male pygofer 

process shorter (fig. 37j; fig. 38,6) 3 

3. Chief color markings of dorsum yellowish orange and yellowish green; fore wing 

with third apical cell long-petiolate; aedeagus with preatrium elongate. 

parvisaccata, new species 

Chief color markings of dorsum black; forewing with third apical cell not petio- 

late; aedeagus with preatrium short .... sobrina (Ruppel and DeLong) 

Barela decorata (Osborn), new combination 

Figure 37,a-e 

Protalebra decorata Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 18, p. 255, 1928. 
Protalebra sabana Osborn, op. cit., p. 259, new synonymy. 

Length of both sexes usually 3.3 mm. Head slightly produced; 
crown with median length about equal to interocular width. Prono- 



266 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

turn with median length one-half greater than median length of crown. 
Forewing with length of second apical cell measured along its inner 
margin equal to two-thirds length of inner apical cell; third apical cell 
not petiolate. Female seventh sternum not greatly produced; pos- 
terior margin with a median, very short quadrate projection; pygofer 
with multiseriate white macrosetae each side of ovipositor, and con- 
spicuous tuft of black macrosetae beyond midlength. Male plates 
not exceeding posterior pygofer margin; each with an irregularly ar- 
ranged close-set group of black spatulate macrosetae at midlength. 
Male pygofer with processes slender, elongate, acute apically, arising 
along ventral pygofer margin, in lateral aspect extending dorsocaudad, 
not strongly curved, not attaining posterodorsal pygofer margin; in 
ventral aspect the two processes extending dorsomesad, contiguous 
apically. Ninth tergum with tergite bounded laterally, but not 
apically, by integumental thickenings. Anal process present, not at- 
taining middle of disc of pygofer. Style without distinct preapical 
lobe, short, rounded apically. Connective papilioniform. Aedeagus 
with preatrium elongate, slender; dorsal apodeme elongate, slender, 
more than half length of shaft, expanded apically, the expansion with 
three small lobes in lateral aspect; shaft very elongate, slender, weakly 
bisinuate, acute apically. Sternal abdominal apodemes traversing 
one conjunctiva. 

Crown pale yellow to sordid gray. Pronotum ivory with a cres- 
centiform orange-red marking extending between humeral margins 
attaining anterior margin behind eyes but not between eyes. Scutel- 
lum yellow, apex black. Forewing hyaline, an orange vitta of irregu- 
lar width in basal half of clavus joining apically the expanded apical 
portion of an orange corial vitta that begins at base of costa, extends 
along costa for short distance, then parallel to claval suture to near 
midlength, the coalesced apical portions forming the anterior margin 
of an oblique hyaline streak extending caudolaterad from commissure 
behind midclavus, not attaining costal margin, the streak also bordered 
posteriorly with orange; clavus with white anteapical spot; an oblique 
streak in costal cell near midlength, base of outer apical cell narrowly, 
and base of third apical cell broadly, black; bases of first and second 
apical cells and apices of veins K, M and Cu orange broadly bordered 
with smoky, claval apex black; wing apex hyaline. Face, venter and 
legs pale except black mesosternal area; pleural portion of pronotum 
with a pink spot. 

The type, from Los Amates, Guatemala, is in the Ohio State Uni- 
versity collection. A topotypic male paratype has been examined 
through the kindness of Dr. J. N. Knull of Ohio State University. 
Additional specimens have been examined from San Pedro de Montes 
de Oca, Costa Rica; Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico (on Eupatorium 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 267 

adenophorum) ; Jacala, Mexico; and Socorro Island (2,000 ft.) in the 
Revilla Gigedo group, Mexico. 

Protalebra sabana is placed in synonymy, above, because the only 
two males examined from Panama appear to be referable to this spe- 
cies. They are from Tocumen, Panama Province, and agree well with 
the above description except for two features: the length is 2.8 mm., 
and the pygofer processes are not quite as gradually tapering; i. e., 
they are slightly broader anteapically. 

The form of the pygofer process, the near-distinct ninth tergite in the 
male, and the occurrence of the black macrosetae on the male plates 
are characters indicating that B. decorata is more closely related to 
species of Beameritlus than are other species of Barela. 

Barela aureocosta (Ruppel and DeLong), new combination 

Figure 37, g-i 
Protalebra aureocosta Ruppel and DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 53, p. 227, 1953. 

Length of male 3.3-3.4 mm., of female 3.5 mm. Head slightly 
produced; crown with median length about one-fourth less than 
interocular width; posterior margin smoothly shallowly concave. 
Pronotum with median length more than one-half greater than median 
length of crown. Fore wing with length of second apical cell measured 
along its inner margin less than two-thirds greatest length of outer 
apical cell; third apical cell long-petiolate. Female seventh sternum 
with posterior margin broadly convex, not greatly produced; pygofer 
without conspicuous tuft of black macrosetae. Male plates slightly 
exceeding posterior pygofer margin, each with a single longitudinal 
row of pale macrosetae from near base to apex; without conspicuous 
black macrosetae. Male pygofer with process arising near center of 
disc, slender, tapered, extending caudomesad, thence curved caudo- 
dorsad, not exceeding posterior pygofer margin, the two processes 
subparallel in ventral aspect. Ninth tergite indistinct, weakly de- 
limited laterally. Anal process present, not attaining middle of disc 
of pygofer. Style widened anteapically, but without distinct preapical 
lobe, apex sharply rounded. Connective broad, triangular. Aedea- 
gus with preatrium slender; dorsal apodeme slender, elongate, more 
than half length of shaft, slightly expanded apically in cephalic aspect; 
shaft slender, cylindrical, elongate. Sternal abdominal apodemes not 
traversing one conjunctiva. 

Crown with ground color dull ivory to gray, an irregular, transverse 
interocular line across disc pale yellow to dull red. Pronotum with 
ground color gray, a transverse, broad dull red stripe across anterior 
portion of disc with a caudolateral extension on each side to humeral 
margins. Scutellum dull yellow, the extreme apex paler. Forewing 



268 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 




Figure 37. — Barela. a-e, B. decorata: a, pygofer, lateral aspect; b, anterior dorsum; c, 
aedeagus, lateral aspect; d, style apex, broadest aspect; r, style and connective, dorsal 
aspect, g-i, B. aureocosta: g, anterior dorsum ; h, pygofer, lateral aspect; i, aedeagus, 
lateral aspect, j-o, B. -parvisaccata: j, pygofer, lateral aspect; k, anterior dorsum; /, style 
apex, dorsal aspect; m, style and connective, dorsal aspect; «, aedeagus, lateral aspect; 
0, sternal abdominal apodemes, ventral aspect. (In a and h the broken lines represent the 
anal process; in 0, the conjunctiva.) 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 269 

with ground color of basal two-thirds dull orange fading to yellow 
along costal margin, clavus with base, a spot near inner basal angle, 
one at midlength and an anteapical spot, corium with spot near base, 
a spot near midlength involving cell M and brachial cell and an 
elongate costal spot which is bordered with black, anterior to outer 
apical cell, yellow to hyaline; an areole in apex of cell R and cell M 
and in outer apical cell, hyaline, remainder of wing apex smoky, the 
yellow apical veins strongly bordered with darker. Clypeus and 
clypellus yellow, with a transclypeal narrow band just below ocelli, 
dull red; lora, genae and pleural portion or pronotum pale gray, the 
last with a pink spot; mesosternum black; remainder of venter and 
legs pale except apical half of each male plate which is darker along 
mesal margin. 

The holotype male, from Iguala, Guerrero, Mexico, in the D. M. 
DeLong collection, has been examined. Additional specimens have 
been examined from Chilpancingo, the Cuernavaca-Acapulco Road, 
and Cuernavaca (on Eupatorium adenophorum) , Mexico, and from 
Santa Tecla, El Salvador (on Lantana camara). The species has been 
collected in numbers from the latter host plant by N. L. H. Krauss. 

In some males examined from El Salvador, the shaft of the aedeagus 
in lateral aspect is more abruptly narrowed than in typical specimens. 

From B. decorata (Osborn), which it resembles superficially, B. 
aureocosta may be easily distinguished by its petiolate third apical 
cell in the forewings and its lack of conspicuous black macrosetae on 
male plate or female pygofer, in addition to the characters given in 
the key. 

Barela parvisaccata, new species 

Figure S7,j~o 

Length of male 3.8 mm., of female 3.8-4.0 mm. Head slightly 
produced; crown with median length slightly more than half inter- 
ocular width. Pronotum with median length more than twice 
median length of crown. Forewing as in B. aureocosta (Ruppel and 
DeLong). Ocelli closer to inner margins of eyes than to median 
line of crown. Female seventh sternum with posterior margin broadly 
convex, with a small angular median excision; pygofer with multi- 
seriate microsetae at each side of ovipositor. Male plates attaining 
posterior pygofer margin, each with single row of macrosetae from 
near base to apex. Male p} 7 gofer process arising near ventral margin, 
short, sinuate, extending ventromesad, thence curved caudodorsad, 
the two processes widely separated in caudal aspect. Ninth tergite 
wanting. Anal processes membranous. Style with distinct preapical 
lobe, the apical extension slightly decurved. Connective papilioni- 



270 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

form. Aedeagus with preatrium about as long as dorsal apodeme, 
broader than in other species of the genus and trough-like; dorsal 
apodeme broader than shaft, curved gradually posterodorsad, less 
than half as long as shaft, which is slender, elongate, and smoothly 
curved dorsad. Sternal abdominal apodemes not traversing one 
conjunctiva. 

Crown entirely greenish gray to ivory with a poorly defined, inter- 
ocular transverse yellow streak. Pronotum with ground color dull 
gray, a transverse broad stripe across anterior portion of disc with a 
caudolateral extension on each side to humeral margin, dull red to 
yellow. Scutellum entirely olive green to dull yellow. Forewing 
with ground color pale green almost to claval apex, a small axillary 
spot, a transcommissural, transversely oval claval spot just behind 
scutellar apex, a transcommissural transverse line between claval 
sutures at midclavus; an oblique corial dash along claval suture near 
base, costal plaque, an oblique marking through cells K, and M near 
midlength of wing and an areole anterior to base of each of apical 
cells, hyaline; wing apices smoky with a hyaline arc through inner 
apical cells. Face yellow to green, in some specimens with a faint 
interocular stripe below ocelli; pleural portion of pronotum usually 
with an orange spot, mesosternum black, remainder of venter and 
legs pale yellow to pale green. 

Holotype male, allotype, and three paratype females, Cuernavaca, 
Mexico, July 1953 (N. L. H. Krauss, on Lantana), in U. S. National 
Museum (No. 62689). 

Barela sobrina (Ruppel and DeLong), new combination 

Figure 38 
Protalebra sobrina Ruppel and DeLong, Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 53, p. 228, 1953. 

Length of male 3.1 mm. Head slightly produced with median 
length about one-fourth less than interocular width. Pronotum with 
median length about twice median length of crown. Forewing with 
length of second apical cell measured along inner margin less than 
two-thirds length of inner apical cell measured along same vein; 
third apical cell triangular or very nearly so. Male plates not exceed- 
ing posterior pygofer margin, each with a longitudinal row of macro- 
setae from near base to apex. Pygofer with process arising near center 
of disc, extending ventrad, curved at ventral pygofer margin and 
extending dorsocaudad and slightly mesad, in ventral aspect the two 
processes convergent but distinctly separated apically. Ninth 
tergite absent. Anal processes present, attaining middle of disc of 
pygofer. Style with weak preapical lobe, apex sharply rounded. 
Aedeagus with preatrium short, distinct; dorsal apodeme digitiform, 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 271 

less than half length of shaft, not expanded apically; shaft nearly 
straight. Sternal abdominal apodemes not traversing one con- 
junctiva. 

Crown pale yellow, the interocular marking bordering the hind 
margin and trilobate with the lobes extending anteriorly, the median 
narrower and longer than the lateral lobes. Pronotum blackish 
brown. Ground color of scutellum and forewings smoky, median 
portion of scutellum paler; forewing with a broad marginal costal 
streak in basal, a similar streak in apical half, ending in basal portion 
of outer apical cell, and a small wedge-shaped marking in base of 
third apical cell, yellow; clavus with an indistinct oblique vitta 
in basal half and an obliquely transverse marking behind midlength; 
corium with a similar vitta in basal half of brachial cell, a spot near 
its midlength, a spot before apex of cell M and a transverse marking 
near midlength of inner apical *cell, translucent; veins R and M 




Figure 38. — Barela sobrina (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral aspect (broken 
line represents anal process); f, style and connective, dorsal aspect; d, aedeagus, lateral 
aspect. 

yellow opposite claval apex; disc of outer apical cell hyaline. Face 
and venter entirely pale yellow, the dorsal portions of the pleural 
portion of pronotum smoky. 

The holotype male, from Iguala, Guerrero, Mexico, has been 
examined through the kindness of Dr. D. M. DeLong. Other speci- 
mens have been examined from Compostela, Nayarit, Mexico, and 
from Totalapan, Oaxaca, Mexico. 

Species of Uncertain Position 

Protalebra clitellaria Osborn 

Figure 39 
Protalebra clitellaria Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus. vol. 18, p. 257, 1928. 

Length of male about 3.1 mm. Head short, triangular; crown with 
median length one-fourth greater than interocular width. Pronotum 

422758—57 10 



272 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



wider than head including eyes, lateral margins strongly divergent 
posteriorly. Face broadly convex, in lateral aspect strongly divergent 
from contour of dorsum; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and 
face, closer to e} r es than to median line of head. Male plates triangular 
with divergent rounded apices, much shorter than pygofer, each with 
submarginal row of conspicuous flattened macrosetae in third quarter 
of its length. Pygofer with posterodorsal margin strongly produced, 
with small group of irregularly arranged macrosetae in upper half 
of disc; a thickened bar in pygofer wall extending from dorsal margin 
to near middle of disc; anal process extending to middle of disc. 
Style without preapical lobe, curved slightly ventrad at apex. Con- 
nective semicircular with apex^turned dorsad. Aedeagus without 




Figure 39. — Protalebra clitellaria (type): a, anterior dorsum; b, pygofer, lateral aspect; c, 
style and connective, dorsal aspect; d, aedeagus, lateral aspect. 



preatrium; dorsal apodeme Y-shaped, sigmoid at base, the arms as 
long as the unpaired portion and decurved apically; a pair of elongate 
atrial processes extending beneath dorsal apodeme, each slender and 
tapering to acute apex which is decurved; shaft simple, setiform, 
twice as long as atrial processes. 

Ground color of crown sordid yellowish gray. Pronotum burnished 
orange with a pair of black spots along posterior margin. Scutellum 
black suffused with golden, basal angles narrowly outlined in orange, 
a pair of spots one behind each apex of transverse sulcus, and the apex, 
ivory. Forewings transparent yellow ; clavus with basal half burnished 
orange outlined with black except next claval suture; corium with a 
small, round black spot in brachial cell in basal third; claval apex and 
portion of adjoining corium fumose (the extent of the fumose mark- 
ing undeterminable in the damaged type). Face and venter dull 
yellow. 

Known only from the type, a male from Chapada, Brazil. 

Specimens with intact wings are needed to determine the generic 
relationships of the species. The male pygofer, in its setal arrange- 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 273 

ment and barlike integumental thickenings, and the anal processes 
suggest a relationship to Protalebra, but the aedeagus differs markedly 
from the species here assigned to that genus and suggests a possible 
relationship to Elabra. 

Protalebra sublunata Osborn 

Erythroneura sublunata Osborn, Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol 18, p. 289, 1928. 
Protalebra sublunata; Young, Univ. Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, p. 38, 1952. 

Length of female 2.6 mm. Crown strongly produced with apex 
rounded; median length more than half greater than interocular 
width. Pronotum wider than head including eyes; median length 
about one-fourth greater than median length of crown ; lateral margins 
strongly divergent posteriorly. Forewing without confluent longi- 
tudinal veins before cross veins; appendix not extending around wing 
apex; inner apical cell much broader at base than at apex; second 
apical cell narrow, parallel-margined, its length measured along inner 
margin approximately two-thirds length of inner apical cell measured 
along same vein; third apical cell triangular, long-petiolate; outer 
apical cell longer than broad, irregularly pentagonal, not attaining 
wing apex. Hind wing with submarginal vein confluent with apical 
wing margin; vein Cu 2 confluent with submarginal vein at point much 
basad of vein m-cu; veins R and M contiguous anteapically, separate 
apically. Face broadly convex in profile, slightly divergent from 
contour of crown; ocelli on rounded margin between crown and face, 
midway between inner eye margins and median line of head. Female 
seventh sternum short, transverse, posterior margin concave medially, 
the lateral lobes slightly produced and rounded; pygofer without 
conspicuous black setae. 

Crown dull ivory, a conspicuous apical spot black, a pair of in- 
distinct discal spots and an indistinct transverse interocular line 
pale gray. Pronotum orange, the hind margin broadly ivory. Scu- 
tellum ivory with apex black. Forewing with ground color dull 
orange in basal half, a transcommissural marking narrow and rounded 
at midcorium, much broader in apical half of clavus, ivory bordered 
with sanguineous, the sanguineous color extending to and expanding 
along costal margin at its midlength; a spot at base of brachial cell, 
anterior two-thirds of costal plaque and portion of costal cell anterior 
to outer apical cell grayish translucent; brachial and anteapical cells 
apically, appendix and first and second apical cells in their basal 
two-thirds, fumose; third and fourth apical cells margined with black 
internally. Face and venter entirely dull yellowish gray. 

Known only from the type, a female from Fort Principe, Rio 
Guapore", Brazil, Aug. 26, 1909, in the Carnegie Museum. 

This species has the facies of a Paralebra, 



274 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Check-List ! 

agresta var. McAtee, Alebra albostriella =aurea, p. 138 

albidula Osborn, Dikraneura =attenuatus, p. 183 

albostriella (Fallen), Alebra [Cicada], p. 135 

alliodorae (Caldwell and Martorell), Habralebra [Protalebra], p. 189 

amoena (Baker), Habralebra [Protalebra], p. 191 

apicalis (Van Duzee), Barela [Protalebra], p. 265 

attenuatus (Osborn), Lawsonellus [Dikraneura], p. 183 

aurata Gillette, Typhlocyba = a,ure2i, p. 138 

aurea (Walsh), Alebra [Typhlocyba], p. 138 

aurecosta (Ruppel and DeLong), Barela [Protalebra], p. 267 

aureovittata (DeLong), Elabra [Alebra], p. 225 

australis, n. sp., Rabela, p. 216 

balli, n. sp., Trypanalebra, p. 156 

balloui, n. sp., Omegalebra, p. 206 

barbata, n. sp., Omegalebra, p. 211 

beameri, n. sp., Beamerulus, p. 244 

bicincta Osborn, Protalebra =tabebuiae, p. 215 

bicincta DeLong, Alebra— aurea, p. 138 

bifasciata (Gillette), Habralebra [Alebra], p. 196 

bifasciatella, n. sp., Habralebra, p. 192 

binotata Walsh Typhlocyba— aurea, p. 138 

blantoni, n. sp., Omegalebra, p. 205 

blantoni, n. sp., Trypanalebra, p. 157 

brasiliensis, n. sp., Blarea, p. 160 

brasiliensis (Baker), Protalebrella [Protalebra], p. 257 

brunnea (Oman), Rhabdotalebra, [Protalebra], p. 237 

brunnea (Oman), Rhabdotalebra brunnea, p. 237 

brunnea var. Ribaut, Alebra wahlbergi= albostriella, p. 135 

caldwelli (Ruppel and DeLong), Diceratalebra [Protalebra], p. 254 

caraguatae, n. sp., Balera p. 173 

clitellaria Osborn, Protalebra, p. 271 

conica (Ruppel and DeLong), Protalebrella [Protalebra], p. 258 

colorata, n. ssp., Rhabdotalebra brunnea, p. 238 

cordiae (Osborn), Omegalebra [Protalebra], p. 204 

costaricensis n. sp., Elabra, p. 225 

costatella, Alebra albostriella form Matsumura= albostriella (?), p. 135 

cruciata, n. sp., Habralebra, p. 198 

cubana Osborn, Protalebra =sanguinolinea, p. 248 

curvilinea (Gillette), Protalebra [Alebra], p. 167 

decorata (Osborn), Barela [Protalebra], p. 265 

decurvata, n. sp., Paralebra, p. 152 

diluta var. Ribaut, Alebra albostriella= albostriella, p. 135 

discicollis Herrich-Schaeffer, Typhlocyba = albostriella, p. 135 

dufouri var. Ribaut, Alebra albostriella= albostriella, p. 135 

eburnea DeLong, Alebra— aurea, p. 138 

eburneola (Osborn), Elabra [Protalebra], p. 221 

elegantula Zetterstedt, Cicadula= albostriella, p. 135 

emarginata (Osborn), Balera [Empoasca], p. 175 

eximia Hardy, Typhlocyba = albostriella, p. 135 

fasciata Curtis, Eupleryx= albostriella, p. 135 

flavonigra (Stal), Brunerella [Typhlocyba], p. 177 



LEAFHOPPER TRIBE ALEBRINI — YOUNG 275 

fulveola Herrich-Schaeffer, Typhlocyba = albostriella, p. 135 

fumida Gillette, Alebra, p. 140 

gillettei, n. sp., Habralebra, p. 196 

hambletoni, n. sp., Rhabdotalebra, p. 235 

haywardi, n. sp., Protalebra, p. 168 

insigita var. McAtee, Alebra albostriella = albostriella, p. 136 

insignita var. McAtee, Alebra albostriella^ albostriella, p. 136 

insularis Caldwell, Protalebra = nexa, p. 170 

interrogata (Knull), Diceratalebra [Alebra], p. 250 

iris, n. sp., Protalebrella p. 260 

isthmusi, n. ssp., Elabra morrisoni, p. 224 

jamaicensis, n. sp., Rhabdotalebra, p. 232 

keiferi, n. sp., Paralebra, p. 148 

lenticula (Osborn), Omegalebra [Protalebra], p. 202 

lineatella (Osborn), Rhabdotalebra [Protalebra], p. 228 

lineola (Osborn), Erabla [Protalebra], p. 214 

maculata (Baker), Trypanalebra [Protalebra], p. 154 

magnifica Young, Brunerella, p. 177 

matogrossana, n. sp., Omegalebra, p. 210 

monrosi, n. sp., Rhabdotalebra, p. 233 

montana Caldwell, Protalebra = sanguinolinea, p. 248 

morelosensis, n. sp., Beamerulus, p. 246 

morrisoni, n. sp., Elabra, p. 223 

morrisoni, n. ssp., Elabra morrisoni, p. 223 

morrisoni, n. sp., Omegalebra, p. 207 

nexa, McAtee, Protalebra, p. 170 

nicaraguensis (Baker), Habralebra [Protalebra], p. 186 

ninettae (Baker), Paralebra [Protalebra], p. 148 

octolineata (Baker), Rhabdotalebra [Protalebra], p. 229 

ogloblini, n. sp., Omegalebra, p. 208 

omega (Van Duzee), Omegalebra [Protalebra], p. 200 

ornata, n. sp., Rhabdotalebra, p. 236 

pallescens var. Ribaut Alebra wahlbergi= albostriella, p. 136 

pallida Ruppel and DeLong, Protalebra =pusilla, Diceratalebra, p. 252 

pallida Osborn, Protalebra = aureovittata, p. 225 

pallidula Walsh, Typhlocyba = aurea, p. 138 

panamensis, n. sp., Habralebra, p. 187 

panamensis, n. sp., Protalebrella, p. 263 

parallela (Osborn), Elabra [Dikraneura], p. 221 

parana, n. sp., Protalebrella, p. 262 

parana (Osborn), Elabra [Dikraneura], p. 222 

pardalis McAtee, Protalebra= maculata, p. 154 

parvisaccata, n. sp., Barela, p. 269 

pellucida (Osborn), Balera [Dikraneura], p. 172 

picea (Osborn), Albera [Protalebra], p. 144 

plummeri (Ruppel and DeLong), Rhabdotalebra [Protalebra], p. 233 

pusilla, n. name, Diceratalebra, p. 252 

pusilla, n. sp., Balera, p. 174 

quadricerata, n. sp., Diceratalebra, p. 254 

quadrifasciatus (Osborn), Osbornulus [Dikraneura], p. 166 

robusta (Gillette), Abrela [Alebra], p. 241 

robusta Young, Orsalebra, p. 142 

rubrafrons var. DeLong, Alebra albostriella^ aurea, p. 138 



276 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

sabana Osborn, Protalebra = decorata, p. 265 
sanguinolinea (Baker), Diceratalebra, [Alebra], p. 248 
sarana (Osborn), Elabra [Dikraneura], p. 224 
schachovskoyi Torres, Protalebrella, p. 256 
scopa var. McAtee, Alebra albostriella= aurea, p. 139 
scriptozona (Van Duzee), Brunerella [Protalebra], p. 178 
signata (McAtee), Rhabdotalebra [Protalebra], p. 231 
similis (Baker), Paralebra [Protalebra], p. 147 
singularis (Baker), Paralebra [Protalebra], p. 150 
sobrina (Ruppel and DeLong), Barela [Protalebra], p. 270 
sola, n. sp., Diceratalebra, p. 249 
sorbi Wagner, Alebra, p. 135 

sublunata (Osborn), Protalebra [Erythroneura], p. 273 
tabebuiae (Dozier), Rabela [Protalebra], p. 215 
terminalis (Osborn), Habralebra [Alebra], p. 194 
terminata (Baker), Protalebrella [Protalebra], p. 261 
tincta var. McAtee, Alebra albostriella=SLUTea,, p. 138 
transversalis (Baker), Habralebra [Protalebra], p. 184 
trimaculata (Gillette), Habralebra [Alebra], p. 193 
uniceratus n. sp., Beamerulus, p. 243 
unipuncta (Baker), Aphanalebra [Protalebra], p. 164 
variata (Ruppel and DeLong), Lareba [Protalebra], p. 181 
vexillifera (Baker), Omegalebra [Protalebra], p. 201 
viridis var. Rey, Alebra albostriella = albostriella, p. 135 
wahlbergi Boheman, Typhlocyba = albostriella, p. 135 
williamsi n. sp., Relaba, p. 162 
williamsi n. sp., Habralebra, p. 187 
willinki n. sp., Habralebra, p. 192 
ziczac (Osborn), Trypanalebra [Protalebra], p. 158 



Literature cited 

Caldwell, J. S., and Martorell, L. F. 

1952. Review of the auchenorhynchous Homoptera of Puerto Rico, Pt. I. 
Cicadellidae. Journ. Agr. Univ. Puerto Rico, vol. 34, pp. 1-132. 

Evans, J. W. 

1946. A natural classification of leafhoppers. Trans. Roy. Ent. Soc. 
London, vol. 96, ser. 3, pp. 46-60. 

LlNNAVUORI, R. 

1954. Contributions to the Neotropical leafhopper fauna of the family 
Cicadellidae. II. A revision of some of StaPs and Osborn's Neo- 
tropical leafhopper species. Ann. Ent. Fennici, vol. 20, pp. 124-145. 

McAtee, W. L. 

1926. Notes on Neotropical Eupteryginae, with a key to the varieties of 
Alebra albostriella. Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 34, pp. 141-175. 

OSSIANNILSSON, F. 

1946. Svensk Insektfauna, No. 36. VII. Hemiptera. Ent. Foren. Stock- 
holm, 150 pp. 

Paoli, Guido 

1941. Sottogenere nuovo di Alebra e descrizione di una nuova specie della 
Somalia. Boll. Soc. Ent. Ital., vol. 73, pp. 40-44. 

Young, D. A., Jr. 

1952. A reclassification of Western Hemisphere Typhlocybinae. Univ. 
Kansas Sci. Bull. 35, pp. 3-217. 

277 



0. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: I9B7 




PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Vol. 107 Washington: 1957 No. 3387 

TWO ADDITIONAL MIOCENE PORPOISES FROM THE 
CALVERT CLIFFS, MARYLAND 



By Remington Kellogg 



I. Rediscovery of Phocageneus venustus Leidy 

In his article on vertebrate remains from Richmond, Va., published 
in 1850, Jeffries Wyman mentioned that among the specimens he had 
received from Dr. Martin Burton, a resident of Richmond, was a 
tooth which Professor Louis Agassiz identified as belonging to his 
genus Phocodon. The type of this genus is Phocodon scillae Agassiz, 
now generally recognized as a species of Squalodon. Professor Wyman 
figured and described the tooth received from Dr. Burton, but he 
did not give it a specific name. Prior to 1869 Leidy received from 
Professor Wyman what was supposed to be the same tooth, but 
remarked: "Having requested Prof. Wyman to allow me to inspect 
the tooth, he sent me a specimen which he observed was either the 
original of the figure (1850, fig. 4) or pertained to the same animal. 
If such is the case, the figure is an unfaithful representation of it." 
This comment is unquestionably correct, for while Wyman's figure 
represents what appears to be a tooth with a small tubercle or cusp 
at the base of the crown posteriorly, a vestigial tubercle on the 
anterior cutting edge, and a flattened root of which the terminal end 
is missing, Leidy's figure (1869, pi. 29, fig. 10) shows a tooth of a 
somewhat different appearance. 

279 



280 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io7 

The tooth (No. 11227) in the collection of the Academy of Natural 
Sciences of Philadelphia bearing the name Phocageneus venustus is, as 
Leidy has commented, not accurately portrayed in the illustration 
published by Wyman. Nevertheless it should be noted that the 
essential structural features are shown, although somewhat exag- 
gerated. After examining this tooth, however, I am of the opinion 
that it is actually Wyman's original specimen, and that his illustration 
represents an unsuccessful attempt to draw a rather difficult object. 
One reason for this conclusion is that the length of Wyman 's tooth as 
illustrated corresponds rather closely to that of Leidy 's type specimen. 
Wyman stated that his tooth measured 1.2 inches, that is, 30.48 mm. 
Furthermore, Wyman's description applies very exactly to the tooth 
(No. 11227) in the collection of the Academy of Natural Sciences of 
Philadelphia. Leidy also accurately described this tooth, and his 
illustration is of exactly the right size, though the ornamentation of 
the enamel crown is not accurately depicted. Notwithstanding the 
observed inaccuracies in the illustrations, the descriptions given by 
both Wyman and Leidy clearly pertain to the tooth in the collection 
of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia and it is the type 
of Phocageneus venustus. 

Wyman's description (1850, p. 231) is as follows: 

This tooth (fig. 4) is l%o inch in length, having a small portion broken from 
the end of its root. The crown is conical, compressed on its inner face, with 
slightly trenchant edges, the posterior of which is provided with a slightly pro- 
jecting tubercle. The enamel over its whole surface is roughened by small 
irregular ridges, the general direction of which is from the base towards the 
apex of the crown, those at the apex being the most minute. This tooth must 
have been placed at the anterior part of the jaw; all those of the posterior lateral 
portions being deeply indented. 

Wyman obviously was influenced by the assumption that this 
odontocete was a relative of Squalodon, whose posterior teeth have 
serrated cutting edges. This tooth, however, came from the posterior 
end of the tooth row and probably from the maxillary. 

Leidy (1869, pp. 426-427) described the tooth as follows: 

The crown is conical, compressed, oval in section at base, and moderately 
curved. It forms an acute ridge before and behind, and has an acute point. 
The base is conspicuously swollen internally, and contracts all around toward 
the neck. The anterior acute border of the crown expands in a triangular surface 
of the swollen base. The posterior border is embraced by an attempt to form a 
basal cingulum. The enamel of the crown is nearly uniformly corrugated, and 
the wrinkles are much interrupted. The fang, broken at its point, has been 
about twice the length of the crown, is conical, slightly curved, and feebly 
gibbous. 

The dimensions of the type tooth of Phocageneus venustus are as 
follows: Maximum length as preserved, 30.4 mm.; maximum height 
of crown, 13.5 mm.; maximum anteroposterior diameter of base of 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 281 

crown, 10.7 mm.; maximum transverse diameter of base of crown, 
8.8 mm.; maximum diameter of root, 9.5 mm.; maximum diameter of 
root at broken-off extremity, 8.0 mm.; least diameter at same point, 
5.5 mm. 

The specimen hereinafter described apparently represents the 
second recorded occurrence of this extinct porpoise in the Calvert 
formation. The symphyseal portion of the mandibles was discovered 
by Roland A. Fowler on May 15, 1955, protruding from the face of 
the cliff south of Fairhaven, Md., and it was brought to the U. S. 
National Museum for identification. Subsequently, on May 21, 
Franklin L. Pearce accompanied Mr. Fowler to the site and excavated 
the posterior portions of the mandibles as well as six vertebrae. 
Later, on September 17, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Pearce, G. Donald 
Guadagni, and I made a deeper excavation at the site and recovered 
ten additional vertebrae. 

Phocageneus Leidy 

Phocageneus Leidy, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, ser. 2, vol. 7, p. 426, 1869. 

Genotype : Phocageneus venustus Leidy. 

Diagnosis: Mandibles with symphysis united but not firmly 
ankylosed; width of symphysis greater than depth; opposite free 
posterior portions of mandibles come together at a 30° angle at 
symphysis; coronoid process robust; distance from apex of coronoid 
process to posterior margin of hindmost alveola equivalent to approxi- 
mately one half of distance from posterior face of condyle to posterior 
end of symphysis; flange-like internal dorsal border of mandible 
posterior to coronoid process prolonged backward internal to and 
beyond condyle; condyle large, directed downward and backward, 
and projecting externally conspicuously beyond outer face of mandible. 

Seven teeth located behind posterior end of symphysis on each 
mandible; alveolae separated by intervals of 4.5 to 11.5 mm.; circular 
depressions for reception of apices of teeth in upper jaws present be- 
tween teeth on symphysis; roots of teeth elongated, curved, and 
slightly expanded proximally; crowns of teeth somewhat compressed 
transversely on distal half of their height and bent inward toward 
apex, ovoidal in cross section at base, constricted around circum- 
ference at base, and with a vertically directed blunt carina on anterior 
and posterior faces of at least the nine hindmost teeth; enamel on 
basal half of crowns of posterior mandibular teeth coarsely corrugated 
or wrinkled; enamel on crowns of anterior mandibular teeth less 
noticeably wrinkled, the striae being least conspicuous on external 
face, and a vertically directed carina more noticeably developed on 
posterior than on the anterior face. 



282 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io7 

Periotic with unusually large elliptical fenestra rotunda, relatively 
small internal acoustic meatus, and elongated anterior process. 
Cervical vertebrae robust, with relatively thick centra; atlas with 
reduced lower transverse processes, enlarged upper transverse processes 
and elongated hypapophysial process; ventroexternal angles of broad 
transverse processes of third and fifth cervicals project forward and 
outward; lateral arterial canals large. Neural spines narrow on 
anterior dorsals and broad on posterior dorsals; first to sixth dorsals 
have facets for articulation with capitula of corresponding ribs 
situated at the upper anteroexternal and upper posteroexternal angles 
of the centra; eighth dorsal with short diapophysis and short parapo- 
physis (transverse process) closely approximated. 

Phocageneus venustus Leidy 

Phocageneus venustus Leidy, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, ser. 2, vol. 7, 
p. 426, pi. 29, fig. 10, 1869. (See Wyman, Amer. Journ. Sci., ser. 2, vol. 10, 
1850, p. 230, fig. 4.) 

Type specimen: One tooth. Cat. No. 11227, Academy of Natural 
Sciences of Philadelphia. Collector, Dr. Martin Burton (1850?). 

Hokizon and locality: Richmond, Henrico County, Va. Pre- 
sumably from the diatomaceous deposits, Calvert formation, upper 
Miocene. 

Referred Specimen 

USNM 21039: Mandibles, lacking anterior portion of symphysis; 
right and left tympanic bulla; right and left periotic; right and left 
malleus; right incus; left stapes; 16 detached teeth; atlas and 3 cervical 
vertebrae; 10 dorsal vertebrae; 2 lumbar vertebrae; 4 caudal vertebrae; 
2 chevron bones; 1 sternal segment; and portions of 5 ribs. Collector, 
Roland A. Fowler, May 15, 1955. 

Horizon and locality: Diatomaceous earth, one-quarter mile 
south of wharf at Fairhaven, Fairhaven Cliffs, Anne Arundel County, 
Md., about 8 feet above base of cliff. Calvert formation, upper 
Miocene. 

Mandibles 

The anterior portion of the symphysis (pi. 1) was broken off and 
lost prior to the discovery of these mandibles protruding from the 
face of the cliff. A short section of the right mandible between the 
level of the third tooth behind the posterior end of the symphysis and 
the anterior border of the orifice of the internal dental canal was 
destroyed accidentally when the specimen was discovered; this region 
has been restored. The posterior portions of both mandibles are 
somewhat crushed in a dorsoventral direction but are otherwise 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 283 

essentially complete. The mandibles were united but not firmly 
ankylosed at the posterior end of the symphysis. On the ventral face 
(pi. 2) the line of contact of the opposite mandibles is indicated by a 
continuous narrow groove which extends medially the full length of 
this portion of the symphysis. 

The symphyseal portion of the united mandibles apparently tapered 
toward the anterior extremity, since the transverse diameter dimin- 
ishes from 45 mm. at the level of the posterior end to 28 ± mm. at the 
level of the 11th alveola counting forward from the hindmost alveola 
in the left mandible, although the dorsoventral reduction is less 
noticeable. 

Between the tooth rows the dorsal surface of the symphysis is 
concave or depressed. Pits for the reception of the apices of the 
teeth in the upper jaws are present between the teeth on the symphysis. 

The distance (107 mm.) from the posterior end of the symphysis to 
the posterior margin of the hindmost alveola in the left mandible is 
greater than the interval (60 ± mm.) between opposite tooth rows at 
the level of this tooth. The opposite free posterior portions of the 
mandibles come together at an angle of 30° at the symphysis. 

More than 1 1 alveolae were present in the left mandible when com- 
plete. Since there is no known closely related odontocete it is in- 
advisable to estimate the number of teeth originally present in each 
mandible. The teeth on the posterior portion of the symphysis were 
not implanted opposite one another and the alveolae are separated 
by intervals of 7 to 9 mm. from preceding and succeeding alveolae. 
The minimum interval between alveolae in either mandible behind 
the symphysis is about 4.5 mm. The septa between the alveolae are 
complete. The largest alveola (sixth counting forward from the hind- 
most) in the left mandible measures 9 mm. anteroposterior^ and 8 mm. 
transversely, and the smallest (ninth counting forward from the hind- 
most) 8 mm. anteroposteriorly and 7 mm. transversely. The alveolae 
located behind the symphysis are larger than those located anterior to 
the posterior end of the symphysis. The seven alveolae located 
behind the symplrysis on the left mandible are spaced at intervals of 
4.5 to 11.5 mm. The distance from the posterior margin of the 
hindmost alveola to the anterior margin of the 7 th alveola in the left 
mandible is 101.5 mm. The distance between opposite alveolae 
immediately in front of the posterior end of the symphysis is 22 mm., 
and at the level of the 11th tooth counting forward from the hindmost 
in the left mandible it is 18.5 mm. The presence of 7 teeth in the left 
mandible behind the level of the posterior end of the symphysis 
readily distinguishes these mandibles from those of Pelodelphis gracilis 
(Kellogg, 1955, pi. 13, fig. 1), which have 12 teeth on this portion of 
the mandibles. 



284 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The extremities of the long roots of at least two teeth posterior to 
the posterior end of the symphysis curve backward below the tooth 
immediately behind. 

From a lateral view the ventral profile of the proximal portion of 
the symphysis suggests that the anterior portion was bent slightly 
upward. The external face of the symphyseal portion of the left 
mandible is convex along the dorsal border, but then slopes obliquely 
from the dorsal border to the midline of the ventral surface. A cross 
section of the symphysis at the level of the 11th tooth counting for- 
ward from the hindmost in the left mandible resembles an open U. 

The largest nutrient foramen is located on the outer surface of the 
left mandible 15 mm. below the rim of the second alveola counting 
forward from the hindmost. A second foramen opens 17 mm. below 
the rim of the sixth alveola and a third foramen 16 mm. below the 
rim of the eighth alveola counting forward from the hindmost. Short 
grooves extend forward from the first and second of these foramina, 
and a somewhat longer groove extends forward from the third foramen 
at least beyond the level of the 11th alveola counting forward from 
the hindmost. 

The depth of the left mandible in its present condition at the pos- 
teriormost alveola is 32 mm., although crushing has distorted the 
posterior portion of each mandible to some extent. It is also possible 
that the posterior portions of the mandibles have been spread apart 
more than originally existed. 

The dorsal edge of each mandible ascends gradually to the apex of 
the coronoid process which has a thickened dorsal border. Each 
coronoid process is bent outward and the opposite processes are 
separated by an interval of 132 mm. The distance (173 mm.) from 
the apex of the coronoid process to the posterior margin of the hind- 
most alveola on the left mandible is equivalent to about 53 percent of 
the distance (324 mm.) from the posterior face of the condyle to the 
posterior end of the symphysis. 

About 52 mm. behind the posteriormost alveola on the inner face 
of each mandible there is a large orifice for the dental canal. Posterior 
to this orifice, the inner wall is reduced to a low thin strip along the 
ventral border of the mandible. The outer wall of the posterior 
portion of each mandible consists of a thin shell of bone which, judging 
from the curvature of the crushed areas, was originally somewhat 
convex. Unlike other odontocetes the dorsal border of the mandible 
posterior to the coronoid process forms an internal flange-like ledge 
which is prolonged backward internal to and beyond the condyle. 
Unfortunately no comparisons can be made with the posterior portions 
of the mandibles of Squalodelphis fabianii (Dal Piaz, 1916) which are 
concealed by matrix. The ventral margin of the left mandible is 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 285 

continued backward from the symphysis in a shallow curve toward 
the angle. 

The dorso ventral axis (35 mm.) of the left condyle is directed down- 
ward and backward and its external border projects conspicuously 
beyond the outer face of the mandible. The maximum transverse 
diameter of the left condyle is 32.8 mm. In outline, the left condyle 
is almost subscutate in outline and is directed more outward than 
backward. The right condyle has been restored. 

Measurements of mandibles (in millimeters) 

Right Left 

Length of mandible, condyle to broken anterior end 395. 0± 386. 

Greatest length of ankylosed symphyseal portion of rami 62. 5 62. 5 

Transverse diameter of mandibular symphysis at level of pos- 
terior end 45. 

Vertical diameter of mandibular symphysis at level of pos- 
terior end 29. 

Transverse diameter of mandibular symphysis at level of 11th 

tooth counting forward from hindmost tooth in mandible 28. ± 

Vertical diameter of mandibular symphysis at level of 11th 
tooth counting forward from hindmost tooth in mandible 

Height of mandible through coronoid process 

Greatest dorsoventral diameter of condyle 

Greatest transverse diameter of condyle 

11 alveolae in an interval of 

7 posterior alveolae (first to seventh) in an interval of 

4 anterior alveolae (eighth to 11th) in an interval of 

Condyle to posterior end of symphysis 

Apex of coronoid process to posterior end of symphysis 



Teeth 

Both mandibles were broken off 62.5 mm. in front of the posterior 
end of the symphysis. Eleven alveolae are now preserved in the left 
mandible and presumably the same number were present in the cor- 
responding portion of the right mandible. Seven teeth were im- 
planted in the left mandible behind the level of the posterior end of 
the symphysis. Four teeth are preserved in place in the right mandi- 
ble; eight teeth and three alveolae are present in the left mandible. 
The alveolae for the tenth and eleventh teeth in the left mandible 
counting forward from the hindmost were completely filled with 
diatomaceous earth. Two of the detached teeth have been allocated 
to these alveolae. On the right mandible, the alveolae for the ninth, 
tenth, and eleventh teeth counting forward from the hindmost lack 
the outer walls since a section of the external shell of this mandible 
70 mm. in length and 18 to 20 mm. in width was destroyed. 



23.5 




85,0+ 


87.0+ 




35.0 




32.8 




164.0 




101.5 




56.0 


;30. Odb 


324.0 




282.0 



286 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The teeth of Phocageneus venustus resemble most closely those of 
Squalodelphis jabianii (Dal Piaz, 1916, p. 24, figs. 5-8, and pi. 5, figs. 
3-18) from the lower Miocene, upper Langhian stage of Belluno, 
Italy, not only in size but also in the configuration of the crown and 
the wrinkling of the enamel. Dal Piaz (1916, p. 32) proposed the 
family Squalodelphidae to include the Italian Squalodelphis and the 
Argentine Argyrodelphis [= Diochotichus], while others have regarded 
Squalodelphis as either an offshoot of primitive Squalodontidae 
(Slijper, 1936, pp. 545, 549) or a transitional form between the 
Squalodontidae and the Ziphiidae. Although the family allocation 
of Phocageneus will await discovery of a skull, the structural charac- 
teristics of the teeth nevertheless indicate some relationship with 
Squalodelphis. 

Fifteen teeth were present in each mandible and on each side of 
the rostrum of Squalodelphis jabianii, a total of 60 teeth. The 
alveolae on the symphysis of Squalodelphis jabianii are separated by 
intervals that progressively increase from 15 mm. at the level of the 
posterior end to about 23 mm. at the anterior end. On the basis of 
the illustrations of the skull and mandibles of Squalodelphis jabianii 
published by Dal Piaz (1916, pi. 1, fig. 2; pi. 2, fig. 2) it would appear 
that eight teeth were located on the symphyseal portion of each man- 
dible and seven on the free portion behind the symphysis. Conse- 
quently the eight teeth implanted on the symphyseal portion of 
each mandible occupied an interval of about 246 mm. Since the four 
alveolae on the posterior symphyseal portion of each mandible of 
Phocageneus venustus occupy an interval of 62.5 mm., it is obvious 
that either the symphysis of Phocageneus was shorter than that of 
Squalodelphis or a greater number of teeth were present. 

The ornamentation of the enamel crowns of the teeth of Phocageneus 
venustus is quite unlike those of either Delphinodon dividum (True, 
1912, pi. 26, figs. 1-20) or Tretosphys gabbii (Kellogg, 1955, pis. 20, 21). 
Furthermore the teeth of Phocageneus venustus are larger than the 
corresponding teeth of either D. dividum or T. gabbii. The teeth of 
P. venustus differ from the corresponding teeth of D. dividum and 
T. gabbii in that the base of the crown is constricted around its 
circumference to conform to the shape of the neck of the root and 
in that the wrinkles or vertical striae on the corrugated enamel 
surface are more or less complicated by a varying number of short 
oblique grooves. The enamel on the crown is black. 

It should be pointed out that the genotype of the genus Delphinodon 
was fixed by Hay (1902, p. 591) as Delphinodon mento (Leidy, 1869, 
pi. 30, figs. 7, 8). The type tooth of Delphinodon mento (No. 11228, 
Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia) is much larger than those of either 
Delphinodon dividum or D. leidyi (Lcid}^, 1869, pi. 30, fig. 12) and 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 287 

presents several important peculiarities not shared by the smaller 
species. When either a skull or mandible with teeth that match the 
type tooth of Delphinodon mento is found, it is quite probable that it 
will be necessary to separate D. dividum generically from D. mento. 

The ornamentation of the enamel on the inner surface of the crown 
is rugose to a varjung degree, the corrugation or wrinkling of the 
enamel being most pronounced on the teeth situated behind the 
symphysis and progressively diminishing anteriorly. The rugosities 
on the external face of the crown of some of the posterior teeth, 
although rather coarse, are less prominent as compared to the internal 
face and are best developed on the basal one-half of this face. The 
apical one-third of the external face is much less noticeably wrinkled. 
On the basal half, the internal face of the crown of the first to ninth 
teeth (counting forward from hindmost) is noticeably roughened by 
the presence of more or less vertically directed coarse irregular 
wrinkles. The distal third of the internal face of the crown is less 
noticeably corrugated. The crown of each of the above-mentioned 
teeth is somewhat compressed transversely on the distal half of its 
height and bent inward toward the apex, ovoidal in cross section at 
the base, and characterized by a vertically directed blunt carina on 
the anterior and posterior cutting edges. These teeth (pi. 3, figs. 4-6; 
pi. 4, figs. 1-6) are larger than the corresponding teeth of Delphinodon 
dividum (True, 1912, pp. 171-174, pi. 19, figs. 1-2; pi. 26, figs. 1-20), 
the sculpturing of the internal enamel surface is relatively coarse 
(corrugated or wrinkled) on the basal half of their height, no denticulat- 
ed carina is developed on either the anterior or the posterior faces, and 
no discernible accessory tubercle is present near the base of the poste- 
rior face on any of the mandibular teeth. No minute tubercle is 
present at the base of the crown either anteriorly or posteriorly on 
the nine mandibular teeth counting forward from the hindmost. 
The anterior vertically directed carina extends from the triangular 
basal area to the apex of the crown. The posterior vertically directed 
carina is more noticeably developed on the teeth situated behind the 
level of the posterior end of the symphysis than on the teeth situated 
anterior to this end of the symphysis. The anterior and posterior 
faces of first to fourth teeth (counting forward from the hindmost) in 
the left mandible and the posterior face of the fifth and sixth in the 
right mandible were worn by occlusion with the teeth in the maxillaries. 
The presence of circular depressions between the alveolae for the sixth 
to eleventh teeth in the left mandible indicates rather conclusively 
that the points of the corresponding maxillary teeth were thrust into 
these pits. 

By "basal cingulum" Leidy (1869, p. 426) apparently referred to the 
inwardly projecting irregular rugose area (pi. 3, fig. 2) approximately 



288 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

4 to 5 mm. above the base of the crown on the type specimen of 
Phocageneus venustus. The enamel in this area is corrugated and the 
more or less vertically directed wrinkles are not in each instance 
continuous. In describing this tooth Wyman (1850, p. 231) mentions 
"a slightly projecting tubercle." Wyman seems to have applied this 
term to a minute tubercle situated near the basal end of the posterior 
carina on the crown (pi. 3, fig. 2). Since the wrinkles on the enamel 
surface of the crown of the type tooth are less pronounced than on 
the posterior mandibular teeth of USNM 21039, this type tooth is 
tentatively identified as a posterior tooth from the right maxillary. 

The following detailed descriptions of 10 of the 16 detached teeth, 
which were recovered from the matrix enveloping the mandibles, are 
given to indicate the extent of variation in the ornamentation of the 
enamel on the crowns. The allocations are based on comparison 
with teeth implanted in the mandibles. 

A posterior tooth (pi. 4, fig. 2), identified as the second counting 
forward from the hindmost on the right mandible, which lacks the 
distal portion of the root, has the enamel on all faces of the crown 
coarsely corrugated on the basal half, the apical half of the crown is 
compressed transversely, the edge of the vertical carina on the 
anterior face is blunt and slightly nodular, and the base of the crown 
is constricted around its circumference. 

Another posterior tooth (pi. 3, fig. 6), identified as the fourth 
counting forward on the right mandible, has carinae on the anterior 
and posterior faces, the apical half of the crown is bent inward and 
somewhat compressed transversely, the enamel on the basal half of 
the crown is corrugated or wrinkled, and the base of the crown is 
constricted around its circumference. The greatest diameter of the 
proximal portion of the elongated curved root exceeds slightly the 
greatest diameter of the basal portion of the crown. 

The sixth tooth (pi. 3, fig. 5), counting forward from the hindmost 
on the left mandible, has the enamel on the crown ornamented 
similarly to that of the preceding tooth but differs in having two 
carina on the anterior face, the bifurcation commencing approximately 
3 mm. below the point. 

An anterior tooth (pi. 4, fig. 1), presumably the 10th in the left 
mandible counting forward from the hindmost, is quite similar to the 
11th (28.2+ mm.) as regards ornamentation of the enamel on the 
crown, although the anteroposterior diameter of the crown is greater 
and a vertical carina is present on both the anterior and posterior faces. 

The anterior tooth (pi. 4, fig. 6) identified as the 11th counting 
forward from the hindmost in the left mandible has the enamel on 
the internal face somewhat wrinkled, especially at the base of the 
crown, but possesses a carina on the anterior edge which bifurcates 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 289 

ventrally to bound a rather smooth triangular basal area. The 
posterior face of the crown is worn. 

Another anterior tooth (pi. 3, fig. 4) from the right mandible which 
seems referable to the 11th counting forward from the hindmost has 
an ornamentation on the internal face of the crown similar to the 
corresponding tooth from the left mandible. 

Another detached tooth (pi. 4, fig. 5) apparently was located anterior 
to the 11th alveola and may be either the 12th or the 13th in the 
tooth row of the right mandible. It has an inwardly curved crown 
which is tapered toward the point. The side to side compression of 
the upper half of the crown is much less noticeable than on the 10th 
tooth. On the internal face of the crown the enamel is faintly 
wrinkled, the striae extending in a more or less vertical direction to 
the point. As contrasted with the internal face, the enamel on the 
external face is less noticeably wrinkled and relatively smooth. A 
slight vertical carina is present on the posterior face but not on the 
anterior face. The elongated and curved root is swollen on the 
internal face below the crown, and slightly flattened transversely at 
the extremity. 

A rather small tooth (pi. 4, figs. 3, 4) with shortened and malformed 
root unquestionably represents the posteriormost tooth in either the 
upper or lower tooth rows. No alveola for such a tooth is discernible 
on the left mandible, but since this portion of the right mandible was 
destroyed, it may possibly have been present in the right tooth row. 
In that case, eight teeth were present in the right mandible behind 
the posterior end of the symphysis. The crown is low — the height 
being equivalent to about two-thirds of the anteroposterior diameter — 
and is constricted at the base, the apex of the crown is blunt and a 
coarsely corrugated pseudocingulum, broader internally than external- 
ly, sets off the somewhat triangular apical half of the crown. The 
short root is transversely flattened, nodular on the distal half, and 
irregularly bifurcated at the extremity. 

Of these 16 detached teeth, the longest one is complete and undoubt- 
edly belongs in the anterior part of the tooth row of either the upper 
or lower jaws. The measurements of this slender tooth are as follows : 
Greatest length, 39 mm.; greatest length of root, 29 mm.; greatest 
diameter of root, 8 mm.; height of crown, 12 mm.; greatest antero- 
posterior diameter of crown, 7 mm. If this tooth was included in a 
lower tooth row it was dislodged from the symphyseal portion of the 
right mandible. The inwardly curved crown is ornamented with 
rather coarse vertical wrinkles on the inner surface, although the outer 
surface is relatively smooth. The base of the crown is not constricted 
around its circumference. The terminal end of the backwardly curved 
and tapering root is very slender. 



290 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io7 






„<?+ + 



,_q i-H t- co 



00 <N OS 10 

J H t>: «d 



(j'ftta ^ irf i> t-h t> j> ^ o <m o 



"5 00 00ON N 
<M 



tJ 



,J*«± + 



J ^CO^io 00 o o o o> « § 



a2 J 



00 i> 



U3 iO O O tH t-h 

p^'abbcot^odooioJ h^^o S3 ^ * °° 
>— '«q cm i-H i-H 

_ ^"SNOOOWNW f ^ ^ CM CO 

a j^u***^* I ^ - c oo 

H W^cfl CM rH rH g 

I m CO i> 00 CO 

d i-4 ^ oo 06 



, bb o co i> cm cd o £ io 

^CCj CO CM i-l m CM. O OO CO CO 



T-H O OS 00 

CM r-H 



lO 00 CO 



w 2 

g ,-h -^ + B ^ odoood 

w W^ca co <n th «* 

O M '■•■.-.-. . 

<! cd o i> co 

H ^coco »o CM 00 "* i> co £ 

H W 3cfl COCNt-h g ^ OiO^ 

g pj jj od i> 

w 

O ^^ 

COC0iO00l>COCOCOl> feCO io rti CO 

to o 

I ►J-a^g^S " 3 ^ a. « 3 * ^ 

I 

g §U5iOOiO^CO 



^ £ r£ cm" eM" th ci od 

<j dp 

S 2 p 1 






» is ^ * a i 

o^ P a o ^ >3 o a «g 

F-4 O " ^H 'P 1 ITS "SO *H 5^ fli 



o 


IS 


u 




<4-H 


CD 


n 


■+J 




X 


f-l 


0) 


0) 




+J 


a 


a 


5 

o 



-^ -r^ cj P &h cc ^^ -rj, ^ jj c3 

bJDbJDCoSfl bD^) _£ ^ 

«+H°3 •— ' t*_| 

-f3 +3 +3 O -t-3 -»-» 4» -P O +5 H "^ rt 

COCCCO 02CQ (B IB MOtCM 

a) cj -p id <d a cp -pofecufe 

OOOWOO OO wo o 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 291 

Another slender detached anterior tooth of similar shape, which 
lacks most of the crown, measures 37 mm. in its present condition 
and may, when complete, have exceeded the length of the previously 
described tooth. 

The left mandible was broken subsequent to preparation, revealing 
the roots of the second and third teeth counting forward from the 
hindmost. The distal half of the root of the second tooth is bent 
backward almost at right angles to the axis of the crown and the 
proximal portion of the root and extends backward below the root of 
the posteriormost tooth. The distal portion of the root of the third 
tooth is not bent backward as abruptly as that of the second tooth 
and its extremity does not extend posterior to the level of the anterior 
margin of the alveola of the second tooth. In the right mandible the 
root of the third tooth situated behind the posterior end of the 
symphysis (presumably the fifth tooth counting forward from the 
hindmost) is strongly curved backward toward the extremity and 
slightly expanded below the base of the crown and its extremity 
extends backward below the root of the tooth behind it. 

Peeiotic 

The left periotic (pi. 5, fig. 7), which was detached from the cor- 
responding tympanic bulla, does not differ in its external features 
from the right periotic. Both periotics are characterized by dorso- 
ventral compression of the pars cochlearis, unusually large orifices of 
the fenestra rotunda and the aquaeductus cochleae, and a relatively 
small internal acoustic meatus. 

One characteristic feature of the ventral surface of the periotic 
(pi. 5, fig. 6) is the shape of the articular facet on the posterior process 
for the corresponding process of the tympanic bulla. This articular 
facet curves concavely from end to end, and slopes from the postero- 
external angle to the anterointernal angle. Faint shallow grooves 
directed externally are visible on the internal portion of this facet. 
The ventrointernal border of the posterior process projects inward 
and the free edge contributes the floor for the facial canal. The 
anterior face, except for the short internal portion, and the dorsal 
face of the posterior process form a continuous sloping surface which 
terminates in the dorsally prolonged posterodorsal free edge of this 
process; the posterior face of this process is shallowly concave and the 
external end is emarginate. 

As regards the ventral aspect of the pars cochlearis, there is a much 
closer resemblance to Zarhachis flagellator (Kellogg, 1924, pi. 7, fig. 6) 
than to other Calvert Miocene porpoises, although the free posterior 
and internal and anterior faces of this region are thicker and more 



292 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

noticeably rounded. The large fenestra rotunda (pi. 6, fig. 3) is 
elliptical in outline and noticeably larger than the fenestra ovalis. 
The posterior face of the periotic is noticeably excavated above the 
fenestra rotunda, forming a broad dorsally directed groove. The 
foot plate of the stapes is lodged tightly in the ovoidal fenestra ovalis 
and is held in position by a pair of narrow internal ledges which 
extend across the anterior and posterior walls, respectively. Within 
the vestibule are the orifices of the three small canals, the two largest 
of which are situated opposite the epitympanic orifice of the aquae- 
ductus Fallopii and lead to the semicircular canals; the other, a minute 
orifice, is situated at the posterointernal angle and is the terminus of 
the aquaeduct leading from the foramen singular e. On the internal 
wall there is a small passage which leads into the scala vestibuli. 
The epitympanic orifice of the aquaeductus Fallopii is small and 
opens into a narrow slit formed by the rim of the fenestra ovalis and 
the thin inwardly projecting ledge of the external portion of the 
periotic. The groove for the facial nerve,|which leadsffrom this 
aquaeduct, is sharply delimited externally and internally, and is 
markedly widened and deepened external to the fossa for the stapedial 
muscle and then extends backward along the dorsointernal face of 
the posterior process to and along the posterior face of the same 
process. A thin-edged rim separates the fenestra ovalis on the out- 
side from the groove for the facial nerve and on the rear from the 
fossa for the stapedial muscle. The ovoidal fossa for the stapedial 
muscle is rather deep, concave from side to side, and extends down- 
ward on the external face of the pars cochlearis. 

Along the internal margin of this fossa the thin-edged crest de- 
veloped on the ventro external angle of the pars cochlearis extends 
backward to the posterior limit of the latter. The depth of the 
posterior face of this fossil periotic (9.8 mm.), as measured from the 
hindmost margin of the stapedial fossa to the fossa for the cerebral 
orifice of the aquaeductus vestibuli, is greater than the corresponding 
measurement of Zarhachis flagellator. 

Between the irregular tuberosity or swelling on the basal portion 
of the anterior process and the anterior margin of the articular facet 
on the posterior process the ventral surface of the external denser 
portion of the periotic is narrowly depressed or excavated. The fossa 
incudis is reduced to a flattened oval area about 2 mm. in diameter 
and is located adjacent to the external rim of the groove leading from 
the aquaeductus Fallopii. This fossa incudis, which receives the 
crus breve of the incus, is shorter than that of Zarhachis flagellator, 
being prolonged farther posteriorly on the periotic of the latter. 

The fossa for the reception of the head of the malleus is circular in 
outline, rather deeply concave, and is located on the internal face of 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 293 

the irregular tuberosity on the basal portion of the anterior process. 
This fossa extends forward for the most part beyond the level of the 
epitympanic orifice of the aquaeductus Fallopii. The anterior process 
is elongated, obliquely truncated anteriorly, and directed obliquely 
inward. The main articular surface for the accessory ossicle or un- 
cinate process of the tympanic bulla is an elongated concave depres- 
sion which occupies the distal three-fourths of the ventral surface of 
the anterior process. 

In its general features the confirmation of the cerebral face readily 
distinguishes this periotic (pi. 5, fig. 7) from those of other Calvert 
Miocene porpoises. 

The internal acoustic meatus (pi. 6, fig. 2) is relatively small when 
contrasted with the orifice for the aquaeductus Fallopii through which 
passes the facial nerve. The channel for this aquaeduct is separated 
posteriorly by a low thin partition from the internal acoustic meatus. 
The minute orifice of the foramen singulare is located on the edge of 
this partition. The tractus spiralis foraminosus is well defined and 
terminates in the minute foramen centrale at the anterior end. 

Outside the internal acoustic meatus and external to the unusually 
large cerebral orifice of the aquaeductus cochleae is the small orifice 
of the aquaeductus vestibuli which opens into a slit-like depression. 

Measurements of the periotics (in millimeters) 

Right Left 
Breadth of periotic at level of fenestra ovalis (as measured from 

external face above groove to internal face of pars coch- 

learis) 20. 20. 

Greatest length of periotic (tip of anterior process to tip of 

posterior process) 37. 5 40. 

Greatest dorsoventral depth of periotic (as measured from 

most inflated portion of tympanic face of pars cochlearis and 

groove to most projecting point on cerebral face) 14. 2 

Distance between fenestra rotunda and tip of anterior process 28. 28. 

Distance between fenestra rotunda and anteroexternal angle of 

posterior process 16. 16. 4 

Distance between epitympanic orifice of aquaeductus Fallopii 

and tip of_anterior process 21. 

Tympanic Bullae 

Both of the tympanic bullae are unusually well preserved. The 
left tympanic bulla was detached from the periotic while the right one 
has been left in its normal relationship. These tympanic bullae are 
somewhat larger than those of either Eurhinodelphis bossi or Rhab- 
dosteus latiradix and slightly smaller than those of Zarhachis flagellator 
(Kellogg, 1924, pi. 7, figs. 2, 4). 



294 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 10? 

From a dorsal view (pi. 5, fig. 1) the inferior margin of the outer 
lip of the bulla is seen to be bent abruptly inward, forming a thin 
shelf to which the uncinate process is attached. The uncinate process 
which articulates with the elongate depression on the ventral face of 
the anterior process of the periotic is missing from the left bulla, but 
it is preserved in its normal position on the right bulla (pi. 6, fig. 1). 
This uncinate process is rather large, laterally compressed, and pro- 
longed dorsally. The anterior end of the bulla is drawn out into a 
narrow projection which is directed forward and slightly downward, 
and constitutes the anterior outlet or tympanic aperture of the eus- 
tachian canal. The tympanic cavity is bounded by the overarching 
outer lip and by the iuvolucrum. The thick involuted portion of the 
tympanic bulla is unevenly depressed below the level of the inwardly 
bent outer lip and rapidly diminishes in depth anterior to the middle 
of its length. The thick posterior portion of the involucrum is de- 
pressed dorsally and internally opposite the sigmoid process. 

The posterior border and extremity of the sigmoid process are 
noticeably thickened; this process is twisted at a right angle to the 
long axis of the bulla. The posterior conical apophysis is somewhat 
flattened on its dorsal face, but otherwise the relations between the 
apophysis and the closely approximated sigmoid process are normal. 

The elongated posterior process (pi. 5, fig. 3) is dorsoventrally 
compressed, emarginate distally, and is borne on a short slender neck; 
the articular facet for the posterior process of the periotic occupies 
less than half of the dorsal surface. 

Measurements of tympanic bullae (in millimeters) 

Right Left 
Greatest length of bulla 50. 49. 5 

Greatest depth of bulla on internal side (ventral face to dorsal 

face of involucrum) 18. 18. 5 

Greatest depth of bulla on external side (ventral face to 

extremity of sigmoid process) 
Greatest width of involucrum in epitympanic cavity 
Length of posterior process 
Greatest width of bulla 

The ventral surface of the tympanic bulla (pi. 5, fig. 2) is charac- 
terized by a rather broad and deep longitudinal groove, the depression 
becoming more pronounced anterior to the middle of its length. 
When viewed from the ventral side the outer contour of the bulla is 
biconvex and the inner contour exhibits a concave curvature. The 
bulla is much broader posteriorly than anteriorly. 

When viewed from the external side (pi. 6, fig. 1), the posterior 
contour is seen to be convex, the ventral contour slightly convex 
posterior to the anterior projection, the posterior conical apophysis 



33.0 


34.0 




18. 


21. 5 


21.0 


30.5 


31. 5 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 295 

partially concealed, and the sigmoid process directed more upward 
than backward. 

Malleus 

The malleus differs in several respects from that of Kentriodon 
pernix (Kellogg, 1927, figs. 8-13). The facets for articulation with 
the incus occupy more than one-third of the head of malleus and are 
located at the anterior end in a depressed area. The opposite facets 
meet medially at a right angle. The anterior end of the head is pro- 
longed and forms a projecting conical point, and from it on the 
external side arises the minute tubercle or processus muscularis for 
insertion of the tensor tympani tendon. 

The head of the malleus is borne on a slender stalk, the processus 
anterior (longus, gracilis, or folianus of authors), which becomes 
narrower as it approaches the outer lip of the tympanic bulla, fusing 
with the latter in the narrow groove between the sigmoid process and 
the uncinate process. 

The longitudinal groove on the internal face of the tubercle at the 
anterior end of the head of the malleus may mark the area of attach- 
ment of the fleshy process (the " triangular ligament" of authors) of 
the membrana tympani. The malleus, including the anterior tubercle, 
measures 8.4 mm. in length and 4.3 mm. in width. 

Incus 

Two distinct facets comprise the surfaces by which the incus 
articulates with the corresponding facets on the malleus. The largest 
of these two facets is shallowly concave, subcrescentic in outline, and 
coextensive with the external face or base of the body of the incus; 
the smallest facet is deeply concave and is situated at the base on the 
ventral side. These two facets are separated from one another by a 
sharp ridge. From the body of the incus projects the cms longum, 
which is bent inward distally in a dorsointernal direction. On the 
dorsal end of the apical portion of the short conical crus breve is a 
small facet which rests in the fossa incudis. From the apex of the 
crus longum to the base of the bod}^ the incus measures 4 mm.; the 
greatest diameter of the base is 3.5 mm. 

Stapes 

The footplate of the slender stapes is closely fitted to the rim of the 
fenestra ovalis, although some slight side-to-side movement may have 
been possible. On the vestibular face of the footplate of the stapes is 
a distinct umbo or large oval concavity. The inter crural aperture is 
very minute and connects the concavities on the opposite sides of the 
stapes. A minute tubercle in the center of a small circular scar on the 
posterointernal angle of the head presumably marks the area for the 

427790—57 2 



296 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

attachment of the stapedius muscle. The ovoidal concave facet on the 
slightly expanded distal end of the head constitutes the area of contact 
with the corresponding facet on the head of the crus longum of the 
incus. 

Cervical Vertebrae 

Four cervical vertebrae were associated with the mandibles. By a 
rather unusual modification, the ventroexternal angle of the broad 
transverse process of the third and fifth and presumably of the fourth 
cervical projects forward and outward. In this feature as well as the 
large size of the lateral arterial canals, these cervicals resemble the 
corresponding vertebrae of Basilosaurus cetoides and Zygorhiza kochii 
(Kellogg, 1936, fig. 10 and pi. 1) and differ in these respects from other 
known Calvert Miocene odontocetes. There is no indication, however, 
of any future tendency toward ankylosis of the individual cervical 
vertebrae. The sixth cervical has elongated and laterally compressed 
ventral transverse processes which are directed downward and out- 
ward. The third, fifth, and sixth cervicals have a rather broad longi- 
tudinal ridge on the ventral surface of the centrum. 

Atlas: This vertebra (pi. 7, fig. 3) resembles the atlas of Eurhino- 
delphis cocheteuxii (Abel, 1931, pi. 19, fig. 2) in having robust upper 
transverse processes but differs in a number of other respects. The 
reduction of the lower transverse processes, the enlargement of the 
upper transverse processes, the elongation of the hypapophysial 
process, the height of the neural canal, and the anteroposterior 
diameter of the roof of the neural arch characterize this atlas. 

The upper transverse processes are widened vertically, somewhat 
compressed in an anteroposterior direction, and project more outward 
than backward. The lower transverse processes are short and nodular. 
The facets for articulation with the occipital condyles are concave, 
widest near the middle of their height, and separated ventrally by an 
interval of 22 mm. The roof of the neural arch is not elevated 
medially — the anteroposterior diameter at center measuring 30 mm. — 
and is pierced on each side by a large vertebrarterial canal. The 
neural spine is low, broad, and blunt. The posterior facets for articula- 
tion with the axis are not identical in conformation. The left facet is 
somewhat elliptical and the right facet ovoidal in outline. Both facets 
are set off from the posterior face of the centrum externally, ventrally, 
and internally by projecting edges. The hypapophysial process is 
elongated, flattened dorsally, and somewhat rounded ventrally. 
Between the posterior facets and at the base of the rather broad neural 
canal is a narrow upwardly curving surface for articulation with the 
odontoid process of the axis which extends upward along the internal 
border of each lateral facet for at least half of the height of the latter. 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 297 

Third cervical: This cervical vertebra (pi. 7, fig. 2) differs from 
the corresponding vertebra of both Eurhinodelphis bossii and Rhab- 
dosteus latiradix by having much broader and shorter transverse 
processes, which have ventroexternal angles bent forward instead of 
backward, and by having large lateral arterial canals. The right pre- 
zygapophysial facet is ovoidal in outline and slopes steeply from 
external to internal margin. The right postzygapophysial facet is 
slightly convex, and slopes downward from external to internal margin. 
The neural canal is considerably wider (38 mm.) than high (18 mm.). 
The robust neural spine is short and is inclined backward. The anteri- 
or and posterior faces of the centrum are somewhat convex although 
depressed at the center. The median anteroposterior ridge on the 
ventral face of the centrum is rather broad (about 11 mm.) and 
separates deep lateral depressions. On both transverse processes the 
large arterial canal has a vertical diameter greater than the horizontal. 
Each transverse process is continuous dorsally with the pedicle of the 
neural arch; the dorsoexternal angle of each projects backward and 
the ventroexternal angle projects forward. Near the base of the 
anterior border of each transverse process a blunt tuberosity projects 
forward. 

Fifth cervical: In many respects this cervical (pi. 7, fig. 4) is quite 
similar to the third cervical. Each transverse process is somewhat 
compressed anteroposteriorly, perforated at the base by a large round- 
ed arterial canal, and connected dorsally with the lateral face of the 
pedicle of the neural arch by a thin plate. The dorsoexternal angle of 
each transverse process projects backward and the ventroexternal 
angle projects forward, resulting in the concave curvature of the 
anterior face distally. A small process similar to that of the third 
cervical projects forward near the base of the anterior border of the 
transverse process. The roof of the neural arch is narrow, although 
wider anteroposteriorly than that of the third cervical; the neural 
spine is short. The neural canal is wider (43 mm.) than high (34 mm.) . 
The right prezygapophysial facet is subpyriform in outline, although 
flat, and slopes steeply from external to internal margin. The rather 
flat postzygapophysial facets are less elongated than the prezygapo- 
physial facets and slope steeply downward from external to internal 
margins. The anterior and posterior facets project beyond the corre- 
sponding faces of the centrum. The anterior and posterior faces of the 
centrum are somewhat convex although depressed at the center. A 
broad median anteroposterior ridge on the ventral face of the centrum 
projects conspicuously below the lateral depressions. 

Sixth cervical : Except for larger size and more robust build, this 
cervical (pi. 7, fig. 1) is quite similar in general conformation to the 
corresponding vertebra of Rhabdosteus and Eurhinodelphis. The 
transverse processes are directed downward, outward, and backward. 



298 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The broad ventral projection of each transverse process is flattened 
transversely; the upper portion is compressed anteroposteriorly, 
perforated at the base by a very large arterial canal and connected 
dorsally with the lateral face of the pedicle of the neural arch by a 
thin plate. The pedicles of the neural arch are stout and the neural 
canal is wider (47 mm.) than high (23 mm.). The anteroposterior 
diameter of the roof of the neural arch exceeds slightly that of the fifth 
cervical and the neural spine is low. The prezygapophysial facets are 
large and each slopes steeply from outer to inner margin. The left 
postzygapophysis is somewhat larger than the corresponding pre- 
zygapophysial facet and slopes much less steeply downward from ex- 
ternal to internal margins. Both facets project beyond the corre- 
sponding faces of the centrum. The anterior face of the centrum is 
slightly convex but depressed at the center; the posterior face of the 
centrum is concave. The median anteroposterior ridge on the ventral 
face of the centrum is noticeably narrower than that of the fifth 
cervical and the lateral depressions are shallower. 

Measurements of cervical vertebrae (in millimeters) 

Atlas C. 3 C. 5 C. 6 

Greatest vertical diameter of articular sur- 
face for condyle (right) 55. 
Greatest transverse diameter of articular 

surface for condyle (right) 25. 5 

Least anteroposterior diameter of dorsal 

portion of neural arch 30. 13. 5 14. 5 17. 

Least anteroposterior diameter of pedicle of 

neural arch 14. 5 14. 5 15. 5 

Greatest height (vertically) of vertebra 

(tip of neural spine to ventral face of cen- 
trum) 
Anteroposterior diameter of centrum 
Distance across vertebra between tips of 

lower angles of transverse processes 94 100. 108. 146. 

Distance across vertebra between tips of 

upper angles of transverse processes (dia- 

pophyses) 108. 105. 130. 

Distance between tip of prezygapophysis 

and tip of postzygapophysis 44. 50. 50. 

Transverse diameter of neural (spinal) 

canal anteriorly 48. 38. 43. 47. 

Maximum height of neural (spinal) canal 

anteriorly 46. 18. 34. 23. 

Greatest distance across vertebra between 

outside margins of anterior articular 

facets 87. 

Greatest distance across vertebra between 

outside margins of posterior articular 

facets 87. 5 



91.0 


77.5 


86.5 


91.5 


58.0 


31. 5 


33.5 


39.5 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 299 

Dorsal Vertebrae 

The centra increase in length progressively from the first to the 
tenth in the dorsal series, and are broader than high. The width 
exceeds the length of the centrum of the first dorsal ; the four posterior 
dorsals, seventh to tenth, have centra that are longer than wide. On 
each side of the centrum of the six anterior dorsals articular facets for 
the heads of the corresponding and succeeding ribs are situated at the 
upper anteroexternal and the upper posteroexternal angles; the upper 
anteroexternal facet alone is retained on the seventh dorsal. The 
pedicles of the neural arches are strong and occupy more than half the 
length of the centrum. On the five anterior dorsals the neck of the 
diapophysis is constricted dorsoventrally between the distal articular 
facet and the neural arch. The facets on the distal ends of the dia- 
pophyses for articulation with the tuberculaof the ribs increase in width 
from the first to the sixth dorsals. On the second to fifth dorsals, 
inclusive, this facet projects forward beyond the level of the anterior 
face. On the eighth dorsal the diapophysis projects outward from 
near the base of the pedicle of the neural arch. 

As will be noted from an examination of the illustrations, the 
backwardly projecting dorsal portion of the neural arch becomes pro- 
gressively narrower toward the posterior end of the dorsal series. 
The anteroposterior diameter of the neural spine at the base increases 
from the anterior to the posterior end of the series. On the three 
anterior dorsals the anteroposterior diameter of the neural spine at 
the distal end is somewhat less than at the base, this difference being 
especially noticeable on the first dorsal. The neural spines of the two 
posterior dorsals have approximately the same anteroposterior di- 
ameter above the base. The prezygapophysial articular facets on the 
first dorsal are separated by a greater interval than on succeeding 
dorsals. Between the third and the ninth dorsals the width of the 
interval separating the prezygapophysial facets becomes markedly 
reduced. Each prezygapophysial facet is characterized by an up- 
turned inner margin. The postzygapophysial facets of the six anterior 
dorsals project backward beyond the level of the posterior face of the 
centrum. The metapophyses of the ninth and tenth dorsals project 
forward beyond the level of the anterior face of the centrum. 

First dorsal: On this vertebra (pi. 12, fig. 1) the diapophysis pro- 
jects farther laterally than on the vertebrae that follow and the distal 
facet for articulation with the tuberculum of the first rib is situated 
behind the level of the anterior face of the centrum. A large facet for 
the capitulum of the first rib is located at the upper anteroexternal 
angle of the centrum (pi. 8, fig. 1) and a smaller facet for the capitulum 
of the second rib at the upper posteroexternal angle of the centrum. 



300 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The pedicles of the neural arch are strong and the neural canal is 
triangular in outline. As compared with the following vertebrae, the 
neural spine is relatively slender and slightly inclined forward. The 
prezygapophysial facets are large, deeply depressed posteriorly, and 
are separated by an interval of 41 mm. posteriorly. The postzygapo- 
physial facets are large and slope obliquely from external to internal 
margins. The roof of the neural arch is narrow anteroposteriorly, the 
minimum diameter being 29 mm. The anterior and posterior faces of 
the centrum are shallowly depressed medially and the dorsal surface 
of the centrum is depressed on each side of the low median antero- 
posterior ridge. The centrum of this vertebra is the smallest of the 
dorsal series. 

Second dorsal: The centrum of this vertebra (pi. 8, fig. 2) is 
longer than that of the first, the neural canal is smaller, and the mini- 
mum anteroposterior diameter (38 mm.) of the roof of the neural 
arch is greater. The neural spine is nearly vertical. The pedicles 
of the neural arch are low and robust. Each diapophysis projects 
upward, outward, and forward, and extends beyond the level of the 
anterior face of the centrum. The ovoidal lateral facet on the diapo- 
physis for articulation with the tuberculum of the second rib is some- 
what rugose, concave from end to end, and the anteroposterior 
diameter (28 mm.) is greater than the vertical diameter (21 mm.). 
The right prezygapophysial facet (pi. 12, fig. 2) is nearly flat, and 
slopes less steeply from external to internal margin than on the first 
dorsal; these facets are separated by an interval of 33 mm. posteriorly. 
The postzygapophysial facets are smaller than the anterior facets and 
somewhat rugose. The anterior and posterior faces of the centrum 
are depressed medially. The upper anteroexternal facet on the 
centrum for the capitulum of the second rib is smaller than the cor- 
responding facet on the first dorsal, but slightly larger than the upper 
posteroexternal facet. 

Third dorsal: Compared with the second dorsal, this vertebra 
(pi. 12. fig. 3) has shorter diapophyses, narrower neural canal, and 
broader neural spine. The backwardly projecting dorsal portion of 
the neural arch has a narrower transverse width than on the preceding 
dorsal. The prezygapophysial facets are large, concave, deeply de- 
pressed, and separated posteriorly by a relatively narrow interval 
(25 ± mm.). The right postzygapophysial facet is slightly convex, 
roughened, and slopes from external to internal margin. Each dia- 
pophysis projects outward, upward, and forward from the pedicle of 
the neural arch and projects forward beyond the level of the anterior 
face of the centrum; the ovoidal lateral facet for articulation with the 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 301 

tuberculum of the third rib is rugose, deeply concave, and the antero- 
posterior diameter (21 mm.) exceeds slightly the vertical diameter 
(20 mm.) . The lateral faces of the centrum (pi. 8, fig. 3) are depressed 
and curve concavely from anterior to posterior margins; the maxi- 
mum width of the posterior face slightly exceeds that of the anterior 
face. The upper anteroexternal facet on the lateral surface of the 
centrum is elongated vertically and narrower anteroposteriorly than 
on the second dorsal; the upper posteroexternal facet is reduced in 
size. 

Fourth dorsal: The length of the centrum is less than the width 
of the anterior face and the vertical diameter is about two-thirds the 
greatest width posteriorly; the anterior epiphysis is missing. This 
vertebra (pi. 12, fig. 4) is characterized by a rather low and wide 
neural canal; the backwardly projecting dorsal portion of the neural 
arch is noticeably contracted transversely posteriorly, as contrasted 
with the third dorsal. The neural spine is relatively narrow. The 
diapophyses project upward and outward and the concave rugose 
articular facet for the tuberculum of the fourth rib slopes obliquely 
downward and inward, the vertical diameter (21 mm.) being approxi- 
mately equal to the anteroposterior diameter (22 mm.). The deeply 
depressed prezygapophysial facets are separated anteriorly by an 
interval of 17 mm. and project forward beyond the level of the anterior 
face of the centrum. The postzygapophysial facets have been broken 
off. The lateral (pi. 8, fig. 4) and ventral surfaces of the centrum are 
depressed and curve concavely from anterior to posterior margins. 
The upper anteroexternal and posteroexternal facets for articulation 
with the heads of the corresponding ribs are approximately the same 
size. 

Fifth dorsal: In general appearance this vertebra (pi. 9, fig. 1) is 
quite similar to the fourth dorsal, with the exception of the more 
anterior position of the articular facet for the tuberculum of the fifth 
rib, the shorter pedicle of the neural arch, and the longer antero- 
posterior diameter of the neural spine. The robust diapophysis pro- 
jects upward, outward, and forward at a lower level than on the 
fourth dorsal; the rugose sub triangular facet for the tuberculum of 
the fifth rib is concave, slopes downward and inward, and projects 
forward beyond the level of the anterior face of the centrum; the 
anteroposterior diameter (25 mm.) of the right facet exceeds slightly 
the vertical diameter (22 mm.). The concave prezygapophysial 
facets (pi. 12, fig. 5) are broad, and deeply depressed; the interval 
separating these facets can not be determined with certainty because 
of distortion resulting from crushing. The postzygapophysial facets 
are elongated, almost twice as long (23 mm.) as broad (12 mm.), and 



302 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

slope obliquely from external to internal margins. The upper anterior 
and posterior facets for heads of the corresponding ribs are present 
on the lateral surface of the centrum. The transverse and vertical 
diameters of the posterior face of the centrum exceed the correspond- 
ing measurements of the anterior face; the ventral and lateral surfaces 
of the centrum curve concavely from anterior to posterior margins. 

Sixth dorsal: Compared with the fifth dorsal, the backwardly 
projecting dorsal portion of the neural arch is narrower, the facet on 
the diapophysis for articulation with the tuberculum of the corre- 
sponding rib is smaller, the metapophyses project farther forward, 
the neural canal is reduced in width and height, and the pedicles of 
the neural arch are wider anteroposteriorly. The robust diapophysis 
(pi. 13, fig. 4) projects more outward than either upward or forward, 
and the concave distal facet for articulation with the tuberculum of 
the sixth rib is somewhat reniform in outline and is situated behind the 
level of the anterior face of the centrum. The concave prezygapophys- 
ial facets slope steeply from external to internal margins and are 
separated by an interval of less than 10 mm. Both postzygapophysial 
facets are eroded. The ventral and lateral faces of the centrum curve 
concavely from anterior to posterior margins, and the transverse 
width of the posterior face exceeds that of the anterior face. The 
anterior facet on the upper lateral surface of the centrum (pi. 9, fig. 2) 
for articulation with the capitulum of the sixth rib is larger than the 
corresponding posterior facet for the capitulum of the seventh rib. 

Seventh dorsal: This vertebra (pi. 12, fig. 6) was badly damaged 
while the mandibles were being excavated. It lacks portions of both 
epiphyses, the pre- and postzygapophyses, the diapophyses, the dorsal 
portion of the neural arch, and the neural spine. Nevertheless, it 
should be noted that the height and width of the neural canal is less 
than on the preceding dorsal, the centrum is longer, and the dia- 
pophysis projects outward from the pedicle of the neural arch at a 
slightly lower level. The upper anteroexternal facet on the centrum 
(pi. 9, fig. 3) for articulation with the capitulum of the seventh rib is 
located on the anterior face of a protruding 3-sided tuberosity, 
foreshadowing the development of the rudimentary transverse process 
on the eighth dorsal. No posteroexternal facet for articulation with 
the eighth rib is developed on the centrum. 

Eighth dorsal: On this vertebra (pi. 13, fig. 1) the neural spine, 
the backwardly projecting dorsal portion of the neural arch including 
the postzygapophyses, the right metapophysis and its prezygapo- 
physial facet, and the left transverse process were destroyed during 
excavation. The elongated left prezygapophysial facet occupies 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 303 

most of the internal surface of the metapophysis and slopes steeply 
downward from external to internal margins. The short dorso- 
ventrally compressed left diapophysis projects outward from the 
pedicle of the neural arch. The distal facet on the diapophysis for 
articulation with the tuberculum of the eighth rib is elongated and is 
separated from the facet on the short transverse process for the capit- 
ulum of the same rib by an elongated groove measuring less than 
10 mm. in vertical diameter. This dorsoventrally compressed trans- 
verse process (pi. 9, fig. 4) is situated at least 10 mm. behind the level 
of the anterior face of the centrum. The vertical and transverse 
diameters of the neural canal are less than on the preceding dorsal, 
the pedicles of the neural arch are noticeably reduced in height, and 
the left metapophysis projects forward beyond the level of the anterior 
face of the centrum. 

Ninth dorsal: This vertebra (pi. 13, fig. 3) is characterized by 
short robust transverse processes (parapophyses) , large markedly 
elevated and laterally compressed metapophyses, neural canal reduced 
and triangular in cross section, and broad neural spine. The centrum 
is longer than the preceding dorsal, and the width of the posterior face 
(62.8 mm.) exceeds the width (58 mm.) of the anterior face. Each 
parapophysis projects outward below the level of the dorsal face of 
the centrum and the distal facet for articulation with the single-headed 
ninth rib is deeply concave and rugose. The laterally compressed 
pedicles of the neural arch occupy more than half the length of the 
centrum; the vertical and transverse diameters (26 mm.) of the neural 
canal anteriorly are equivalent. The broad neural spine (pi. 10, fig. 1) 
is directed nearly vertically and is incomplete distally ; the posterobasal 
portion of the spine is eroded in the region of the postzygapophyses. 
Narrow prezygapophysial facets separated by an interval of 10 mm. 
are present at the base and on the inside of each metapophysis. 

Tenth dorsal: Longer transverse processes (parapophyses), longer 
centrum, and larger neural spine distinguish this dorsal (pi. 13, fig. 2) 
from the preceding vertebra. Each dorsoventrally compressed para- 
pophysis projects outward from near the middle of the height of the 
lateral surface of the centrum and is narrowed slightly toward the 
distal end; the distal facet for articulation with the tenth rib is 
reduced in size. The laterally compressed pedicles of the neural arch 
resemble rather closely those of the ninth dorsal. No distinct pre- 
zygapophysial facets are retained at the base on the internal face of 
the large laterally compressed metapophyses. The large meta- 
pophyses (pi. 10, fig. 2) project anteriorly beyond the level of the 
anterior face of the centrum. The neural canal is triangular in cross 
section and similar in size to that on the preceding dorsal. 



304 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



»o»oooio»o©©»o 



"3»00©tOOOOOO 



iOOOO»000©»0 



+ 



lO 
CO 

co 


o 

CO 




CM 


O 






o 

CM 

CO 












o 


to 


o 


<M 


<x> 


o 


lO 


o 


IO 


»o 


o »o 


o 


o 


05 


<tf 




lO 


to 


CN 


CM 

oo 


o 

CO 


00 


§3 


"* CM 


5 


ss 


»o 


«o 


cm 


>* 


o 


o 


t 


U5 


*o 


»o 


+ 

»o «o 


>o 


o 


10 


T? 


00 


CM 


SO 


co 


cm 


S3 


00 


CO 
CO 


CM CO 
•<*< CO 


cN 
U3 


CO 



+ 



OlO>OiOiOiO©©©lO 



CM»O»0CM0000©O>O 



©iO©iOO©0»00 



o oo »o «o 



'0OC0>OCN>0 ir 5"3O»O 





2§ 


© 00 
CO CO 


o 


00 


»0 id 




<M 


S *3 



-3 © 



a 9 

■a o 

t-i bfl 

£ -8 

*" CD "c3 

pat: 

>■« CO CD 

O 5> 



o - 



3 ? 



o 

P. >» ; 



S* 



i^l 



^ 

J-H CD 

d* 

co cd 

2 -3 



•§ 

§ 3 

ft -3 



CD O CD O CD CD 

a § a I a 1 

ra a c3 ri c3 t3 



P. 

O O "g 

eg «3 CD 

•O T3 40 

d d C8 

• • co 

h h d 

£ 8 & 

oop, 

d d 2 

CD CD » 

B ^ ^ 

X5 ,Q ? 



> > "d 



a co 

CO ri 
ft & 

aa 

C3 u 



R38 

■■as 5 

a? s 

C3 2? O 

>> i? fl 
-2 "g 1 

.113 

111 

i M "3 o 

a-s^ 



d d 



2 fl 

CD S 

| g 

a cd 



a 2 8 

8 3 d 

tS 1 ■ 

•° .2 S 

CD Tj d 



3 S. S | 



S > +3 > 



11 

ft CD 



s d 



CD .CO 
co T3 
O u 
ft co 



CD CD CD CD CD CD 



.23 






■S 8 i 

CD +? CO 

5 55 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 305 

LUMBAK VERTEBKAE 

Two lumbar vertebrae were associated with the dorsal vertebrae, 
one of which is partially destroyed and lacks not only the right side 
of the centrum but all processes as well. The anteroposterior diameter 
of the centrum is 86.5 mm., which, on the basis of the length (74.5 
mm.) of the posteriormost dorsal, would indicate an anterior location 
in the lumbar series. The transverse diameter (64 mm.) of the cen- 
trum is approximately the same as the vertical diameter (63.5 mm.). 
The median longitudinal keel is best developed near the middle of 
the centrum. The remnant of the left transverse process indicates 
that it was broad at the base. 

The other lumbar vertebra (pi. 10, fig. 3) is fairly well preserved 
but lacks the anterior portion of both met apophyses and the distal 
end of the neural spine. The centrum is longer (91 mm.) than the 
preceding and the lateral depressions on the ventral face are separated 
medially by the thin longitudinal ridge. No marked differences in 
the vertical and transverse diameters of the anterior and posterior 
faces of the centrum are observable. 

The transverse processes (pi. 14, fig. 1) are elongated, broad at 
the base, and apparently truncated obliquely at the extremity. The 
height (17 mm.) of the neural canal anteriorly is less than the trans- 
verse diameter (21.5 mm.). On each side the pedicle of the neural 
arch occupies more than half the length of the centrum. The meta- 
pophyses were bent upward and directed outward and forward; they 
project anteriorly beyond tht level of the anterior face of the centrum. 
The neural spine is broad at the base with concavely curved anterior 
and posterior margins, but it should be noted that the posterobasal 
portion of the neural spine is eroded. 

Caudal Vertebrae 

The mingling of cervical, dorsal, lumbar, and caudal vertebrae in a 
horizontal space of less than three feet shows that the carcass either 
was in an advanced stage of decay or was torn apart before the bones 
were covered by sediments. It would appear that the bones were 
washed about by water action before they settled in a soft diato- 
maceous ooze. Four caudal vertebrae were found. Three are re- 
garded as belonging to the anterior part of the caudal series and one 
is unquestionably from the terminal end. The caudal series of Kecent 
odontocetes ranges from 18 in Inia, 18 in Hyperodon, and 19 in 
Berardius to 45 in Lagenorhynchus . In view of this variation it does 
not appear advisable to estimate the number of caudal vertebrae. 

The largest of these four vertebrae probably represents the secoud 
or third in the caudal series. The distal end of the neural spine is 
missing and a portion of the left transverse process is destroyed. 



306 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Otherwise this caudal (pi. 11, fig. 1) is essentially complete. The 
pedicles of the neural arch occupy more than half the length of the 
centrum and the ovoidal neural canal diminishes in diameter from 
the anterior to the posterior end. The neural spine is broad at the 
base; the anterior and posterior edges of the neural spine are eroded. 
The metapophyses are strong, projecting upward and outward, and 
extend forward beyond the level of the anterior face of the centrum; 
their dorsal edges are at least 46 mm. above the level of the top of 
the centrum. The centrum is large, its transverse diameter pos- 
teriorly being greater than the corresponding measurement anteriorly, 
and its lateral surfaces deeply depressed between the pedicle of the 
neural arch and the transverse process. The posterior paired plate- 
like descending processes for the chevron are longer than the anterior 
pair; these processes contribute the lateral boundaries of the rather 
deep longitudinal groove on the ventral surface of the centrum. The 
dorsoventrally compressed transverse processes (pi. 13, fig. 5) were 
expanded anteroposteriorly distally, but truncated obliquely toward 
anterior and posterior distal angles. 

The second largest caudal (pi. 11, fig. 2) of those excavated is 
slightly twisted from crushing, the neural spine is destroyed, the 
dorsal edges of the metapophyses are slightly worn, and a portion of 
the left transverse process is broken off. The length of the centrum 
is approximately the same as the more anterior caudal, but the 
transverse and vertical diameters of the anterior and posterior faces 
are reduced. The lateral face of the centrum between the pedicle 
of the neural arch and the transverse process is not only depressed 
but is divided bj a longitudinal ridge. The posterior pair of plate- 
like descending processes on the ventral face for articulation with 
the chevrons are much longer than the anterior pair; these processes 
constitute the lateral boundaries of the longitudinal veitral groove 
which is somewhat deeper than on the anterior caudal. The pedicles 
of the neural arch are reduced in height and length; the neural canal 
is small, not more than 10 mm. in diameter. The metapophyses are 
robust, and project more outward than upward; they apparently 
projected forward barely beyond the level of the anterior face of the 
centrum. The transverse processes (pi. 14, fig. 2) are short and broad, 
and both are perforated at the base by an arterial canal. The trans- 
verse process on the right side is truncated obliquely distally from 
anterior to posterior angle. 

The caudal (pi. 11, fig. 3) with a slightly shortened centrum was 
somewhat damaged during excavation and now lacks a portion of the 
posterior epiphysis and the adjoining region of the centrum, the 
hinder end of the neural arch, and major portions of the plate-like 
descending processes on the ventral face of the centrum. This caudal 
is characterized by a very short neural spine, a very small neural 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 307 

canal (pi. 14, fig. 3), low neural arch, and short transverse processes 
perforated at the base by an arterial canal. The metapophyses pro- 
ject outward and do not extend forward to the level of the anterior 
face of the centrum. The longitudinal groove between the descending 
processes for articulation with the chevrons was wider and not de- 
pressed to the same extent as on the preceding caudal. 

The caudal (pi. 15, fig. 1) from near the terminal end of this series 
is pierced dorsoventrally by two fairly large arterial canals, the dorsal 
orifices being separated by a wider interval than the ventral orifices. 
The anterior and posterior faces of the centrum are slightly concave. 

Measurements of lumbar and caudal vertebrae (in millimeters) 

L L Ca Ca Ca Ca 

Greatest vertical height of 
vertebra, ventral face of 
centrum to tip of neural 
spine 209. 0+ 155. + 

Ventral face centrum anteriorly 
to dorsal edge of meta- 
pophyses 111. 118. 105. 88. 

Vertical height of neural spine, 
dorsal surface of neural 
canal to tip of neural spine 

Greatest anteroposterior di- 
ameter of centrum 

Greatest vertical diameter of 
anterior face of centrum 

Greatest transverse diameter 
of anterior face of centrum 

Greatest vertical diameter of 
posterior face of centrum 

Greatest transverse diameter 
of posterior face of centrum 

Greatest vertical diameter of 
neural canal anteriorly 

Greatest transverse diameter 
of neural canal anteriorly 

Least anteroposterior diam- 
eter of pedicle of neural 
arch 45. 53. 5 51. 

Distance across vertebra be- 
tween outer ends of para- 
pophyses 230. 164. 135. 0+ 80. 5 

Anteroposterior diameter of 

parapophysis at extremity 56. 

Anteroposterior diameter of 
neural spine horizontally at 
base 68. 61. 

Distance from inner surface of 
pedicle of neural arch to ex- 
tremity of parapophysis 130. 101. 86. 5 



128. + 




66. + 








92.0 


88.0 


97.5 


97.0 


88.0 


42. 


66.0 




70.5 


69.0 


71.0 


43.0 


70.0 




76.0 


73. 


68.0 


54. 


65.0 


64.0 


71.8 


67.0 






69.0 


64. 


78.5 


73.8 






18.0 




16.5 


12. 


9.0 




22.0 




15.0 


10.0 


11.0 





308 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io7 

Chevron Bones 

Two chevron bones (pi. 15, figs. 2, 3) were found in the matrix sur- 
rounding the vertebrae. These chevrons have elongated, ovoidal, 
rugose surfaces for articulation with the corresponding facets of the 
caudals. The laterally compressed ventral blade is prolonged backward. 

II. An apparently unrecognized odontocete in the Calvert 
Miocene of Maryland 

Further studies of the Calvert Miocene odontocetes reveal a previ- 
ously unrecognized porpoise. The materials on which this study are 
based were collected in 1914 and 1940, but were laid aside until some 
of the more perplexing problems involved in the determination of the 
identity of some of Cope's type specimens could be resolved, at least 
tentatively. In view of the presently available series of odontocete 
skeletal materials recovered during the past 40 years from the Calvert 
Miocene deposits of Maryland, it seems desirable to review briefly the 
status of our knowledge of the components of this marine fauna. 

At least 13 genera of toothed whales were represented by one or more 
species in the Calvert Miocene fauna. The physeterid Orycterocetus, 
although of small size in comparison to the living sperm whale, was the 
largest of all the Calvert toothed whales. This small sperm whale 
possessed functional teeth in the upper jaws although they were lodged 
in an open continuous alveolar groove. Presumably 20 to 22 teeth 
were present in each upper jaw and 20 to 24 in each mandible. One 
skull, which may possibly represent an immature individual, measures 
approximately three feet in length. The adipose cushion or reservoir 
for spermaceti had spread backward behind the narial passages and, as 
a result of this enlargement, the relative proportions and relations of 
the bones forming the dorsal surface of the skull have been altered to 
conform to this large supracranial basin. The basin is bounded behind 
by the dorsal border of the supraoccipital and the right premaxillary 
(which overlies the frontal) and laterally by the elevated borders of 
the maxillaries. The vertex of the skull has been entirely eliminated, 
one of the nasal bones has either been lost or greatly reduced and the 
other flattened against the frontal behind the greatly enlarged left 
narial passage, and the rostrum has been expanded laterally at the 
proximal end. In contrast to skulls of other odontocetes, the roof of 
the braincase has been depressed below the normal position, seemingly 
as the result of the additional weight and presure of the developing 
spermaceti reservoir. 

Shark-toothed whales of the family Squalodontidae were represented 
by the genus Squalodon (Kellogg, 1923). The skull of this porpoise 
measured at least three feet in length and the rostrum was nearly twice 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 309 

as long as the braincase. In some respects the skull is less modified 
than those of other contemporary odontocetes since the mesethmoid 
divides the fontanelle between the frontals on the forewall of the 
braincase into two large foramina through which the olfactory nerves 
pass. Unlike other Calvert Miocene odontocetes, the dentition of 
Squalodon is heterodont and is regarded as consisting of 3 incisors, 1 
canine, 4 or 5 premolars and 6 or 7 molars. There were 16 teeth 
present in each upper jaw and 14 in each mandible. The crowns of 
the cheek teeth (molars and premolars) have the anterior and posterior 
cutting edges serrated by well-defined accessory cusps. Comparative 
measurements indicate a skeletal length of 10 feet. 

Another porpoise, Phocageneus, on the basis of available materials 
seems to be related to the lower Miocene Italian Squalodelphis, which 
has been regarded as either an offshoot of primitive Squalodontidae or 
a transitional form between the Squalodontidae and the Ziphiidae. 
The lower Miocene Squalodelphis has 15 teeth on each side in the 
upper and lower jaws that are regarded by Dal Piaz (1916, p. 23) as 
representing 3 incisors, 1 canine, and 11 premolars and molars. Un- 
like the genus Squalodon, the posterior teeth of both Squalodelphis and 
Phocageneus lack serrations on the anterior and posterior cutting 
edges. The enamel on the crowns of the teeth of Phocageneus and 
also those of Squalodelphis is coarsely corrugated or wrinkled, the 
crowns are somewhat compressed transversely on the distal half of 
their height, and a vertically directed carina is present on the anterior 
and posterior faces of at least the nine posterior mandibular teeth. 

Most of the other types of Calvert porpoises possessed a somewhat 
homodont dentition and a considerably greater number of teeth than 
Squalodon. Of the four genera of unusually long-beaked porpoises, 
Zarhachis (Kellogg, 1924) was the largest. It appears to be an 
aberrant type with no known counterparts in the Miocene of either 
Europe or South America. The skull of Zarhachis was nearly 4 feet 
long and illustrates an extreme stage in the lengthening of the rostrum 
and the symphysis as well as reduplication of the teeth. As regards 
the number of teeth, 86 to 87 were located on each side of the rostrum 
and 70 to 72 in each mandible. A dorso ventral flattening of both the 
rostrum and the symphysis characterize Zarhachis. Furthermore, the 
terminal teeth on the symphysis occlude with the anteriormost pair of 
teeth on the rostrum. On the braincase the outer end of each supra- 
orbital process of the frontal is bent upward to form a thickened 
longitudinal crest. Two crescentic orifices (Kellogg, 1926, pi. 2) 
enclosed by involuted ectethmoid bones for passage of olfactory 
nerves are present on the posterior wall of the nasal passages. The 
length of the skeleton of this long-beaked porpoise was approximately 
16 feet. 



310 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Eurhinodelphis (Kellogg, 1925) also is characterized by an elongated 
rostrum which constitutes four-fifths of the total length of the skull. 
The distal one-third of the rostrum of the skull of old individuals is 
either edentulous or a cartilaginous ligament may have lodged small 
teeth in an uninterrupted narrow groove, which on each side extends 
from anteriormost alveola to extremity. The alveolae are closely 
spaced on the middle portion of the rostrum. The mandible is cer- 
tainly abnormally shortened and does not extend forward to extremity 
of rostrum. Although some variation in the number of teeth may be 
anticipated, the type skull of Eurhinodelphis bossi has 59 teeth on the 
right side of the rostrum and 60 teeth on the left side. The full com- 
plement of teeth in the lower jaws may have approached the number 
lodged in alveolae in the upper jaws. Unfortunately the distal end 
of the symphysis of the above type specimen is missing, but in the 
present condition 50 teeth were present in the right mandible and 51 
teeth in the left mandible. The alveolae are rather closely approxi- 
mated on the mandibles. The length of this skull is 42 inches (1066 
mm.), and the estimated length of the skeleton is 12 feet. 

On the basis of recovered specimens Rhabdosteus (Cope, 1867) was 
far more numerous in the Calvert fauna than the other genera. The 
largest skull measures about 41 inches (1055 mm.) in length and the 
anterior one-third of the slender tapering rostrum projects at least 
10 inches beyond the anterior extremity of the symphyseal portion of 
the mandibles. Four-fifths of the total length of the skull is consti- 
tuted by the rostrum. Like Eurhinodelphis, the distal one-third of 
the rostrum on skulls of old individuals is seemingly edentulous, but 
on skulls of immature individuals the alveolae are distinct on this 
portion of the rostrum and closely spaced to or nearly to the extremity 
of the rostrum. On each side of the rostrum of a mature individual 
at least 39 teeth were present, and, although no alveolae persist on 
the anterior one-third of the rostrum, the presence of continuous 
alveolar grooves extending to the extremity suggest a condition similar 
to that described for Eurhinodelphis. Along the middle portion of 
the rostrum the alveolae are rather widely spaced and are separated 
by porous or spongy bone which fills the alveolar gutter between the 
roots of the teeth. Teeth are implanted the full length of the sym- 
physeal portion of the mandibles. At least 36 teeth were present in 
each mandible. The teeth in the upper and lower jaws are character- 
ized by a slender crown and a root markedly compressed from side to 
side and conspicuously widened toward the extremity as well as more 
or less prolonged at one basal angle. Comparative measurements 
suggest that the skeletal length of this porpoise may have been 
slightly shorter than that attributed to Eurhinodelphis. 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 311 

Another long-beaked porpoise, Schizodelphis (True, 1908), occurs 
less frequently in Calvert Miocene. The dovsoventrally flattened 
rostrum and symphysis as well as the presence of a long longitudinal 
groove on the outer face of the symphyseal portion of each mandible 
and the flattened palatal surface of the rostrum readily distinguish 
this genus. Unlike either Eurhinodelphis or Rhabdosteus, the anterior 
end of the symphysis extends forward to the level of the anterior end 
of the rostrum. The estimated length of the type skull of Schizo- 
delphis crassangulmn is less than 30 inches (735 mm.). A count of the 
alveolae reveals 65 on each side of the rostrum and 67 in each mandible. 
The skeleton is not sufficiently well known from vertebrae to estimate 
the total length of this porpoise. 

One occurrence has been reported for Pelodelphis (Kellogg, 1955, 
pp. 130-143, pis. 12-16), and, although thus far known only from the 
mandibles, this genus unquestionably possessed a skull with a shorter 
rostrum than either Eurhinodelphis, Rhabdosteus, or Schizodelphis, as 
well as fewer and somewhat larger teeth. Alveolae for 33 teeth are 
present on each mandible and when complete the full complement was 
probably 36 teeth. The skull undoubtedly was more lightly con- 
structed than that of Lophocetus, but approximately the same length. 
The symphysis constituted slightly more than two-fifths of the length 
of either mandible. 

The Lophocetus skull (Kellogg, 1955, pis. 1-3) is approximately 
2 feet in length. It possessed 24 teeth on each side of the rostrum and 
26 teeth in each mandible. The ankylosed symphysis constituted 
one-third the length of either mandible. The large and well w^orn 
teeth of the type specimen of Lophocetus pappus suggest a coarser 
type of food than that sought by porpoises with a markedly elongated 
rostrum. The skull is strongly constructed and is characterized by 
having the vertex of the braincase elevated, the posterior end of each 
premaxillary bent upward, forming an oblique crest adjacent to the 
longitudinally elongated nasal bone, and a rostrum equivalent to not 
more than three-fifths of the length of the skull. 

Kentriodon (Kellogg, 1927) resembles in many respects the living 
Sotalia of South American fresh-water streams. The length of the 
skull varied from 12 to 13 inches and the rostrum comprised three- 
fifths of the total length of the skull. The symphysis did not quite 
equal one- third the length of either mandible. The teeth are small 
and closely spaced in the jaws; 40 teeth are present on each side of 
the rostrum and 38 in each mandible. A reconstruction of the skeleton 
indicates a total length of 5K feet. 

The rather broad braincase, the relatively short rostrum, and short 
symphysis of Delphinodon (True, 1912; Barwick, 1939) as well as the 

427790—57 3 



312 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

peculiarities of the teeth readily distinguish this genus from other 
small Calvert porpoises. The type skull of Delphinodon dividum has 
27 teeth on each side of the rostrum and 26 in each mandible, and the 
largest skull measures slightly more than 16 inches in length. The 
symphysis equals one-fifth the length of either mandible and the 
rostrum comprises 45 to 51 percent of the total length of the skull. 
The estimated length of this porpoise is about 6 feet. 

Our present knowledge of Tretosphys (Kellogg, 1955, pp. 143-153, 
pis. 17-21) is limited to portions of the skull and mandibles, teeth, 
hyoid bones, an incomplete forelimb, and a few vertebrae. Tretosphys 
gabbii was a small porpoise whose ankylosed symphysis measured 
147 mm. in length. There are 14 rather closely approximated alveolae 
located on each side of the symphysis. Anterior detached teeth have 
relatively smooth enamel on anteroposteriorly flattened crowns ; teeth 
from near the middle of the tooth row have the enamel on the outer 
surface of the crown ornamented with fine striae; and the posterior 
teeth have either a fairly large accessory cusp with a denticulated 
cutting edge, or several small tubercles one above the other, or a 
rugose coarsely sculptured internal face of the crown. 

In all probability the skull of the slender-beaked porpoise hereinafter 
described as Araeodelphis did not exceed 19 inches in length. More 
than 45 teeth were originally present on each side of the rostrum, and 
at least 46 and not more than 50 teeth were implanted in each 
mandible. Assuming that the number of caudal vertebrae of 
Araeodelphis did not exceed 20, the dimensions of the dorsal and 
lumbar vertebrae tentatively referred to this species suggest a skeletal 
length of 7 feet. 

In the above review of the odontocete genera represented in the 
Calvert fauna, one notes that the reduplication of the teeth in the 
jaws has progressed at a variable rate. The full complement of teeth 
in each of these genera is summarized as follows : 

Squalodon 60 

Phocageneus ?60 

Lophocetus 100 

Delphinodon 106 

Tretosphys 1 10 ± 

Pelodelphis 144± 

Rhabdosteus 150 

Kentriodon 156 

Araeodelphis 190+ 

Eurhinodelphis 210 

Schizodelphis 264 

Zarhachis 315 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 313 

Araeodelphis, 1 new genus 

Genotype: Araeodelphis natator, new species. 

Diagnosis: Rostrum slender, attenuated toward anterior ex- 
tremity; mesorostral trough roofed over by close approximation of 
premaxillaries ; narrow median longitudinal groove on palatal surface 
extends forward from 45th tooth (counting backward from anterior- 
most alveola) to extremity; more than 45 teeth located on each side 
of rostrum. 

Mandibles slender with symphysis firmly ankylosed, elongated, 
and tapered toward anterior extremity; width of symphysis greater 
than depth; median longitudinal groove on dorsal surface of symphysis 
indistinctly divided longitudinally for about two-thirds its length 
by the raised thin ridge formed at line of contact of mandibles; op- 
posite free posterior portions of mandibles come together at a blunt 
angle (55°) at symphysis; external surface of each mandible convex 
dorsally above the deep channel or groove which commences about 
20 mm. behind level of posterior end of symphysis and extends 
forward almost to anterior end; these channels or grooves on the 
opposite rami bound the median and somewhat convex longitudinal 
strip on ventral surface of symphysis; 36 to 37 teeth located on each 
side of symphysis. 

Roots of teeth implanted in alveolae which slope more inward 
than backward ; roots of teeth noticeably swollen below base of crown 
and attenuated near extremity; crowns of most of the teeth on sym- 
physis and rostrum slender, pointed, and curved inward; enamel on 
crowns of majority of the teeth indistinctly wrinkled in a vertical 
direction on internal surface, but posterior teeth on symphysis have 
enamel more coarsely sculptured internally and possess a small 
tubercle on posterior margin of internal face; posterior teeth (41st to 
45th) on rostrum possess one small tubercle on the posterior surface 
about half way of height of crown and a varying number of minute 
rugosities on internal surface; interval between teeth at base of 
crowns varies from 3 to 6 mm. 

Araeodelphis natator, new species 

Type specimen (USNM 10478): Essentially complete rostrum 
except for portion immediately in front of antorbital notches, sym- 
physeal portion of mandibles, and 12 detached teeth. Collector, 
Norman H. Boss, July 1914. 



1 From the Greek, "araios," thin, slender, and "delphis," dolphin, in allusion to slender rostrum and 
symphyseal region of mandibles. 



314 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Horizon and locality: Sandy clay of Calvert Cliffs, 1 rnile south 
of Chesapeake Beach, Calvert County, Md. Calvert formation, 
upper Miocene. 

Rostrum 

This slender attenuated rostrum is characterized by a somewhat 
greater length than that of Kentriodon pernix (Kellogg, 1927, pis. 
2, 6, 7), by closely approximated premaxillaries on the dorsal surface, 
by a narrow median longitudinal groove on the ventral surface which 
extends forward from the 45th tooth (counting backward from the 
anteriormost alveola) to the extremity, and by a greater number of 
teeth. The length of the rostrum of the largest known skull of Ken- 
triodon pernix is 199 mm., while this rostrum, although incomplete, 
measures 337 mm. 

At the hinder end of this rostral fragment (pi. 17, fig. 1) the maxil- 
laries and the premaxillaries are approximately equal in width, but 
near the anterior extremity the width of the maxillary is greater than 
that of the premaxillary. Commencing at the level of the 38th tooth 
(counting backward from the anteriormost alveola) on the right side 
and continuing to the extremity of the rostrum, the inner borders of 
the premaxillaries are in contact, completely roofing over the meso- 
rostral trough. 

The conformation of the hinder end of the right premaxillary in- 
dicates that the premaxillaries are more or less flattened out and almost 
horizontal at the base of the rostrum, but anterior to the level of the 
40th tooth (counting backward from the anteriormost alveola) these 
bones become rather strongly convex and slope from the inner to the 
outer margin, although they are less noticeably elevated above the 
maxillaries on the distal 80 mm. of the rostrum. Both premaxillaries 
decrease in breadth toward the extremity of the rostrum. Several 
nutrient foramina from which narrow grooves extend forward are 
located on the lateral surfaces of the premaxillaries. The premaxil- 
laries and maxillaries are so firmly ankylosed that the line of contact 
is not clearly discernible on the anterior half of this incomplete ros- 
trum. The slope of the maxillaries from the inner to the outer margin 
progressively diminishes toward the anterior extremity. 

On the ventral side of the rostrum (pi. 16, fig. 2) the palatal surfaces 
of the maxillaries become progressively flattened in the direction of the 
antorbital notches and more noticeably convex anterior to the 35th 
tooth (counting backward fcom anteriormost alveola). The median 
longitudinal groove on the palatal surface diminishes in depth toward 
the anterior extremity. The ventral ridge of the vomer is visible on 
the palatal surface of the rostrum as far forward as the 35th tooth 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 315 

(counting backward from the anteriormost alveola) and is thrust 
between the opposite maxillaries. More than 45 teeth were originally 
present on each side of the rostrum. 

Measurements of rostrum (in millimeters) 

Length of rostral fragment, as preserved 337. 

Transverse diameter of rostrum at level of 39th alveola counting back- 
ward from anteriormost alveola of right maxillary 42. 

Transverse diameter of rostrum at level of 5 th alveola counting back- 
ward from anteriormost alveola of right maxillary 18. 5 

Distance between alveolae of opposite tooth rows at level of 39th alveola 

counting backward from anteriormost alveola of right maxillary 30. 

Distance between alveolae of opposite tooth rows at level of 30th alveola 

counting backward from anteriormost alveola of right maxillary 16. 

Distance between alveolae of opposite tooth rows at level of 10th alveola 

counting backward from anteriormost alveola of right maxillary 10. 

45 alveolae on right side of rostrum in an interval of 319. 

38 alveolae on left side of rostrum in an interval of 277. 

Mandibles 

Both mandibular rami are broken off a short distance behind the 
posterior end of the symphysis. The symphysis is attenuated toward 
the anterior extremity, the transverse diameter diminishing from 50 
mm. at the level of the posterior end to 11 mm. at the anterior end. 
The vertical diameter of the symphysis at the anterior end is slightly 
more than one-third the depth at the posterior end. The anterior 
extremity of the symphysis may lack only the anterior walls of the 
anteriormost alveolae. 

The mandibles (pi. 16, fig. 3) are firmly ankylosed throughout the 
length of the symphysis; the line of ankylosis is indicated by the 
raised thin longitudinal ridge on the posterior 190 mm. of the median 
longitudinal groove on the dorsal surface of the symphysis. The 
dorsal surface of the symphysis is not flattened and is characterized 
chiefly by this rather deep median longitudinal groove measuring 
about 8 mm. in width at a point 40 mm. anterior to the posterior end 
of the symphysis and narrowing anteriorly to a width of about 1 mm. 
at a point about 40 mm. posterior to the anterior extremity. On each 
side of this median longitudinal groove and inside the tooth rows, 
the dorsal surface of each mandible comprising the symphysis is 
convex from side to side. On the ventral surface (pi. 17, fig. 2) the 
line of ankylosis is indicated by a continuous thin groove which 
extends medially the full length of the symphysis. 

The blunt angle (55°) formed by the free hinder portions of the two 
mandibles of Araeodelphis natator where they meet to form the 



316 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

symphysis is less acute than in Acrodelphis letochae. Brandt (1874, 
p. 22, pi. 3) states that the two mandibles of Acrodelphis letochae 
meet at a 25° angle. The two mandibles of Champsodelphis lopho- 
genius, judging from the artist's illustration (Van Beneden and 
Gervais, 1880, pi. 57, fig. 10), meet at an angle of 35°. The transverse 
diameter of the symphysis of Acrodelphis letochae (Heiligenstadt, 
No. 15, Wien Mus.) is 20.5 mm., however, as contrasted to 50 mm. for 
the corresponding measurement of Araeodelphis natator and 43.2 mm. 
for Champsodelphis lophogenius (type, No. 11731, Lab. Paleont., Mus. 
Nat. Hist. Nat., Paris). 

From a lateral view (pi. 16, fig. 1) the ventral profile is essentially 
straight. The external surface of the mandible is characterized by a 
deep channel or groove, commencing at a vascular foramen about 
20 mm. behind the level of the posterior end of the symphysis and 
extending forward almost to the anterior end although diminishing 
in depth. No interruptions or breaks in the continuity of this groove 
are observable. This channel is about 6 mm. wide posteriorly and 
progressively narrows toward the anterior extremity of the symphysis. 
Short, anteriorly directed grooves from small vascular or nutrient 
foramina open into these channels. These longitudinal channels on 
the lateral surface of the right and left mandibles set off a somewhat 
convex ventral strip (pi. 17, fig. 2) which measures 15 mm. in width 
30 mm. anterior to the posterior end of the symphysis and about 9 mm. 
in width 50 mm. behiad the anterior end. 

The mandible of Acrodelphis letochae (Abel, 1900, pi. 1, fig. 2), 
however, is characterized by a longitudinal groove on the lateral 
surface that originates in a vascular foramen approximately at the 
level of the posteriormost alveola and extends forward parallel to the 
alveolar edge at least as far as the posterior end of the symphysis. 
This longitudinal groove is then replaced at a slightly lower level by 
another deeper and more sharply defined longitudinal groove which 
continues forward in the same position to the anterior end of the 
symphysis as preserved. These grooves on the lateral surfaces of the 
ankylosed mandibles delimit the median longitudinal convex portion 
of the ventral surface of the symphysis. The interruptions or breaks 
in the continuity of these lateral grooves as well as the conformation 
of the median longitudinal portion of the ventral surface of the sym- 
physis of Acrodelphis letochae are regarded as indicating that Acro- 
delphis and Araeodelphis are not closely related. Although some 
variability is expected in structures, such as vascular impressions, no 
collateral evidence is known which supports Abel's (1900, p. 849) 
contention that such grooves possess no generic significance. Grooves 
on mandibles of species of other odontocetes conform to the generic 
types, as, for instance, Schizodelphis. 



Right 


Left 


359.0 


320.0 


291.5 




50.0 




24.5 




11.0 




9.5 




26.5 




16.5 





MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 317 

Measurements of mandibles (in millimeters) 

Length of mandible, as preserved 

Greatest length of ankylosed symphyseal portion of mandibles 
Transverse diameter of ankylosed symphysis at posterior end 
Vertical diameter of ankylosed symphysis at posterior end 
Transverse diameter of ankylosed symphysis at anterior end 
Vertical diameter of ankylosed symphysis at anterior end 
Transverse diameter of ankylosed symphysis 100 mm. anterior 

to posterior end 
Vertical diameter of ankylosed symphysis 100 mm. anterior to 

posterior end 
Distance between alveolae of opposite tooth rows at level of 

posterior end of symphisis 36. 

Distance between alveolae of opposite tooth rows at the level 

of 35th tooth counting forward from posterior end of 

symphysis 6. 

Least distance between alveolae in tooth row 3. 

Maximum distance between alveolae in tooth row 5. 

37 alveolae in an interval of 296. 305. 

35 alveolae on sj^mphysis in an interval of 280. 288. 

Anteroposterior diameter of largest alveola 5. 5 

10 teeth at hinder end of symphysis in an interval of 86. 88. 

12 teeth at hinder end of symphysis in an interval of 102. 103. 

Teeth 

One tooth inserted near the anterior end of the symphysis of the 
mandible (seventh counting backward from anteriormost) by the 
preparator is in all probability misplaced since it possesses three small 
tubercles on the basal portion of the coarsely sculptured internal 
surface of the crown. With this exception, the crowns of the teeth 
(pi. 18, figs. 1-3) located in front of the posterior end of the symphysis 
are slender, relatively long, and curved inward, with vertically wrinkled 
or slightly fluted enamel on the internal surface and relatively smooth 
enamel on the external surface. The teeth have single roots. The 
roots are swollen or gibbous below base of the crown, abruptly curved 
backward at the extremity, and attenuated. Intervals between the 
basal portions of the crowns of the teeth are rather short, varying 
from 3 mm. anteriorly to 6 mm. posteriorly. Three teeth on the 
right side, two of which are situated anterior to the posterior end of the 
symphysis, have the internal surface of the crown coarsely sculptured 
or wrinkled and one small tubercle on the posterior margin about half 
way of height of crown. 

Three detached teeth (pi. 18, figs. 4-6), apparently dislodged from 
the posterior free portion of the right mandible while the specimen 
was being prepared, have two slender pointed tubercles, one above 
the other on the posterior edge of the internal surface of the crown, 
as well as tongue-like projections on the enamel extending nearly 



318 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



vertically from near the basal border of the internal surface. The 
anterior surface of the crown (pi. 18, fig. 4) of these teeth is character- 
ized by irregular nodosities which contribute to the formation of a 
ledge about half way of its height. The enamel on the apical portion 
of the crown is relatively smooth. The crowns of these three teeth 
are shorter and more robust than the majority of the teeth on the 
mandible, although the apical portions are likewise curved inward. 
Immediately below the base of the crown, excrescences on the anterior 
and posterior surfaces abruptly widen anteroposteriorly the upper- 
most portions of the roots. On the symphysis, 37 teeth were present 
on the right side and 36 on the left side. 

The crowns of the five posterior teeth on the right side of the 
rostrum are shorter, somewhat conical, and curved inward. The 
apices of the crowns are slightly worn. A varying number of minute 
rugosities are present on the internal surface of the crown and at 
least one small tubercle on the posterior surface is situated about half 
way of the height of the crown. The gibbous roots of the posterior 
teeth have a somewhat roughened surface immediately below the 
enamel crown. On the major portion of the rostrum the crowns of ( 
the teeth (pi. 16, fig. 1) are slender, relatively long, and curved inward, 
with vertically wrinkled enamel on the internal surface and relatively 
smooth enamel on the external surface. These teeth have gibbous 
roots (pi. 18, figs. 1-3). 

As regards some of the Calvert Miocene porpoises it should be'noted 
that the number of teeth located on the free portion of each ramus 
behind the posterior end of the symphysis varies considerably, ranging 
from 11 to 12 in Pelodelphis, 14 to 15 in Delphinodon, and 18 to 19 in 
Kentriodon. Other fossil porpoises known from the Helvetian de- 
posits of the Department of Landes, France, as, for instance, Champs- 
odelphis lophogenius (Valenciennes, 1862) and C. dationum (referred 
mandible, Van Beneden and Gervais, 1880, p. 488, pi. 57, fig. 11) 
have 10 to 11 teeth on the free portion of each mandible. In view of 
the length of the symphysis one might anticipate that the minimum 
number of teeth in each mandible of Araeodelphis natator would be 
46 and the maximum 49 or 50. 

All of the teeth on the type mandible of Champsodelphis lophogenius 
have rather smooth enamel on the outer surface of the crown. The 
shelf on the inner side at the base of the crown does not resemble a 
cingulum, but nevertheless it is quite prominent; the enamel on this 
basal region of some of these teeth is characterized by faint striae 
and minor vertical grooves. Valenciennes (1862, pp. 788-789) refers 
to an excessively small vestige of a tubercle at the base of the crown, 
although I failed to observe it at the time the type specimen was 
examined. The apices of the teeth are pointed and curved inward 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 319 

and backward. The neck of the root is slightly constricted below the 
enlargement of the base of the crown. The measurements of these 
teeth are as follows: height of enamel crown, 5.9 to 7.4 mm.; antero- 
posterior diameter of crown at base, 4.9 to 5.5 mm.; transverse diam- 
eter of crown at base, 5.4 to 5.8 mm. On the left mandible 10 alveolae 
occupy an interval of 114 mm. These teeth of Champs odelphis 
lophogenius are, however, more robust than those of Araeodelphis 
natator, the base of the crown being more noticeably enlarged, and the 
root slightly constructed immediately below the base of the crown. 
The roots of the teeth of Araeodelphis natator, however, are conspicu- 
ously swollen below the base of the crown and the measurements are 
as follows: height of enamel crown, 6 to 8.2 mm.; anteroposterior 
diameter of base of crown, 2.9 to 3.0 mm.; and transverse diameter of 
base of crown, 2.7 to 3.8 mm. 

The teeth of Acrodelphis letochae (Pia, 1937, p. 363) that are located 
in the free portion of the mandible behind the posterior end of the 
symphysis have crowns that are curved distally, are approximately 
circular in cross section, and lack any trace of tubercles, granulations 
(rugosities), or edges. Pia (1937, p. 363) has also commented that the 
teeth of Acrodelphis letochae do not agree with those of "Champsodel- 
phis" ombonii (Longhi, 1898) and that these two species are not 
generically related as Abel (1905, pp. 130-132) assumed. The type 
mandible of Acrodelphis letochae has 14 teeth in an interval of 64 mm. 
There are 14 teeth on the posterior portion of the symphysis of 
Araeodelphis natator in an interval of 123 mm. 

The teeth on the mandible referred to Champsodelphis dationum by 
Gervais (Van Beneden and Gervais, 1880, p. 488, pl. 57, fig. 11) 
approximate more closely in dimensions the teeth of Araeodelphis 
natator. The teeth are described by Gervais (1859, p. 306) as having 
pointed crowns that curve inward and that have smooth enamel, a 
constricted neck, and a slightly swollen root. The measurements of 
the largest of these small teeth are as follows : height of enamel crown, 
6 mm.; greatest width of crown, nearly 3 mm. Twelve alveolae 
occupy an interval of 110 mm. on the left mandible; height of mandible 
at last tooth, 35 mm. ; and height of posterior end of symphysis, 28 mm. 

Measurements of the teeth (in millimeters) 







Antero- 
median 
(pl. 18. 
fig.l) 


Median 
(pl. 18, 
fig. 2) 


Median 
(pl. 18, 
fig. 3) 


Median 


Pos- 
terior 
(pl. 18, 
fig. 4) 


Pos- 
terior 
(Pl. 18, 
fig. 6) 


Pos- 
terior 
(pl. 18, 
fig. 5) 


Greatest length, as preserved 




19.7 


16.5 


16.4 


17.0+ 


15.5 


14.4 


15.2 


Length of root 




12.5 


8.7 


8.5 


8.3+ 


9.6 


8.5 


9.4 


Greatest diameter of root 




5.0 


5.5 


4.4 


5.0 


5.3 


5.7 


5.3 


Height of crown 




7.0 


8.2 


7.5 


8.0 


6.0 


6.4 


6.0 


Greatest anteroposterior diameter 
















of crown 




3.0 


3.0 


3.0 


3.0 


3.0 


3.0 


2.9 


Greatest transverse diameter 


of 
















crown 




2.7 


2.8 


2.8 


3.0 


2.9 


3.5 


3.8 



320 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Referred Specimen 

USNM 16569: Six cervical (not including atlas), 10 dorsal and 5 
lumbar vertebrae; eleven ribs. Collectors, William F. Foshag and 
Remington Kellogg, Aug. 6, 1940. 

Horizon and locality: Compact, sandy, blue clay of Zone 11, 
about 5 feet above base of cliff, approximately 1.2 miles north of mouth 
of Parker Creek, William Freeland farm, Calvert County, Md., Cal- 
vert formation, upper Miocene. 

A consecutive series of vertebrae extending from the axis to and 
including the fourth lumbar were found embedded in their normal 
sequence when the specimen was excavated. Following extended 
comparisons with the vertebrae of other small Calvert odontocetes, 
and the resultant elimination from tether consideration of all forms 
heretofore recognizable in this fauna, it seemed reasonable to assume 
at least tentatively that this vertebral series represents Araeodelphis 
natator. 

Vertebrae 

With the exception of the atlas, all of the vertebrae in the cervical 
series are preserved. Ten consecutive vertebrae represent the dorsal 
series. The five lumbar vertebrae belong to the anterior portion of 
this series. 

Cervical Vertebrae 

All of the cervical vertebrae were free, the series consisting, when 
complete, of seven vertebrae. The diagnostic features of this series 
may be summarized as follows: Axis characterized by a slender and 
elongated neural spine, short and blunt odontoid process and maximum 
transverse diameter approximately equal to height; neural spines of 
third to sixth cervicals short; ventral transverse processes of third to 
fifth cervicals directed obliquely backward and perforated at the base 
by an arteri al canal, which increases in size from third to sixth cervical ; 
ventral transverse processes of sixth cervical relatively large and 
directed downward, outward, and backward; seventh cervical lacks 
ventral transverse processes and the dorsal transverse processes are 
blade-like and attenuated distally; pre- and postzygapophyses similar 
in position and inclination on the third to seventh cervicals, although 
those of the seventh are somewhat larger than on the preceding 
vertebrae; axis and third to seventh cervicals exhibit a longitudinal 
carina on the ventral face of the centrum ; there is a slight progressive 
increase in the thickness of the centra of the third to seventh cervicals. 

Axis: In comparison to the axis of Delphinodon dividum (True, 1912, 
pp. 176, 182, pi. 19, figs. 5, 6) this vertebra (pi. 19, fig. 1) is somewhat 
larger, measuring 89 mm. in height, and its greatest thickness antero- 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 321 

posteriorly (29.5 mm.) is slightly less than one-half its breadth anteri- 
orly (63 mm.). The neural spine is slender, elongated, and inclined 
backward ; the posterior face of the spine is rugose and a sharp vertically 
directed carina is developed on the anterior face. This spine differs 
from that of D. dividum in being noticeably elongated and not ex- 
panded distally. The ventral transverse processes were relatively 
slender, elongated, and directed obliquely backward. The height of 
the neural canal anteriorly is approximately equal to the transverse 
diameter. The anterior facets (pi. 20, fig. 1) for articulation with the 
atlas are shallowiy concave from side to side — the vertical diameter 
(27 mm.) of right facet being greater than the maximum transverse 
diameter (20.5 mm.) — and they are separated ventrally by an interval 
that barely exceeds the vertical diameter of the right facet. The 
odontoid process is short, blunt, and somewhat rugose dorsally, and 
its rather large ventral articular face (transverse diameter, 20.5 mm.; 
anteroposterior diameter, 20 mm.) is convex in both directions. On 
the right side the postzygapophysial facet is ovoidal in outline and 
slopes obliquely downward from external to internal margins. The 
posterior face of the centrum is deeply concave and considerably wider 
(40 mm.) than high (26.5 mm.). On each side of the median longitu- 
dinal ridge the ventral surface of the centrum is deeply depressed. The 
dorsal surface of the centrum is also depressed on each side of the 
median longitudinal ridge. 

Third cervical: This vertebra (pi. 19, fig. 2) is characterized by a 
thin centrum, slender pedicles of the neural arch, a very short neural 
spine, and slender transverse processes. The right prezygapophysial 
facet is not only shaiiowly concave but is depressed posteriorly. 
Relatively flat and ovoidal postzygapophysial facets slope steeply 
from the external to the internal margins. The neural canal is con- 
siderably wider (21.5 mm.) than high (16 mm.). The centrum has a 
slightly convex anterior face, a concave posterior face, and a median 
anteroposterior ridge on the dorsal and ventral faces which separates 
depressions on each side. On the right transverse process (pi. 20, 
fig. 2), the arterial canal which perforates the base of this process is 
large, but on the left transverse process a thin transverse isthmus of 
bone divides this canal anteriorly. In contrast to D. dividum (True, 
1912, pi. 19, figs. 7, 8), each slender, elongated, and backwardly curved 
transverse process projects from the lateral surface of the centrum 
but is not continuous dorsally with the pedicle of the neural arch. 

Fourth cervical: The centrum (pi. 19, fig. 3) is thin, although 
slightly thicker than the third cervical, the pedicles of the neural arch 
are wider transversely, and the neural canal is narrower. The roof of 
the neural arch is narrow anteroposteriorly; the neural spine is very 
short and obliquely truncated distally. Each transverse process 



322 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

(pi. 20, fig. 3) , although slightly shorter than the process on the third 
cervical, is attenuated distally, curved outward and backward, and 
perforated at the base by an arterial canal. The centrum is depressed 
medially on the anterior face, the posterior face is concave, and the 
median anteroposterior ridge on the dorsal and ventral faces separates 
the depressed areas on each side. Shallowly concave and ovoidal 
prezygapophysial facets slope steeply from external to internal mar- 
gins. The elongated postzygapophysial facets are twice as long as 
wide and slope obliquely from external to internal margins. The 
pre- and postzygapophyses respectively project noticeably beyond the 
level of the anterior and posterior faces of the centrum. 

Fifth cervical: This cervical has a smaller neural canal, the 
pedicles of the neural arch are narrower transversely, and the centrum 
is relatively larger than the corresponding vertebra of D. dividum 
(True, 1912, pi. 19, figs. 11, 12). The roof of the neural arch is rather 
narrow anteroposteriorly and the neural spine is reduced to a low 
sharp ridge. Each transverse process (pi. 20, fig. 4) is compressed 
anteroposteriorly, truncated obliquely distally, perforated at the base 
by a very large arterial canal, and connected dorsally with the lateral 
face of the pedicle of the neural arch by a thin anteriorly curved plate 
which is an extension of the lateral face of the centrum. 

The anterior face of the centrum is depressed in the center and the 
posterior face is concave; the median anteroposterior ridge on the 
depressed dorsal face is reduced; and four depressions separated by low 
anteroposterior ridges alter the conformation of the ventral face. The 
prezygapophysial facets are unusually large, shallowly concave, and 
slope steeply downward from external to internal margins. The 
postzygapophysial facets are sub triangular in outline, rather flat, 
and slope obliquely from external to internal margins. All of these 
facets (pi. 19, fig. 4) project beyond the corresponding faces of the 
centrum. 

Sixth cervical; In contrast to the preceding cervical, the ventral 
transverse processes (pi. 19, fig. 5) are directed more downward than 
outward, the large arterial canals extend farther dorsally, and the 
neural canal is slightly wider. The roof of the neural arch is narrow 
anteroposteriorly; the neural spine is short and pointed. 

The ventral transverse processes (pi. 20, fig. 5) are robust and are 
directed downward, outward, and backward. On the right side, the 
outer wall of the arterial canal is thin and compressed anteroposterior^ 
and is continuous dorsally with the anterior border of the pedicle of the 
neural arch. The pedicles of the neural arch are compressed from 
side to side and widened anteroposteriorly. The anterior and pos- 
terior faces of the centrum are concave; the median anteroposterior 
ridge which divides the depressed dorsal face is low in comparison to 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 323 

the development of the same ridge on the depressed ventral face. 
The prez}^gapophysial facets are elongated, almost twice as long 
(14 mm.) as broad (7.5 mm.), shallowly concave, and slope very 
steeply from the external to internal margins. The postzygapophysial 
facets are likewise elongated, but are attenuated anteriorly. This 
cervical is readily distinguished from the corresponding vertebra of 
D. dividum (True, 1912, pi. 19, fig. 13) by the shape and direction 
of the transverse processes, by the relatively smaller size of the 
neural canal, and by the dimensions of the arterial canal. 

Seventh cervical: As regards thickness, the centra of the sixth 
and seventh cervicals are about equal. The anterior and posterior 
faces of the centrum are shallowly concave; the dorsal face of the 
centrum is depressed; and the ventral face has two elongate depres- 
sions on each side of the median anteroposterior ridge. A vertically 
elongated posterior facet (pi. 19, fig. 6) for the capitulum of first rib 
is located on the lateral face of centrum; the blade-like dorsal trans- 
verse processes are attenuated toward the extremity, each being 
broadly united at the base with the pedicle of the neural arch and 
directed outward. No trace persists of the ventral transverse pro- 
cesses. The neural canal (pi. 20, fig. 6) is much wider (24 mm.) than 
high (15 ± mm.) and the roof of the neural arch has increased slightly 
in anteroposterior diameter. The pedicles of the neural arch resemble 
those of the sixth cervical, but have a greater anteroposterior diameter. 
The prezygapophysial facets are elongated, shallowly concave, and 
slope steeply from external to internal margins. The ovoidal postzy- 
gapophysial facets are somewhat longer (13 mm.) than wide (10 mm.) 
and likewise slope obliquely from external to internal margins. 

Dorsal Vertebrae 

With the exception of the distal portions of the neural spines of the 
fifth, seventh, eighth, and ninth dorsals and the right diapophyses of 
the second and third dorsals, all of these vertebrae are well preserved 
and little or no distortion from crushing is evident. 

The centra progressively increase in length from the anterior to the 
posterior end of the dorsal series, the centrum of the posterior dorsal 
being almost three times as long as the first. The shape and size of the 
neural spine, the width of the interval between the prezygapophysial 
facets, and the peculiarities of the diapophyses characterize each of 
the dorsal vertebrae. On these vertebrae as well as those of related 
fossil porpoises of the Calvert Miocene, a progressive decrease in the 
width of the interval separating the prezygapophysial facets from 
the anterior to the posterior dorsal is a normal feature. These facets 
become increasingly oblique in position toward the posterior end of 
the dorsal series. On the first four dorsals the facet on the dia- 



324 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

pophysis for articulation with the tuberculum of the rib is situated 
in front of the level of the anterior face of the centrum, but on the 
sixth it is entirely behind the level of the anterior face. 

On the six anterior vertebrae in the dorsal series, the vertical 
diameter of the facet on the diapophysis for articulation with the 
tuberculum of the rib is greater than the anteroposterior diameter 
in contrast to the pronounced anteroposterior elongation of these 
facets on the corresponding vertebrae of Delphinodon dividum (True, 
1912, pi. 20, figs. 1-9); furthermore, the prez3^gapophysial facets 
slope steeply from external to internal margins while those of D. 
dividum are nearly horizontal. 

The transverse processes of the transitional vertebra are not per- 
forated by an arterial canal near the base. The slender neural spines 
of the five anterior dorsals progressively increase in height. Behind 
these vertebrae the neural spines become wider on the basal half. 

A well defined facet for articulation with the capitulum of the rib 
is located at the upper posteroexternal angle of the centrum of the first 
to seventh dorsals. On the first dorsal, the diapophyses project 
farther laterally than on the vertebrae that follow. The relative 
height of the diapophysial articular facet above the centrum does not 
change materially on the eight anterior dorsals. On the ninth dorsal 
the shift to a lower level is rather pronounced since each process 
projects from the side of the neural arch about midway between 
centrum and the top of the neural canal. The postzygapophysial 
facets become progressively reduced (shorter) toward the posterior end 
of the dorsal series and are barely discernible on the tenth dorsal. 

First dorsal: The anterior dorsal (pi. 21, fig. 1) is characterized 
by a shorter centrum than those that follow in this series — the trans- 
verse diameter being more than a third greater than the maximum 
anteroposterior diameter — by a vertically elongated anterior facet for 
the capitulum of the first rib on the lateral face, and b} 7 a small facet 
for the capitulum of the second rib at the upper posteroexternal angle 
of the centrum. The neural spine is relatively slender, rather short, 
and slightly inclined forward. The neural arch (pi. 22, fig. 1) is low, 
robust, and with a laterally projecting diapophysis on each side which 
bears a dorsoventrally prolonged concave articular facet for the tuber- 
culum of the first rib. This facet slopes downward and inward. The 
postzygapophysial facets are elongated, the anteroposterior diameter 
(18 mm.) being twice the maximum transverse diameter (9 mm.), and 
slope obliquely from external to internal margins. The ovoid al 
prezygapophysial facets are 17 mm. in length and 9.5 mm. in breadth 
and slope steeply from external to internal margin. The width (22.5 
mm.) of the neural canal anteriorly exceeds slightly the vertical 
diameter (18 mm.), and the prezygapophysial facets are separated by 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 325 

an interval of 31 mm. posteriorly. The roof of the neural arch is 
rather narrow anteroposterior^, the minimum diameter being 12 mm. 
The centrum has concave anterior and posterior faces, and a low 
median anteroposterior ridge on the dorsal and ventral faces that 
separates the depressed areas on each side. A small arterial foramen 
is located on each side of this ridge on the dorsal face. 

Second dorsal: Compared with the first dorsal, the centrum is 
longer, the neural spine is higher, the neural canal is larger, and the 
minimum anteroposterior diameter (18 mm.) of the roof of the neural 
arch is greater. The slender neural spine (pi. 21, fig. 2) is nearly 
vertical and is obliquely truncated at the extremity. The diapophysis 
projects upward, forward, and outward. The subpyriform lateral 
facet on the diapophysis for articulation with the tuberculum of the 
second rib is concave from side to side, the vertical diameter (19.5 
mm.) being greater than the transverse diameter (14.5 mm.). 

The left ovoidal prezygapophysial facet measures 14.5 mm. in 
length and 11 mm. in breadth and slopes steeply from external to 
internal margin. The left postzygapophysial facet is nearly sub- 
quadrate in outline, measuring 12.5 mm. in length and 11 mm. in 
width, and slopes obliquely from external to internal margins. An- 
teriorly, the neural canal (pi. 22, fig. 2) is slightly wider (23 mm.) 
than high (22 mm.). The anterior and posterior faces of the centrum 
are slightly concave at the center, two arterial foramina of moderate 
size are present on the depressed dorsal face, and the lateral faces are 
deeply depressed. The upper posteroexternal facet for the capitulum 
of the third rib is larger than on the preceding dorsal. 

Third dorsal: This vertebra (pi. 21, fig. 3) differs from the corre- 
sponding vertebra of Delphinodon dividum (True, 1912, pi. 20, fig. 2; 
pi. 22, fig. 2) in having the diapophyses projecting obliquely upward 
and outward, the long axis of the articular facet for the tuberculum of 
the third rib nearly vertical, and prezygapopl^sial facets steeply 
sloping. The backwardly projecting dorsal portion of the neural 
arch has a greater transverse width (38.5 mm.) than on either the 
preceding or following dorsal. The neural spine has increased in 
width anteroposteriorly. The maximum width (25 mm.) of the neural 
canal (pi. 22, Hg. 3) anteriorly is slightly greater than the height (23.5 
mm.). The left prezygapophysial facet is irregularly depressed, is 
17 mm. in length and 13 mm. in breadth, and slopes obliquely down- 
ward from external to internal margin. The postzygapophysial facets 
are ovoidal and likewise slope obliquely. A pair of arterial foramina 
much larger than those on the second dorsal are present on the de- 
pressed dorsal face. The lateral faces of the centrum are depressed 
and curve concavely from anterior to posterior margins, and the maxi- 
mum width (37 mm.) of the posterior face exceeds that of the anterior 



326 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

face (30.7 mm.). A large triangular facet for the capitulum of the 
fourth rib is located obliquely on the centrum at the upper postero- 
external angle. 

Fourth dorsal: The length (30.5 mm.) of the centrum barely 
exceeds the width (30 mm.) of the anterior face, although the posterior 
face is somewhat wider (37 mm.). This vertebra (pi. 21, fig. 4) is 
characterized in part by a high slender neural spine which curves 
backward toward the extremity. The diapophyses project upward 
and outward, and the subtriangular articular facet for the tuberculum 
of the fourth rib slopes obliquely downward and inward, the vertical 
diameter (17.5 mm.) of the facet being greater than the anteroposterior 
diameter (15.5 mm.). The steeply sloping prezygapophysial facets 
are longer (17.5 mm.) than wide (13.5 mm.), concave from side to 
side, and irregularly depressed. The postzygapophysial facets are 
elongated and likewise slope obliquely from external to internal 
margins. The anteroposterior diameter of the backwardly projecting 
dorsal portion of the neural arch exceeds that of the third dorsal. 
A pah- of large arterial foramina are present on the depressed dorsal 
face; the lateral and ventral faces of the centrum are depressed and 
curve concavely from the anterior to posterior margins. The maxi- 
mum width (25 mm.) of the neural canal (pi. 22, fig. 4) anteriorly is 
equivalent to the height (25 mm.). The large triangular facet for 
the capitulum of the fifth rib is located obliquely on the centrum at 
the upper posteroexternal angle. 

Fifth dorsal: In general appearance this vertebra (pi. 21, fig. 5) 
resembles the fourth, with the exception of the more posterior position 
of the articular facet for the tuberculum of the rib and an obvious 
narrowing and elongation of the backwardly projecting dorsal portion 
of the neural arch. A slight reduction in size of the neural canal 
(pi. 24, fig. 1), the width and the height being approximately equal, 
and a narrowing of the minimum interval (16.5 mm.) between the 
prezygapophysial facets also characterize this dorsal. The centrum 
is slightly longer than that of the fourth and is more noticeably 
constricted from side to side between the anterior and posterior faces. 
The pair of arterial foramina on the dorsal surface of the centrum are 
as large as those of the fourth dorsal. The neural spine, although 
lacking the distal end, is similar in conformation and backward 
inclination to the spine of the fourth dorsal. The diapophyses project 
upward and outward and the subtriangular articular facet for the 
tuberculum of the fifth rib slopes less obliquely downward and inward 
and is placed almost entirely behind the level of the anterior face of 
the centrum; the anteroposterior diameter (14 mm.) of the left facet 
is slightly less than the vertical diameter (15.5 mm.). The pre- 
zygapophysial facets are concave, longer than wide, and slope obliquely 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 327 

from external to internal margins. The obliquely sloping elongated 
postzygapophysial facets are almost twice as long (16.5 mm.) as broad 
(9 mm.). The large triangular facet for the capitulum of the sixth 
rib is located obliquely on the centrum at the upper posteroexternal 
angle. 

Sixth dorsal: When the postzygapophysial facets of the fifth dorsal 
are placed in articular position with the prezygapophysial facets of 
this vertebra, it will be observed that these paired facets articulate 
rather loosely in contrast to the more restricted articular relations of 
the preceding dorsals. The ovoidal prezygapophysial facets are 
elongated, deeply concave, slope steeply from external to internal 
margins, the length (18.5 mm.) of the left facet exceeds the maximum 
transverse diameter (11 mm.), and the minimum interval between 
these facets posteriorly is reduced to 14 mm. The obliquely sloping 
postzygapophysial facets measure 13.5 mm. in length and 7 mm. in 
breadth. Compared with the fifth dorsal the backwardly projecting 
dorsal portion of the neural arch is noticeably narrower and the 
anteroposterior diameter (35 mm.) of the neural spine at the base is 
also greater than the corresponding measurement (30 mm.) of the 
spine of the preceding vertebra. The diapophyses of this vertebra 
(pi. 23, fig. 1) are more robust than those of the fifth dorsal and project 
less noticeably upward; the diapophysial articular facet is slightly 
smaller, but likewise is located behind the level of the anterior face of 
the centrum. The height (24 mm.) of the neural canal (pi. 24, fig. 2) 
anteriorly is equal to the width. The centrum is longer than that of 
the fifth dorsal, the maximum width (37 mm.) of the posterior face 
is greater than the anterior width (30.2 mm.), and the strong lateral 
constriction has reduced the ventral surface to an indistinct ridge. 
A pair of arterial foramina are present on the dorsal face. The large 
triangular facet for the capitulum of the seventh rib is located obliquely 
on the centrum at the upper posteroexternal angle. 

Seventh dorsal: This vertebra (pi. 23, fig. 2) differs from the 
preceding vertebra in having the articular facet on the diapophysis 
elongated anteroposteriorly, a noticeably narrower backwardly pro- 
jecting portion of the neural arch, no pronounced widening of the 
posterior face of the centrum as contrasted with the anterior face, 
and the absence of an articular facet for the capitulum of the eighth 
rib at the upper posteroexternal angle of the centrum. The more 
nearly circular but deeply concave prezygapophysial facets slope 
steeply from external to internal margins, and the minimum interval 
between these facets posteriorly does not exceed 10 mm. Each 
postzygapophysial facet is reduced to an irregular depression located 
on the external face of the basal portion of the neural spine. Although 
the major upper portion of the neural spine is broken off, the inclina- 

427790—57 4 



328 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io7 

tion of the posterior edge suggests that it was similar in conformation 
to that of the eighth dorsal; the anteroposterior diameter (35 mm.) 
of the neural spine at the base is approximately the same as on the 
sixth dorsal. 

The diapophyses project outward but not upward and are located 
entirely behind the level of the anterior face of the centrum. The 
height (23 mm.) of the neural canal (pi. 24, fig. 3) anteriorly is slightly 
less than the transverse diameter (24 mm.). The pedicles of the 
neural arch are widened anteroposteriorly but lack the lateral depres- 
sion of the preceding dorsals. The centrum is longer than that of 
the sixth and the width (32.5 mm.) of the posterior face exceeds very 
slightly the width (31.8 mm.) of the anterior face; the pronounced 
lateral constriction of the centrum has reduced the ventral face to a 
low ridge. The pair of arterial foramina on the dorsal face are large 
and elongated. 

Eighth dorsal: With the exception of the distal portion of the 
neural spine, this vertebra (pi. 23, fig. 3) is essentially complete. From 
the preceding dorsal, this vertebra differs in having a pronounced en- 
largement of the rather thin laterally compressed metapophyses, 
irregular convex prezygapophysial facets, markedly reduced post- 
zygapophysial facets, and more robust diapophyses located at a lower 
level. Each diapophysis (or coalesced diapophysis and merapophysis 
of Abel, 1931) projects outward from the pedicle of the neural arch 
and bears distally an ovoidal facet for the single-headed rib, the antero- 
posterior axis (18 mm.) being greater than the vertical (12.5 mm.) 
diameter ; the anterior face of the diapophysis is concave in the dorso- 
ventral direction and the posterior face is convex. 

There is a noticeable increase in the length (42.6 mm.) of the cen- 
trum, and the width (33.7 mm.) of the posterior face slightly exceeds 
the width (32.5 mm.) of the anterior face. The pronounced lateral 
constriction of the centrum also resembles that of the preceding dorsal 
and the ventral ridge is quite similar. The pair of arterial foramina 
on the dorsal face are, however, smaller. The height (22 mm.) of the 
neural canal (pi. 24, fig. 4) anteriorly is equivalent to the width. The 
anteroposterior diameter of the pedicle of the neural arch exceeds that 
of the seventh dorsal and the backwardly projecting portion of the 
neural arch is approximately the same width as the former. The 
neural spine is relatively broad and inclined backward. 

Ninth dorsal: This vertebra (pi. 23, fig. 4) is characterized by a 
short transverse process (parapophysis) with a distal enlargement to 
provide an increased surface for articulation with the single-headed 
ninth rib, a somewhat elevated and laterally compressed meta- 
pophysis, reduced neural canal, and broad neural spine. 

The centrum is slightly longer (45.5 mm.) than the preceding dorsal, 



MIOCENE PORPOI&ES — KELLOGG 329 

and the width (34.5 mm.) of the posterior face exceeds the width 
(32.5 mm.) of the anterior face. The lateral faces of the centrum are 
strongly depressed and curve concavely from the anterior to the pos- 
terior epiphyses, resulting in the development of a sharp thin antero- 
posterior ventral ridge. The pah' of arterial foramina on the dorsal 
face are smaller than those of the preceding centrum. The laterally 
compressed pedicles of the neural arch have a minimum antero- 
posterior length of 26.5 mm. Each parapophysis (pi. 25, fig. 1) 
projects outward but is situated only partially below the level of the 
dorsal surface of the centrum. The height (23 mm.) of the neural 
canal anteriorly exceeds slightly the width (21 mm.). The rather 
broad neural spine, inclined backward and irregularly thickened below 
the extremity, measures 40 mm. anteroposteriorly at the base. 

Tenth dorsal: Elongated metapophyses, neural canal triangular in 
cross section, longer transverse processes (parapophyses) with in- 
creased distal enlargement, and longer centrum distinguish this dorsal 
(pi. 26, fig. 1) from the preceding vertebra. Although a perceptible 
increase in the length (50 mm.) of the centrum is observable, the 
width (35 mm.) of the posterior face as compared with the width 
(33.2 mm.) of the anterior face has not been materially changed. The 
depressed lateral faces of the centrum exhibit the concave end-to-end 
curvature of the preceding vertebrae, but the thin median ventral 
ridge is more strongly developed and the pair of arterial foramina on 
the dorsal face are further reduced in size. Each parapophysis (pi. 25, 
fig. 2) projects outward from the upper portion of the centrum and is 
expanded distally to provide a larger surface for articulation with the 
single-headed tenth rib. 

The laterally compressed pedicles of the neural arch resemble more 
closely those of the following lumbars than of the dorsals. The height 
(23 mm.) of the neural canal anteriorly is greater than the width 
(18 mm.). An increase in the anteroposterior diameter (44 mm.) of 
the neural spine at the base and a slight decrease in the height as 
compared to the ninth dorsal is conformable to the anticipated transi- 
tion from the dorsal to the lumbar type of vertebra; it should be noted 
that the anterior border of the distal end of this spine is eroded and 
consequently this portion of the spine was probably wider in its 
original condition. 

No distinct prezygapoplrysial facets are observable and the area 
occupied by the postzygapophysial facets on the preceding dorsals is 
reduced to an irregular depression. 

Lumbar Vertebrae 

Five anterior lumbar vertebrae were found. Of these, one is of no 
value for comparative purposes, two lack portions of the neural spine, 



330 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

and, on another, the distal end of the left transverse process is broken 
off. Four of these lumbar vertebrae appear to represent a consecutive 
series. 

The centra are all longer than broad and progressively increase in 
length from the first to the fourth. All possess a strongly developed 
median ventral carina or keel, which increases in prominence from the 
first to the fourth. The transverse processes are expanded beyond the 
middle of their length and are rounded dis tally with the exception of 
those of the first lumbar which are obliquely truncated. From the 
first to the fourth lumbars the broad neural spines are nearly vertical 
and decrease in height. The minimum anteroposterior diameter of 
either pedicle of the neural arch exceeds one-half the length of the 
centrum. The neural canals are subtrianguiar in cross section and 
decrease in height from the first to the fourth. The thin lamina-like 
metapophyses are directed obliquely upward and forward and all 
project beyond the level of the anterior face of the centrum. The 
prezygapophysial facets are reduced to circular depressions. On these 
anterior lumbars the backwardly projecting dorsal portion of the 
neural arch, however, does not extend beyond the level of the posterior 
face of the centrum. 

In contrast to the lumbar vertebrae of Delphinodon dividum (True, 
1912, pi. 23, figs. 1-6), these vertebrae have more elongated centra, 
broader neural spines, wider neural canals, and distally expanded 
transverse processes. 

First lumbar: The right metapophyses and the tip of the right 
transverse process are missing. The centrum is elongated (pi. 26, 
fig. 2) and the strongly depressed lateral faces are separated ventrally 
by the thin longitudinal ridge. The pair of arterial foramina on the 
dorsal face are rather small. The transverse processes are elongated 
(85 mm.) and exceed in length those of the following lumbars; the 
distal half of each process is obliquely truncated anteriorly, terminat- 
ing in an irregular roughened area on the posteroexternal angle. It is 
quite possible that this rugose surface may have served as an area for 
the attachment of a floating rib. The height (24 mm.) of the neural 
canal (pi. 28, fig. 1) anteriorly exceeds the width (18 mm.). On 
each side the pedicle of the neural arch occupies about two-thirds 
(37 mm.) the length (56 mm.) of the centrum. The left metapophysis 
is directed upward and forward, and projects beyond the anterior 
face of the centrum. The prezygapophysial facets are roughened and 
are located below the level of the base of the neural spine. The 
anterior margin of the rather broad neural spine exhibits a more 
noticeable concave curvature than the posterior margin. 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 331 

Second lumbar: This vertebra (pi. 26, fig. 3) differs from the 
first lumbar as follows: the centrum is slightly longer (58.5 mm.) 
and wider anteriorly (35.5 mm.), the transverse processes are shorter, 
and the neural spine is broader. The right metapophysis is missing. 
The left metapopirysis does not project as far forward as that of the 
preceding lumbar, and the prezygapophysial facet, which is located 
below the level of the base of the neural spine, is reduced to a circular 
depression. A sharp ventral longitudinal ridge or carina forms the 
dividing line between the deeply depressed lateral surfaces of the 
centrum. The pair of arterial foramina on the dorsal face are very 
small. As compared to the first lumbar the anteroposterior diameter 
(35 mm.) of the pedicle of the neural arch at the base is slightly shorter, 
the height (25 mm.) of the neural canal (pi. 28, fig. 2) anteriorly has 
increased slightly and the width (17.5 mm.) has decreased, and the 
backwardly projecting dorsal portion of the neural arch may have 
been shorter since it terminates in its present condition at least 10 mm. 
anterior to the level of the posterior face of the centrum. The rather 
broad neural spine is directed almost vertically. It should be noted 
that the anterior border of the distal portion of the neural spine is 
slightly eroded, although it is unlikely that this has materially altered 
the contour. The rather broad transverse processes increase in 
width beyond the basal constriction, and exhibit a nearly straight 
posterior edge, a rounded extremity, and an oblique truncation of the 
anterior border on the distal half of the length. 

Third lumbar: On this vertebra (pi. 27, fig. 1) the distal portion 
of the neural spine is destroyed, the left metapophysis is broken off, 
and the posteroexternal angle of the left transverse process is missing. 
As compared to the preceding vertebra, the centrum has increased 
very slightly in length. In the development of the longitudinal 
ventral keel and the side-to-side compression this centrum agrees 
rather closely with that of the preceding lumbar. The width (38 mm.) 
of the posterior face is slightly greater than the width (36 mm.) of 
the anterior face and the pair of arterial foramina on the dorsal face 
are small. The pedicles of the neural arch do not differ materially 
from the preceding lumbar, and the backwardly projecting dorsal 
portion of the neural arch does not extend posteriorly to the level 
of the posterior face of the centrum. The neural spine is not quite so 
broad anteroposteriorly as the preceding. The elongated and rather 
slender right metapophysis projects conspicuously beyond the level 
of the anterior face of the centrum and the prezygapophysial facet 
is restricted to a small depression located near the posteroventral 
angle of this process. The transverse processes (pi. 29, fig. 1) are 
slightly expanded on the distal half and have rounded extremities. 



332 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 10? 

Fourth lumbar: Of this lumbar (pi. 27, fig. 2), the right meta- 
pophysis is incomplete, all of the neural spine with the exception of 
the small basal fragment is missing, and the distal half of the left 
transverse process is broken off. The centrum is slightly longer (61 
mm.) and broader posteriorly (39.5 mm.) than the prceding lumbar, 
the longitudinal ventral carina or keel is more strongly developed, and 
the side-to-side compression accentuates the anteroposterior concave 
curvature of the lateral faces. The neural canal (pi. 29, fig. 2) is 
reduced in height and breadth. The right transverse process is less 
noticeably expanded distally than that of the preceding lumbar and 
is rounded at the extremity. Since a portion of the neural arch is 
incomplete it is quite possible that the slender elongated metapophysis 
has been incorrectly placed in the restoration of the missing portions. 
An irregularly depressed small circular area on the posteroventral 
border of this metapophysis represents the prezygapophysial facet. 

Indeterminate lumbar: This vertebra (pi. 27, fig. 3) is too in- 
complete for the determination of its position in the lumbar series. 
Basal portions of the transverse processes and a small section of the 
anterior face of the centrum are preserved. The right transverse 
process does not differ materially from the basal portion of this process 
on the third lumbar. 

Measurements of cervical vertebrae (in millimeters) 

Axis C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 C-7 

Greatest height (vertically) of vertebra (tip of 

neural spine to ventral face of centrum) 
Greatest distance across vertebra between outer 

margins of anterior articular surfaces 
Least anteroposterior diameter of dorsal surface 

of neural arch 
Least anteroposterior diameter of pedicle of neural 

arch 
Greatest vertical diameter of anterior face of 

centrum 
Greatest transverse diameter of anterior face of 

centrum 
Distance across vertebra between outer ends of 

diapophyses 
Distance across vertebra between outer ends of 

transverse processes 
Transverse diameter of neural (spinal) canal 

anteriorly 
Vertical diameter of neural (spinal) canal an- 
teriorly 
Greatest distance between outer margins of pre- 
zygapophysial facets 
Greatest distance between outer margins of post- 

zygapophysial facets 
Distance between tip of prezygapophysis and tip 

of postzygapophysis 

* Posterior face. 



89.0 


52.3 


53.7 


50.2 


53.2 




63.0 












17.0 


6.5 


8.5 


6.7 


6.6 


9.0 


10.0 


5.5 


5.7 


7.4 


10.5 


14.2 


26.5* 


29.0 


29.7 


30.8 


31.2 


30.5 


40.0* 


35.2 


35.0 


32.4 


32.3 


31.5 
72.0 


87.+ 






62.8 


60.5 




23.0 


21.5 


19.0 


19.5 


20.7 


24.0 


23.7 


1G.0 


17.0 


15.0 


16.0 








36.6 


36.7 


37.0 


42.3 




31.2 


34.0 


36.2 


38.0 


48.2 




18.0 


20.7 


22.0 


23.7 


24.5 



MIOCENE PORPOI&ES — KELLOGG 333 



<Niooi-HCOcoodt> cd cm 06 



P 



O iO O © "0 iOO o 

ci cm cd i-5 cd cm co «h 

CM CO CM CM CM 00 *H «D 



+ 4- 

00 0>0«01>iOOOOOOO 00 00 



i-h.-hcm'oocmcmcM'-hcm r-5c? 06 

T-Ht>-tfCMCOCMCM<Nb- <Ni-i »0 

+ + + 

ot>©coooooio© 00 



^OOCMCOCMCMt-ICO <Nr-H iO 



+ + 

O O CM 



00 
00 


CO "# 
^ CO 


CM 


O 

CO 


CM 


<M 


CO 


cD 





>o cm 


CM 


10 


00 


IQ 


00 


CO 





O CM 

CO CO 


CO 
CM 


o5 

CM 


CM 


CM 


ri 


CO 



CO 




CM 


TP 


CM 





o3 

CM 



H W 00C-t-^t^C'^'^COl> : tF © ^ 

H OOThCO<NCOtN(N'-HcO CO CM "3 

g 



H 

<1l ©'■"*©' id©' id »d cm' »d id ©' id 

«Q CMI>COCMCOCMCM>-icO r^cO t}h 

n 

§ 

H CO 

06 ^ 

jQ ©iCCMcMCOCMCM'-i CO rt< 

02 

o -r 

A CM COO^OiOOOCO O 

o O 

02 

Z ,_, iO<N»-OCOOO>OOiO CO iO CM 

cS^oJoic^oooao^ cm co 06 

OOCOt-HCMCO'-HCMT-it*- 10 "* CO 



©' 


l> CO 


>d 

CM 


© 

CO 


id 

CM 


to 

CM 


CM 


to 

CO 


iO 


IO IO 


to 


i> 


iO 


O 







CO 




iO CM 


CM 


O 

CO 


CO 
CM 


iO 

CM 


CO 





id 




t-^ CO 
iO CM 


id 

CM 




CO 


CM 

CM 


CO 
CM 


© 


iO 


CM tC 


CO 





O 


iO 


O 



B 1 

3 Q 

03 

< 03 "w J © © t-> -3 -3 cd u U m «2 A © T3 

£ ^ £ g 1 •§ § ,T fl a S S ° .2 & -5 

^ O % 5 a; «n "S "8 © « „ C il ^ 

c3 T : iSi5-£ **-• a ° ° © © *-> t-, © o "a ra 

0+3 « G C 5 t-££.£-£.rjraO<j3 

* 11^ 1 4 I 1 * l 8 * 8 *! & *|| 

If Sll| s lull llp-t-l^ll-tf 

3 o .S3 o cl « ?? « SO o >> M -| g 
C^OftmPoa©aa2m2c35o v o w ra©raSoftSoa 



^«-M^fl-,OCD©CD fl , <Ui3cDC: W ©Sa3rt02O^CDgc]CClS 

©c^g-g^-g ©^ 2^ g^gs^g^-g g "I g © 'g ©0.2 no S 
O > <JO OOOhSQQOOQ P 



73.5 


60. 0+ 




58. 5 


59.4 


61. 


34. 3 


35. 4 


37.0 


35. 5 


36.0 


36.4 


25. 


21. 


16. 


17. 5 


16. 4 


14.0 


30. 5 


31. 


34. 



334 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io7 

Measurements of lumbar vertebrae (in millimeters) 

L-l L-2 L-3 L-4 L-5 

Greatest height (vertically) of 
vertebra (tip of neural spine to 
.ventral face of centrum) 131. 4 127. 114. 0-f 84. + 

Vertical height of neural spine, 
dorsal surface of neural canal 
to tip of neural spine 81. 

Anteroposterior diameter of cen- 
trum 56. 

Greatest vertical diameter of an- 
terior face of centrum 35. 

Greatest transverse diameter of 

anterior face of centrum 31. 8 

Greatest vertical diameter of neural 

(spinal) canal anteriorly 24. 

Greatest transverse diameter of 

neural (spinal) canal anteriorly 18. 

Least anteroposterior diameter of 

pedicle of neural arch 34. 8 

Distance across vertebra between 
outer ends of transverse pro- 
cesses (parapophyses) 195. 0-f 179. 5 179. 143. 2+ 112. 0± 

Distance between tip of meta- 
pophysis and posteroventral 
angle of neural spine 75. 65. 78.U 58. + 

RlBS 

Nine identifiable ribs and distal portions of two others were asso- 
ciated with the vertebrae. The ribs were not found in normal rela- 
tion to the dorsal vertebrae when the bones were excavated and their 
position was determined by articulations with the vertebrae. Only 
the first rib (pi. 30, fig. 1) from the left side is essentially complete. 
As compared with the ribs that follow in the series, this first rib is 
relatively short, rather broad, and strongly flattened anteroposteriorly. 
The capitulum is rounded, larger than those of the second to sixth 
ribs, and its articular surface is rugose. The neck is short and 
flattened anteroposteriorly. The tuberculum is elongated (22.5 mm.), 
convex from side to side, with greatest width (12. 5 mm) 
posteriorly. The greatest width of the shaft (35 mm.) is immediately 
behind the tuberculum. The shaft is abruptly bent downward 
behind the angle and its ventral end is slightly twisted inward and 
enlarged internally to provide the rugose surface for attachment to 
the sternum. 

The right and left second ribs (pi. 30, figs. 2, 5) lack the distal por- 
tions of the shafts. On both ribs the small, rounded capitula are 
borne upon short necks which are bent slightly upward. The tuber- 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 335 

culum is elongated, sub triangular in outline, and with greatest width 
(10.5 mm.) posteriorly. The outer surface of the shaft is flattened 
and transversely widened in the region of the angle, with the pro- 
truding edge overhanging the posterior surface. Below the angle 
the shaft is flattened anteroposteriorly and its inner and outer edges 
are thin and somewhat irregular. The greatest width (21.5 mm.) of 
the right rib, as preserved, is near the posterior end of the angle, and 
its end-to-end curvature is more pronounced than that of the first rib. 

The third rib (pi. 30, fig. 6) on the right side lacks the distal portion 
of the shaft, but is otherwise complete. This rib is characterized in 
part by a more strongly curved slender shaft, its outer edge being thin 
and its inner edge somewhat rounded at least on the proximal portion. 
The outer surface of the shaft is also transversely widened in the region 
of the angle, with the protruding edge overhanging the posterior 
surface for a greater distance than on the second rib. The capitulum 
is elongated, sub triangular in outline, bent upward, and with its 
articular surface roughened. The neck is narrower and longer than 
that of the second rib. The elongated tuberculum is sub triangular 
in outline, concave from end to end, and convex from side to side. 

Less than one-third of the fourth rib (pi. 30, fig. 7) on the right side 
is preserved, and it lacks not only the distal portion of the shaft but 
the neck and capitulum as well. The fourth rib on the left side lacks 
the distal portion of the shaft. The shaft is slightly narrower than 
that of the third rib ; the normal widening of the thorax in this region 
results in a lengthening of the interval between the tuberculum and 
the angle, and the overhang of the outer edge in this region is less 
noticeable. The tuberculum is subovoidal in outline and slopes 
downward from anterior to posterior margins. The neck is slightly 
longer than that of the third rib and its dorsoventral diameter is 
reduced. The capitulum is relatively small. The outer edge of the 
shaft is thin and the inner surface rounded. 

The right and left ribs of the sixth pah* (pi. 30, figs. 4, 8) are char- 
acterized by a slender shaft, an elongated neck, a small capitulum, 
and a subovoidal tuberculum which slopes downward from anterior 
to posterior margins. The outer surface of the shaft is transversely 
widened between the tuberculum and the angle, with the protruding 
edge overhanging the posterior surface for a greater distance than on 
any of the preceding ribs. Below the level of the angle the inner 
surface of the shaft is rounded; the outer edge is thin and irregular. 

The proximal portion of the seventh rib (pi. 30, fig. 9) above the 
angle is missing. The outer surface of the shaft is transversely 
widened above the angle and the protruding edge overhangs the 
posterior face as on the preceding rib. The outer edge of the slender 



336 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

shaft is thin and the inner surface rounded. At some time in the life 
of this porpoise this rib was broken approximately 125 mm. distal to 
the angle, and the resulting rugose enlargement of this broken end 
indicates that the break with the distal portion did not subsequently 
heal. 

Literature cited 

Abel, O. 

1900. Untersuchungen iiber die fossilen Platanistiden des Wiener Beckens. 
Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, math. nat. Kl., vol. 68 (1899), 
pp. 839-874, 4 pl3. 
1905. Les odontocetes du Bolderien (Miocene superieur) d' An vers. Mem. 

Mus. Roy. Hist. Nat. Belgique, vol. 3, 155 pp., 27 figs. 
1931. Das Skelett der Eurhinodelphiden aus dem oberen Miozan von 
Antwerpen. (III. Teil und Schluss der "Dauphins longirostres du 
Boldenen [Miocene superieur] des environs d'Anvers.") Mem. 
Mus. Roy. Hist. Nat. Belgique, No. 48, pp. 191-334, pis. 19-29. 
Barwick, A. R. 

1939. Miocene porpoise (Delphinodon dividum) from southern Maryland. 
Amer. Midi. Nat., vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 154-159, 1 fig. 
Brandt, J. F. 

1874. Erganzungen zu den fossilen Cetaceen Europa's. Mem Acad. Imp. 
Sci. St.-P6tersburg, ser. 7, vol. 21, No. 6, iv + 54 pp., 5 pis. 
Cope, E. D. 

1867. An addition to the vertebrate fauna of the Miocene period, with a 
synopsis of the extinct Cetacea of the United States. Proc. Acad. 
Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 19, No. 4, pp. 138-156. 
Dal Piaz, G. 

1916. Gli Odontoceti del Miocene Bellunese. Pt. 3. Squalodelphis 
fabianii. Mem. 1st. Geol. Univ. Padova, vol. 5, pp. 3-34, 3 figs. 
5 pis. 
Gervais, P. 

1859. Zoologie et paleontologie Franeaises, ed. 2, text, viii + 544 pp.; atlas, 
xii pp., 84 pis. 
Hay, O. P. 

1902. Bibliography and catalogue of the fossil vertebrata of North America. 
Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv., No. 179, U. S. Dept, Interior, pp. 1-868. 
Kellogg, R 

1923. Description of two squalodonts recently discovered in the Calvert 

Cliffs, Maryland; and notes on the shark-toothed cetaceans. 
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 62, art. 16, 69 pp., 20 pis. 

1924. A fossil porpoise from the Calvert formation of Maryland. Proc. 

U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 63, art. 14, 39 pp., 18 pis. 

1925. On the occurrence of remains of fossil porpoises of the genus Eurhino 

delphis in North America. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 66, art 
25, 40 pp., 17 pis. 

1926. Supplementary observations on the skull of the fossil porpoise 

Zarhachis jlagellator Cope. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 67, art. 28, 
18 pp., 5 pis. 



MIOCENE PORPOISES — KELLOGG 337 

1927. Kentriodon pernix, a Miocene porpoise from Maryland. Proc. U. S. 
Nat. Mus., vol. 69, art. 19, 55 pp., 20 figs., 14 pis. 

1936. A review of the Archaeoceti. Carnegie Institution Washington, 

Publ. 482, xv + 366 pp., 88 figs., 37 pis. 
1955. Three Miocene porpoises from the Calvert Cliffs, Maryland. Proc. 

U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 105, art. 3354, pp. 101-154, 1 fig., 21 pis. 
Leidy, J. 

1869. The extinct mammalian fauna of Dakota and Nebraska, including 

an account of some allied forms from other localities, together 

with a synopsis of the mammalian remains of North America. 

Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, ser. 2, vol. 7, pp. 1-472, 

30 pis. 

LONGHI, P. 

1898. Sopra i resti di un cranio de Campsodelphis fossile scoperto nella 
molassa miocenica del Bellunese. Atti Soc. Veneto-Trentina Sci. 
Nat., Padova, ser. 2, vol. 3, fasc. 2, pp. 323-380, 3 pis. 

PlA, J. 

1937. Von den Walen des Wiener Miozans. Kurze Ubersicht der Kennt- 

nisse und Fragen. F. E. Suess-Festschr. Geol. Ges. Wien, Mitteil, 
vol. 29, pp. 357-428. 
Slijper E. J. 

1936. Die Cetaceen vergleichend-anatomisch und systematisch. Em 
Beitrag zur vergleichenden Anatomie des Blutgefass-, Nerven- 
und Muskelsystems, sowie des Rumpfskelettes der Saugetiere, mit 
Studien iiber die Theorie des Aussterbens und der Foetalisation. 
Capita Zoologica, Hague, vols. 6, 7, xv + 590 pp., 256 figs. 
True, F. W. 

1908. On the occurrence of remains of fossil cetaceans of the genus Schizo- 
delphis in the United States, and on Priscodelphinus (?) crassan- 
gulum Case. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 50, pt. 4, pp. 449-460, 
pis. 59-60. 
1912. Description of a new fossil porpoise of the genus Delphinodon from the 
Miocene formation of Maryland. Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila- 
delphia, ser. 2, vol. 15, pp. 165-194, pis. 17-26. 
Valenciennes, M. A. 

1862. Sur une machoire inferieure de dauphin fossile envoyee par M. 
Thore, de Dax (department des Landes). Comptes Rendus Acad. 
Sci. Paris, vol. 54, No. 14, pp. 788-790. 
Van Beneden, P. J., and P. Gervais 

1874-1880. Osteographie des Cetaces vivants et fossiles comprenant la 

description et l'iconographie du squelette et du systema 

dentaire de ces animaux ainsi que des documents relacifs a 

leur histoire naturelle, Paris, text, viii + 634 pp. ; atlas, 64 pis. 

Wyman, Jeffries 

1850. Notice of remains of vertebrated animals found at Richmond, 
Virginia. Amer. Journ. Sci. Arts, ser. 2, vol. 10, pp. 228-235, 1 pi. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 1 




Phocageneus venustus Leidy (referred specimen, USNM 21039), dorsal view of mandibles. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 2 





I 



Phocageneus venustus Leidy (referred specimen, USNM 21039), ventral view of mandibles. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 3 







/ 





Phocageneus venustus Leidy, type tooth (ANSP 11227): 1, external view; 2, posterior view; 
3, internal view. Referred teeth (USNM 20139): 4, external view, eleventh tooth, right; 
5, internal view, sixth, left; 6 internal view, fourth, right. All X 2. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 4 









Phocageneus venustus Leidy, teeth (referred specimen, USNM 20139): 1, internal view, 
tenth tooth, left; 2, internal view, second, right; 3, internal view, hindmost, ? right; 
4, internal view, hindmost, ? right; 5, internal view, twelfth or thirteenth, right; 6, external 
view, eleventh, left. Figure 4, X 4; all others X 2. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 5 










Phocageneus venustus Leidy, left tympanic bulla and left periotic (referred specimen, USNM 
21039): 1, dorsal view, tympanic bulla; 2, ventral view, tympanic bulla; 3, external view, 
tympanic bulla; 4, posterior view, tympanic bulla; 5, external view, periotic; 6, tympanic 
or ventral view, periotic; 7, cerebral or internal view, periotic. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 6 






Phocageneus venustus Leidy, right tympanic bulla and right periotic (referred specimen, 
USNM 21039): 1, external view of tympanic bulla and periotic; 2, cerebral or internal 
view of tympanic bulla and periotic; 3, posterior view of tympanic bulla and periotic. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 7 




> ^-! 







> M-i 

.2 > 




PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 









PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 9 



^ 




cr> 





.-'....* 




PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 10 





PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 11 



CTS 






PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG. PLATE 12 




Phocageneus venustus Leidy (referred specimen, USNM 21059): 1-6, anterior views of first, 
second, third, fourth, fifth, and seventh dorsals, respectively. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 13 




Phocageneus venustus Leldy (referred specimen, USNM 21039): 1-4, anterior views of 
eighth, tenth, ninth, and sixth dorsals, respectively; 5, anterior view of caudal. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 14 






Phocageneus venustus Leidy (referred specimen, USNM 21039): 1, anterior view of lumbar; 
2 and 3, anterior views of caudals. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 15 








Phocageneus venustus Leidy (referred specimen, USNM 21039): 1, dorsal view of terminal 
caudal; 2 and 3, lateral views of chevrons; 4 and 5, segments of sternum. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 16 



.^1 




I 



I u 




o 

£ co* 

ti 8 



3 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 17 





PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 18 







b- 



# 





Araeodelphis natator, new genus, new species (type, USNM 10478): 1-3, internal views of 
anterior teeth; 4-6, internal views of posterior teeth. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 1! 









CN 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 20 




SO 






O-N 


a 


VO 




in 


1-, 


MD 




i — i 


CO 






S 


C3 
U 


z 


'> 


GO 


V- 


£> 


8 




PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 21 






£ & 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 22 






PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 




KELLOGG, PLATE 23 

> 




Cvj 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 24 




T 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 25 











PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 26 





O) 



ON 


j>. 


VO 




i/-, 


eg 


VO 


> 




*-P 




o 


s 


<u 


£ 


CO 


GO 


1-1 


p 


TO 








cti 


c 


-T. 


CD 


E 




"— ■ 


T3 




C 




O 


T3 


u 


<D 


<L) 



,_£ -a 






PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG. PLATE 27 








,5 B 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG. PLATE 28 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 29 




PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



KELLOGG, PLATE 30 




O .^ 






z 5 



ar2 

CO (^ 

Si o 



~ o 

3 O 



STUDIES OF SEVEN SIDERITES 



BY 



EDWARD P. HENDERSON AND STUART H. PERRY 



No. 3388. — From the Proceedings of the United States National Museum 
Vol. 107, pp. 339-403, 6 figs., 22 pis. 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 
WASHINGTON : 1958 



Stuart H. Perry 

Stuart Hoffman Perry died on February 15, 1957, in Tucson, Ariz. He 
was the publisher of the Adrian Telegram and vice president of the 
Monroe Evening News, both well known Michigan newspapers. From 
April 1940 he was an associate in mineralogy at the U. S. National Museum. 

Perry was born October 13, 1874, in Pontiac, Mich., and while very 
young showed an interest in science. At 15 he presented a paper on 
rhizopods before the American Microscopical Society. In 1894 he gradu- 
ated from the University of Michigan, where he studied chemistry, 
geology, and zoology. Two years later he graduated from the University 
of Michigan Law School, and for nearly five years practiced law in De- 
troit. In 1901 he entered newspaper work. After a few years of pub- 
lishing various papers in Michigan he purchased an interest in the Adrian 
Telegram, and a few years later an interest in the Monroe Evening News. 

Fossils were one of Perry's early scientific pursuits, but when someone 
showed him a meteorite and asked some questions about it his reply was 
that he did not know but that he would look into that subject. From that 
moment on, Perry's scientific interests were essentially directed towards 
the study of meteorites. He was both a keen student of meteorites and 
a vigorous collector of them. However, the unique thing about his 
collecting was that almost as soon as he became the owner of a meteorite 
he was concerned with giving the specimen to a collection where it would 
help others in the study of meteorites. 

In 1944 the U. S. National Museum published Bulletin 184, Perry's 
"Metallography of Meteoritic Iron." Shortly thereafter Perry compiled 
and privately published five albums of photomicrographs on meteorites, 
the background of the study on which Bulletin 184 was based. Because 
of the excessive costs of this publication, the album series was limited to 
six sets. Later the album series was expanded to nine volumes, in which 
the studies on 166 meteorites were reported and 2,308 photomicrographs 
presented. 

In 1946 the National Academy of Science awarded Perry the J. Law- 
rence Smith gold medal for his investigations on meteorites. Through 
the years that Perry was studying and collecting meteorites he generously 
shared his knowledge and specimens with others. Although he presented 
specimens to many institutions and privately assisted others in their 
studies of meteorites, he was sincerely interested in the growth of the 
national collection of meteorites and presented what he considered to be 
his important specimens to the U. S. National Museum. During his life 
Perry donated 192 different meteorites to the national collections. 
ii 




Stuart Hoffman Perry 
1874-1957 



(Photo by Fabian Bachrach) 




PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 
U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 

Vol. 107 Washington : 1958 No. 3388 



STUDIES OF SEVEN SIDERITES 



By Edward P. Henderson and Stuart H. Perry 



Introduction 



These seven descriptions are some of the investigations the authors 
made between 1940 and 1956. Some of these observations formed the 
background study to U. S. National Museum Bulletin 184, by S. H. 
Perry, published in 1944. After that volume was published, a limited 
number of albums of photomicrographs on iron meteorites with 
interpretations were also privately published by S. H. Perry and given 
a limited distribution. These nine volumes are now available in the 
following institutions: American Museum of Natural History; 
Chicago Museum of Natural History; Mineralogical Museum, Harvard 
University; U. S. National Museum; Mineralogical Museum, Uni- 
versity of Michigan ; and British Museum (Natural History) . 

During these studies our findings sometimes differed from the data 
that others had published on the same meteorites, and we suggested 
that a reexamination should be made. The divergences were found in 
the descriptions of specimens, chemical analyses, the assignment of 
types and the identifications of conspicuous minerals. 

339 



340 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. io? 

Some of these findings confirm data published by others and some 
correct errors in earlier descriptions. Two of the studies are descrip- 
tions of undescribed irons. 

The undescribed meteorites are the Goose Lake, California, and the 
Keen Mountain, Virginia, irons. The former was found in 1938, and 
although it had been pictured in several publications, its unique 
surface features were not described properly. The Keen Mountain 
iron was found in 1950 and is not as well known. The main masses 
of both meteorites are in the U. S. National Museum. 

The investigations on the Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Breece, Tombig- 
bee, and Soroti meteorites are restudies of described specimens. 

Appreciation is expressed to all who have helped in various ways in 
this study. The investigation of these meteorites began many years 
ago and presented a variety of problems that were discussed with 
many workers. We may have failed to give credit to all the contrib- 
utors to this work, but we hope this is not the case. 

Among the many who have made important contributions and 
whom we wish to thank for their assistance are Prof. H. H. Uhlig of 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Dr. Walter Curvello of 
Museum National, Rio de Janerio, Brazil, who was a visitor in the 
U. S. National Museum when some of these investigations were in 
progress; Dr. Frederick H. Pough, formerly of the American Museum 
of Natural History; R. O. Roberts of Uganda for providing samples of 
the Soroti meteorite; Dr. Clifford Frondel of Harvard College and 
Dr. Carl Dunbar of Yale University for the loan of samples of the 
Pittsburgh meteorite; Dr. Gunard Kullerud ^of the Carnegie 
Institute Geophysical Laboratory; and Dr. George Ellinger of U. S. 
National Bureau of Standards. 

The Goose Lake, California, Meteorite 

Plates 1-9 

While deer hunting west of Goose Lake, Modoc County, Calif, (lat. 
41°58' N., long. 120°32' W.), on Oct. 13, 1938, Clarence Schmidt, 
Joseph Secco, and Ira I vers discovered a large, irregular, rounded 
object that proved to be the fourth largest iron meteorite thus far 
reported from this country. The U. S. National Museum acquired 
this specimen through the cooperation of Clarence Schmidt, acting as 
agent for the finders, and the U. S. Forest Service, on whose land the 
specimen was found. 

The details of discovery and removal of the specimen to San Fran- 
cisco, Calif., have already been published (Leonard, 1939a, 1939b, 
1940, 1950; Linsley, 1939a, 1939b). The specimen was displayed 
during the 1939 and 1940 seasons of the International Exposition at 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 341 

Treasure Island, Calif.; when the Exposition closed, the sample was 
shipped to the U. S. National Museum. 

Any description of the Goose Lake iron that neglected to discuss the 
cavities would be incomplete. The description of this meteorite and 
its cavities is not controversial, but our discussion of the origin and 
significance of the cavities definitely is controversial. Although we 
are not qualified to work in the sciences needed to explain the origin 
of these cavities, we have made this study available to many persons 
working in other sciences and have stimulated considerable thinking 
about cavities in meteorites. Our opinions about the origin of these 
cavities are not in accord with the thinking of F. L. Whipple and 
R. N. Thomas, whose comments have been given mainly by informal 
communications. 

At the Boston meetings of the American Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Science in 1953, Thomas discussed some of our theories 
and raised some challenging points. His objections are not entirely 
convincing, but on the other hand we are not completely satisfied with 
our own theories concerning the origin of cavities in the Goose Lake 
iron. We hope that this paper will stimulate more discussion on this 
important feature of meteorites. 

After the Boston meetings the authors discussed the problem with 
J. M. Kendall, U. S. Naval Ordnance Laboratory, Silver Spring, Md., 
and with C. H. McLellan and William J. O 'Sullivan from Langley 
Aeronautical Laboratory, Langley Field, Va. Actually, the topics in 
this study have been so widely discussed with others that it is be- 
coming difficult properly to credit the suggestions. We are grateful 
for the interest others have taken. 

Description 

The Goose Lake meteorite measures 46 x 29 x 20 inches and weighs 
2,573 pounds. Its surface, although comparatively fresh, is covered 
with a thin, firm layer of brown iron oxide, but in many places flight 
markings are still preserved. The appearance of this iron would seem 
to indicate that it fell a few years before its discovery but long enough 
ago for the black crust of a freshly fallen iron to rust. 

The thin films of deformed metal that occur on the surface of the 
iron range in thickness from one-sixteenth to three-sixteenths of an 
inch. These, we believe, are flow structures and represent the last 
physical change to take place on the iron during its flight. The 
deformed metal shows that a strong lateral force was exerted on the 
surface during its fall. After studying these zones of deformed metal, 
we found similar structures on other meteorites. The side of the iron 



342 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

which has the best development of these features was, we suspect, the 
forward face during the last moments of high-velocity flight. 

The cavities in this iron are a most conspicuous feature. Many of 
them are large, others are narrow but deep, and many have rims that 
curl inward. At one place a series of cavities makes a tunnel through 
the meteorite. 

The irregular shape of the Goose Lake meteorite suggests that it 
probably did not hold a fixed position very long during its fall. Thus, 
if the cavities were made during its passage through our atmosphere, 
they formed in a fraction of the time the iron was in the atmosphere. 
The highest temperature and the major changes in shape occur on the 
front side of a meteorite, but it seems to us illogical to suppose that 
each of the cavities was made in the brief interval during which a 
fixed point was in front. 

F. C. Leonard (1939a) and E. G. Linsley (1939a) each published a 
picture of the meteorite in situ, but as these pictures seem to be 
different, it is difficult to believe that both actually show the meteorite 
in situ. The side of the meteorite which was in front at the end of 
the flight may not be the side next to the ground, because the iron 
probably rolled after it struck. 

Metallography and Chemical Composition 

A large piece from the edge of the Goose Lake meteorite (pi. 2) 
was cut into slices, each about three-eighths of an inch thick. In 
these polished and etched sections it was possible to observe the dis- 
tribution of the inclusions. 

Schreibersite occurs in small elongated bodies, each surrounded by 
swathing kamacite. Troilite is less abundant and occurs in rounded 
inclusions, the largest measuring 1.75 cm. in diameter. Since many 
consecutive slices were available for examination, we are rather con- 
fident that no large troilites or long tubelike inclusions are present. 
A little schreibersite occurs between the troilite and the matrix, but 
this is a normal association. 

The thin, dark oxide veins shown in plate 7 are essentially parallel 
to kamacite lamellae. The slice shown came from the edge of the 
meteorite, where the mass of metal is comparatively thin and where 
the metal was under the greatest strain during the fall. The strain 
exceeded the bond between the kamacite lamellae or between the 
kamacite and taenite, which explains why the oxide veins parallel the 
structures. Presumably the fractures were filled when the surface of 
the meteorite was extremely hot, because only then would the metal 
flow freely enough to enter the tiny cracks. The volume of injected 
metal is so small in comparison with the mass of the meteorite enclos- 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 343 

ing these veins that no appreciable amount of heat was carried into 
the meteorite in this manner. 

The plessite shown in plates 8 and 9 is unusual. The spheroidized 
inclusions suggest that it was heated long enough to form this structure 
and then cooled quickly. Such cooling is inconceivable while the 
mass was a part of some planetlike body. This structure could be 
developed by heat generated at the surface during the iron's flight; 
the only question is: Would there have been enough time? 

The widths of the kamacite bands in the Goose Lake meteorite are 
within the range of those in the coarse octahedrite group, but the 
symmetrical pattern and uniform width of the lamellae make this iron 
resemble a medium octahedrite. 

The average width of a series of kamacite lamellae in one slice is 
1.61 mm.; in another slice, 1.51 mm. A few of these bands measured 
5 cm. long, but the average is near 3 cm. The taenite is abundant, 
most of it darkened by reason of imperfect transformation and con- 
taining needles of kamacite. The plessite fields are numerous and 
varied in character. 

In table 1 the composition of the Goose Lake meteorite is compared 
with that of seven other similar irons from widely scattered localities. 
Since the chemical analyses are nearly alike, these specimens should be 
compared with respect to other features. The Mbosi, Drum Moun- 
tains, and Goose Lake irons are large, each weighing over 1,000 pounds, 
but the other five meteorites are comparatively small. Unfortunately 
we have not seen all these meteorites, and the information concerning 
surface features was obtained from published descriptions. We have 
certain reservations regarding the data in the literature relating to 
the surface of meteorites, because the outside of these objects has not 
received much critical attention. 

Table 1. — The composition of the Goose Lake and other similar meteorites. 





Goose 

Lake, 

California 


Aggie 
Creek, 
Alaska 


Drum 
Mts., 
Utah 


Mbosi, 
Tan- 
ganyika 


Baque- 
dano, 
Chile 


Karee 
Kloof, 
South 
Africa 


Lanton, 
Missouri 


Moorum- 

bunna, 
Australia 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


Fe 


90.80 


90.89 


90.70 


90.45 


90.90 


90.79 


90.40 


89.53 


Ni 


8.39 


8.54 


8.59 


8.69 


8.82 


8.27 


8.33 


8.82 


Co 


0.42 


0.67 


0.58 


0.66 


0.15 


0.68 


0.61 


0.56 


P 


0.12 


0.18 


trace 


0.11 


0.24 


0.24 


0.18 


0.29 


S 


0.00 


0.00 


0.00 


0.01 


0.05 


0.00 


— 


0.02 


Cu 


n. d. 


— 


— 


trace 


0.03 


0.03 


— 


0.07 


Insol. 


0.03 


0.03 


0.01 


0.03 


0.01 


0.03 


0.005 


0.30 


Fe 


10.91 


10.42 


10.47 


10.23 


10.68 


10.76 


10.64 


10.08 


Ni+Co 




Width of kama- 


1.5 


1-2 


1 


0.75 


1.5-2.5 


1-2 


less than 1 


0. 5-1. 6 


cite band in mm. 



















344 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The Aggie Creek, Alaska, iron (Henderson, 1949) weighed 43 
kilograms but was described without seeing the main mass. The 
meteorite was recovered from placer gravels 12 feet deep; thus it 
was wet during most of the time it was in the gravels. The weathered 
surface of the piece that was available for study was free from corrosion 
pits. 

Some of the cavities in the Drum Mountains, Utah, iron (Henderson 
and Perry, 1948a) may have existed before the meteorite entered our 
atmosphere. However, one cavity was nearly filled with iron rust 
when the meteorite arrived at the United States National Museum. 
The character of the iron oxide on the surface makes it possible to 
determine the orientation of the specimen in the field, and in this way 
we knew that the rust-filled cavity was inverted. Although it could 
not hold water, the moisture that condensed on its walls was trapped 
and thus evaporation was retarded. The oxide scales that almost 
filled the hole were so firmly embedded that they had to be chipped 
out even after the rough handling this 1 , 164-pound iron received between 
its fall and its arrival in the Museum. As it was shipped in an open 
crate, the freight handlers could see that it was almost indestructible, 
and it is unlikely that they handled it with care. 

The Mbosi, Tanganyika, Africa, iron, according to Grantham and 
Oates (1931), "was buried two to three feet in a red loamy quartz 
rubble which was covered by a few inches of soil. The lie of the mass 
very similar to the hill. Scattered through the rubble, several feet 
from the mass, are scraps up to an inch and a half thick of black 
nickeliferous iron oxide. These, no doubt, are fragments of scales 
detached from the mass during its travel down hill." 

Evidently corrosion removed considerable material, and the altered 
surface may have little or no resemblance to the preflight surface. 
Corrosion may have gone below the zone of cavities, as it did on the 
under side of the Canyon Diablo iron. The illustrations of the Mbosi 
iron show two or more depressions, but these could be the result of 
corrosion. 

The 22-kilogram iron from Baquedano, Chile (Palache and 
Gonyer, 1932), was covered with pits. Its pitted surface was said to 
be "the effect of sand blasting." The authors stated that a portion 
of the surface was corroded, but the published illustrations showed 
no cavities similar to those in the Goose Lake meteorite. 

The Karee Kloof, Cape Province, South Africa, meteorite (Prior, 
1923) weighted 92 kilograms and showed "thumbmarks." The di- 
mensions of one cavernous depression is given as 20 x 15 x 7K centi- 
meters. From a 7.1-gram sample Prior recovered some insoluble 
residue which had "the optical characters of quartz . . . ortho- 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 345 

rhombic pyroxene . . . and some of feldspar having refraction 
slightly less than that of nitrobenzol (1.55) and showing in one case 
twin-stria tions with a low angle of extinction." 

The finding of silicates in a meteorite exhibiting cavities could be 
a very significant observation for us. Unfortunately, one cannot be 
certain that Prior's sample was uncontaminated. It might help to 
explain the origin of cavities if silicates occurred in the irons that 
contain cavities, but we have no clear evidence that they do. If 
there were silicates, they should appear in the polished sections and 
not in the nonmagnetic portion of the insoluble residue. Usually 
some of the abrasive used during the preparation of the sample gets 
embedded in the softer minerals or cracks and then is recovered in 
the insoluble residue; we therefore discard the traces of nonmagnetic 
material that appear there. 

The Lanton, Missouri, iron (Cullison and Muilenburg, 1934), 
weighing 13.7 kilograms, was in four pieces, all of them badly weath- 
ered. No cavities were mentioned, and apparently all the flight 
surfaces were corroded. 

The Moorumbunna, Australia, iron (Edwards and Mawson, 1946) 
was said to have a pitted surface: "the entire surface is pitted, 
apparently the result of corrosion which must have continued over a 
long period of time. Pitting reaches a maximum depth of five 
centimeters below the main surface level; this indicates that the fall 
is by no means a recent occurrence." 

Terminal Velocity 

Many stony meteorites break up or explode after entering our 
atmosphere. Two or more pieces may fall simultaneously some dis- 
tance apart and both be covered with fusion crust. When such 
pieces fit together, there can be no question that they came from the 
same object. The meteorites that separate into pieces probably do 
so when the velocity is high, as indicated by the fact that the fractured 
surfaces are covered with a fused crust. If the pieces fit together, we 
know that little material was lost from either portion. Stony meteor- 
ites are not as tough as the irons, and it is therefore easy to understand 
their breaking apart, but on the other hand some irons do the same 
thing. There are no statistics about the breaking of meteorites into 
pieces that will fit together again, but indications are that there may 
be nearly as many irons that do this as there are stones. 

The Maldyak, Siberia, iron (Zavaritzkit and Kvasha, 1952) was 
split almost in half, and the illustrations show that one part apparently 
suffered more ablation than the other. An equally good example of 
the breaking up of an iron meteorite is the Boguslavka, Siberia, 



346 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE' NATIONAL MUSEUM 



specimen which fell Oct. 18, 1916 (Zavaritzkit and Kvasha, 1952). 
The Maldyak iron is an octahedrite ; the Boguslavka iron a hexa- 
hedrite. It is much easier to explain the Boguslavka meteorite 
separating into fragments than the Maldyak iron, because hexa- 
hedrites have a cubical cleavage while the octahedrites have no 
cleavage. 

Figure I, a, taken from Zavaritzkit and Kvasha (1952), shows that 
the place of separation for these two pieces of the Boguslavka iron is 
at right angles to the base. The right side of the upper portion of 
the left piece is essentially parallel to the fracture separating the two 
pieces. Since these faces appear to be straight, flat, and normal to 
each other, possibly they are cubical cleavages. 

Figure 1,6, was taken from Akulov and Brukhatov (1941) and is 
slightly different. The figure shows the reverse side of the Boguslavka 
iron, and the bottom of the front face of the smaller portion is unlike 
the view Zavaritzkit and Kvasha used. However, the right side of 
the smaller piece is essentially parallel with the adjacent side of the 
larger portion, again indicating cleavage. Neglecting the minor 





a 



Figure 1. — Sketches of the Boguslavka meteorite, which possibly broke along its cubical 
cleavage directions, a, From Zavaritzkit and Kvasha (1952); b, from Akulov and 
Brukhatov (1941). 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 347 

differences in the two views, it seems that this iron separated along 
cleavage directions during its high-velocity flight. 

Meteoritic iron can be easily deformed by a light tap of a hammer. 
Since the Goose Lake iron was found on solid rock, has flight markings, 
and lacks impact scars, either its terminal velocity was low or some- 
thing cushioned its fall. J. J. Cornish, 2 after a brief inspection of 
the specimen, stated that possibly considerable aerodynamic lift was 
given the meteorite during its fall because of its physical form. He 
said: "The large cavity [see pi. 1], which makes an opening to the 
tunnel through this iron, probably would give this body considerable 
spin during its fall. This spin could generate enough lift to reduce the 
velocity of fall." Independently, Cornish selected the same side of 
this iron that we did as the forward face during the fall. 

The area in which the iron fell is covered during the winter months 
with deep snow which would break the impact with the ground. But 
if it fell on a layer of snow, how can we account for the depression that 
Leonard (1940) reported? Leonard mentioned an elliptical ridge 
measuring 24 feet east and west and 20 feet north and south and said 
the meteorite was located in a saucerlike depression approximately 5 
feet in diameter. He apparently assumed that this was the place 
where the iron struck the earth. 

Linsley (1939b) doubts that the saucerlike depression is significant 
and says/ 'there was only the slight depression in which it rested which 
appeared to be due in part to wind erosion as the air currents eddied 
about it." 

Although one can only speculate about the terminal velocity of the 
Goose Lake iron, we are certain that it had a spectacular fall. The 
varied cavities must have produced some weird sounds as the air 
rushed past these openings. It is unfortunate that the iron landed 
in a sparsely settled area, because if it had come to earth in a more 
thickly populated region the terrified citizenry would surely have 
recorded the date and hour of the fall of this screaming meteorite. 

Cavities 

Cavities occur in many iron meteorities, but it need not be assumed 
that all cavities have the same origin. Some definitely are the result 
of terrestrial corrosion, but we are convinced that the cavities in the 
Goose Lake iron did not originate in that way. As we became more 
familiar with these features and discussed them with others, we came 
to feel that their significance was not appreciated and that the old 
explanations for cavities were unsatisfactory. Their physical features, 
significance, and some theories of their origin, as well as the origin 

* Of the Engineering and Industrial Research Station, State College, Miss. Personal communications. 



348 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

of the wide, shallow depressions known as "thumbmarks," are dis- 
cussed in the sections that follow. 

It is difficult to describe, measure, or photograph a cavity so that a 
reader can obtain a comprehensive conception of it, which may 
partially explain why these features have been neglected in descrip- 
tions of meteorites. The measurements recorded for these cavities 
are approximate values but are sufficiently accurate to give an idea 
of their size. We have determined the volume of a few cavities. 

The cavities in some meteorites are bowl-shaped, but when a cavity 
is two to four times as deep as it is wide, it resembles rather a drill 
hole. However, cavities have one almost universal characteristic: 
The width of the opening at the surface is less than the diameter of the 
cavity measured down in the hole. 

A rim of deformed metal overhangs and bends into many cavities on 
the Goose Lake iron. If the fingers are rubbed over the rim inward 
toward the cavity, the surface feels smooth, but when the direction is 
reversed the rim feels jagged. We believe the rim of overhanging 
metal was produced by thermal action on the surface of the meteorite 
after the cavity was there. 

The largest cavity in this iron, shown in plate 1, has an irregular 
opening measuring approximately 10 by 12 inches. Within it there 
are 8 smaller cavities with openings measuring 0.5 to 2.0 inches in 
width and 0.5 to 1.0 inch in depth. An interesting feature of this 
large cavity is an opening in its base approximately 2 by 4 inches that 
leads into an oval cavity entirely within the meteorite. The oval 
cavity is approximately 7 inches long and 4 inches wide and has an 
opening on the rear face of the meteorite. The side wall of this 
cavity at one place is only about an inch below the surface. This 
place can be located in plate 1 between the middle of the long rule 
and the lower part of the opening to the large cavity directly above. 

The oval chamber makes a tunnel through the meteorite. But since 
concealed cavities have not been found in any of the sections cut 
through iron meteorites, we do not believe that this oval chamber was 
a concealed cavity. The lip around the larger cavity (pi. 1) turns 
inward as does the lip around the opening from the bottom of the 
large depression into the tunnel. We regard this tunnel to be as much 
a primary feature as the hole through the Tucson, Ariz. (Ring), 
meteorite shown in pictures by Merril (1929). 

It is impracticable to measure or illustrate in detail all the cavities ; 
therefore, a few of the important types were selected for a more 
detailed study. With the assistance of W. E. Salter of the United 
States Geological Survey, latex molds of these cavities were prepared 
and plaster casts made of the molds. After a plaster mold was avail- 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 349 

able, we investigated methods of measuring the volumes. By the 
method finally used, it is now possible to measure the volume of 
cavities in some large meteorites too heavy to be reorientated so that 
the cavities would be in position to be filled with either a liquid or sand. 
After trying various methods, we found that "Climax" wallpaper 
cleaner (Simmons, 1942) could be successfully used to measure cavity 
volume. A film of oil was first applied to the walls of the cavity, 
then the opening was filled by inserting small wads of cleaner from a 
weighed amount. Each time the cleaner was added, it was pressed 
down with all the force that could be exerted with the fingers. After 
the hole was filled to the original surface of the meteorite, the weight of 
the excess cleaner was subtracted from the original weight. The 
density of the cleaner was obtained by packing it into various com- 
binations of plumbing connections, such as elbows and tees. These 
simulated the cavities in the meteorite very nicely because certain 
combinations gave a sizable cavity with a small opening. After these 
were filled with cleaner, the material was removed and weighed, and 
the volume was then measured with water. As the cleaner absorbs 
oil from the walls of the cavity, its density varies and should be checked 
after several measurements. After a little practice we were able to 
determine the volumes of the cavities with sufficient accuracy for 
our needs. 

Table 2. — Measurements\oj a fewjtavities in the Goose Lake meteorite 



Depth (cm.) 
10 


Width (cm.) 
11 


Width/depth 
ratio 
1. 10 


Volume (cc.) 
686 


Estimated weight 

of Ni-Fe needed 

to fill cavity (gm.) 

5451. 5 


11 


7 


0.63 


340 


2657. 


8 


2 


0.25 


60 


468.0 


11 


5 


0.45 


215 


1677. 



Many mineralogists believe that the cavities in iron meteorites were 
formed during flight when some included mineral burned out. The 
largest inclusions usually found in iron meteorites are troilite and 
schreibersite, with occasionally a carbon nodule, although generally 
the carbon is concentrated around the troilite. Usually the troilite 
and carbon inclusions are rounded masses with a diameter of less than 
1 inch, whereas the schreibersite ordinarily is more elongated and 
irregular. The schreibersite is more uniformly dispersed in this iron 
than is troilite. In the slices so far cut from the Goose Lake iron, no 
single inclusion or aggregate occurs that approaches the dimensions 
of the cavities. 



350 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 1O7 

As troilite and sehreibersite melt at approximately 1000° C. and 
are brittle, it is possible that they would be easily ablated by the air 
stream. If these minerals melted out to form a deep, narrow cavity, 
considerable iron around the inclusion must also have been removed, 
because, as stated above, the cavities in this iron are much larger 
than any of the inclusions thus far found. It is difficult to under- 
stand how a cavity 8 cm. deep with an opening of 2 cm. could be formed 
by melting out some included mineral, and possibly an equal volume 
of Ni-Fe alloy around the inclusion, without widening the opening 
to the surface. If the air within the tube is somewhat stabilized, it 
would retard the flow of heat toward the bottom of the hole, since 
air is an insulating medium. 

Sections cut through some iron meteorites show cavities in which 
troilite still occurs at the bottom. If such cavities were formed by 
burning out the sulfide, it seems unlikely that troilite would be found 
in the bottom of some cavities. Its occurrence there may indicate 
that troilite is not as easily removed during the fall as has been as- 
sumed by some workers in this field. 

As stated above, there are no inclusions in any of the sections of 
the Goose Lake, Canyon Diablo, or Willamette meteorites that even 
approach the dimensions of the cavities. This would seem to rule 
out the theory that the large cavities on the surface of these irons 
were formed by the burning out of troilite, sehreibersite, or carbon 
inclusions except for one possibility. Perhaps the zone around the 
outside of these irons contained larger included masses of these minerals 
than now occur in these meteorities ; consequently, size alone might 
not eliminate the burning-out theory. This possibility would intro- 
duce a new concept of iron meteorites, for in the past it has been tacitly 
accepted that the portion removed from the surface of a meteorite 
during flight had a composition and structure similar to that in the 
mass that fell. 

Those who claim that the cavities were formed by the burning out 
of inclusions must account for the formation of large cavities at very 
high altitudes. Such cavities would have to be formed in a fraction 
of the time it takes the meteorite to pass through the atmosphere. 
The meteorite must pass part way through the rarefied upper atmos- 
phere before collision with the air can have much effect on the surface. 
Toward the end of the flight, the velocity is so retarded that no changes 
take place on the surface. When these two time intervals are sub- 
tracted from the number of seconds required for a meteorite to fall 
through our atmosphere, we do not believe that enough time remains 
for a tumbling iron to undergo sufficient heat penetration to form 
the deep cavities on all sides. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 351 

The greatest changes that take place on a falling meteorite occur 
during the period of their maximum deceleration, which is but a fraction 
of the atmospheric passage. The size and shape of a meteorite affect 
the velocity it will retain during the fall. The Goose Lake meteorite 
has a rather wide cross section and therefore was probably decelerated 
rapidly. There is evidence that less heat was applied to the surface of 
the Goose Lake meteorite than to the surface of certain other meteor- 
ites. For example, there are no delicate stringlike markings of fused 
metal flowing away from the front face, and the cross sections through 
this iron fail to show any appreciable evidence of heat penetration, as 
the internal pattern of the metal continues to the edge without loss of 
detail. The failure to find a zone of modified structure near the edge 
of the Goose Lake iron supports our contention that these cavities 
were not burned out during flight. 

If the Goose Lake iron entered our atmosphere with a high velocity, 
one would expect its surface to show some features similar to those 
found on the Freda, North Dakota (Henderson and Perry, 1942a), 
and the Pima County, Arizona (Henderson and S. H. Perry, 1949), 
irons. The external forms of these two meteorites indicate that more 
heat was applied to them than to the Goose Lake iron. There is no 
evidence that heat penetrated the Goose Lake iron as it did the Reed 
City, Michigan (Henderson and Perry, 1942b), the Bruno, Saskatch- 
ewan (Nininger, 1936), or the Murnpeowie, Australia (Spencer, 1935), 
meteorites. 

The highest temperature on a falling meteorite occurs on the front 
face, while the thermal action on the rear surface is much less severe. 
A shock wave follows the outline of the front face, and the molecules of 
air which strike the iron pass through this wave and are compressed 
into the lateral flow moving toward the edges of the body. It is this 
lateral flow which ablates the iron. The hot gas that is compressed 
against the iron moves with a high velocity and is the agency that cuts 
obliquely across the cavities in the Canyon Diablo iron. It partially 
removed the cavities on the conical sides of the Willamette iron. 

The temperature within a hole may be different from that which 
exists on the surface of the meteorite, and we are not sure that it 
would be below the temperature on the exposed surface. It can be 
argued that the temperature within a hole would be lower because air 
is a poor conductor and because the walls of the cavity would absorb 
heat. 

It is possible also to argue in the opposite direction. Heat is lost 
from the outside surface by radiation, but the heat within the cavity 
cannot escape that way. Thus, if energy can be supplied through the 
opening in amounts which will produce an exothermic reaction, 



352 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



possibly a higher temperature could exist within the cavity than on 
the outside surface. Furthermore, if an element in the included min- 
erals could produce an exothermic reaction , additional heat would be 
generated within the cavity. 

The collision between the air molecules and the meteorite would 
ablate the surface, but the metal on the side walls ("be" and "ef" of 
fig. 2) is both heated and ablated. As the lip of the cavity is ablated 
from two sides, the rim would recede faster than any other part. 

A flow of considerable force exists on the front surface of a meteorite. 
This flow originates at the center and radiates in all directions from 
this point, producing the layers of displaced metal previously referred 
to as a type of flight marking. Thus, on the forward face of a falling 
meteorite we think that a depression should widen faster than it 
deepens. The diameter of an opening (fig. 2) should increase because 
the shaded areas are heat-softened from two sides. This perhaps 
explains why broad shallow depressions are more abundant than 
tubular cavities on iron meteorites. 




v J 



Figure 2. — Cross section of theoretical cavity in a meteorite, showing how the width of 
the opening increases faster then the depth. The shaded area probably would ablate 
faster than the outside surface of the meteorite between "a" and "b" as well as "f" and 
"g." The sides of the cavity, "c" and "e," may be ablated faster than the bottom, 
"d," because there should be a vortex established within the cavity. The arrow indicates 
the direction of the lateral flow, and the vortex within the cavity should rotate as the 
arrow indicates; thus, the sides "c" and "e" may be undercut. 



The above explanation accounts for those shallow but wide depres- 
sions called "thumbmarks." Sometimes these "thumbmarks" are 
closely spaced on the surface but are separated by narrow ridges of 
metal. The fact that the separating ridges are irregular suggests that 
their position was constantly changing. A ridge has a large exposed 
surface compared to its volume; consequently the metal in it would be 
heat-softened to a point where it could be mechanically ablated more 
rapidly than the metal on a flat surface. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 353 

The surfaces of some meteorites pass obliquely across tubelike 
cavities leaving outlines of parts of these cavities still preserved. 
When a surface cuts obliquely across a cavity, the evidence indicates 
that the cavity was being modified at the surface rather than within 
the hole. It also means that the deep and narrow cavity existed when 
the meteorite had a high velocity. These oblique cuts provide a 
method of estimating the thickness of metal that was lost, although 
possibly they give a value closer to the minimum than the maximum. 

Two Canyon Diablo irons in the U. S. National Museum have 
oblique cuts across cavities. Probably no specimen better shows how 
much metal was removed after the cavities existed than the Willamette, 
Oregon, iron. Pictures of the large cavities in the base of that conical 
mass are well known, but few observers have noted the remnants of 
cavities on the conical sides of the specimen. The conical-shaped 
meteorites are cited as having held a fixed position through most of 
their flight. If that is true, the shallow depressions on the conical 
surface of the Willamette iron are probably remnants of cavities similar 
in size and shape to those on the rear surface. The rear face of a 
meteorite undergoes little change during flight. Thus, the rear side 
of the Williamette iron, which exhibits deep craters, may have some 
topographic similarities to the surface that existed there before the 
iron entered our atmosphere. 

Although this is not a discussion of the Willamette iron, it should be 
mentioned that the specimen needs to be restudied. It was described 
as a medium octahedrite and continues to be so listed, although none 
of the specimens we have seen contains a trace of the Widmanstatten 
structures; instead all have granulated structures. Possibly these 
pieces were heat-treated at the time they were removed from the main 
mass or afterward. If further study of the Willamette iron were to 
show that the heat penetrated deeply into the main mass, this might 
be an indication that the meteorite was heated before it entered our 
atmosphere. 

Although the Social Circle, Georgia, iron (Henderson and Perry, 
1951) has no cavities, it is a sizable iron and is granulated throughout. 
In this case the granulation apparently did exist before the specimen 
entered our atmosphere. Since the cavities in the Goose Lake 
meteorite are enclosed in metal with a normal Widmanstatten struc- 
ture and since the etched structure extends to the edge of the slice, 
there is no evidence visible to the naked eye of thermal changes in the 
outside zone of this iron. 

The velocity of all meteors entering our atmosphere is high enough so 
that sufficient heat is developed by the collision with the air to fuse 
the surface and change the shape. The Canyon Diablo individuals 

433890—58 2 



354 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



mentioned above and the Willamette iron show a loss of metal after 
the formation of the cavities. There are no conspicuous oblique cuts 
across the cavities in the Goose Lake meteorite, which indicates that it 
traveled with less velocity through the air than either of the two 
above-mentioned meteorites. 

The two large Canyon Diablo individuals have deep cavities on one 
side but no holes on the side that was next to the ground. The upper 
surface still shows some flight markings, indicating that almost no 
metal was lost since its fall. An examination of the under surface 
gives the impression that the specimens are very old, but an opposite 
opinion would be gained if only the exposed surface were examined. 

It is reasonable to believe that there were cavities on all sides of 
these Canyon Diablo specimens when they entered our atmosphere, 
and we are certain that these cavities existed before the meteorite hit 
the earth. Since the fall, corrosion has removed enough iron from the 
under surface to obliterate the cavities. Just when the Canyon Diablo 
iron fell is unknown; it may have been 10,000 or even 50,000 years ago. 





Figure 3. — Cross section of theoretical cavity in a meteorite, showing how its size may 
increase below the surface by the bombardment. Particles colliding along directions 
indicated by "x" and "x' " will rebound along the same direction, but those striking 
parallel to "y" an< ^ 'V " wu ^ rebound in a different direction. Since most of the particles 
falling within the cavity will rebound against the side walls, this action may produce 
the undercutting. 



But the difference between the corroded under surface and the top 
of the specimen shows how slow atmospheric corrosion is compared 
to the corrosion that takes place on the under side. 

The lateral flow over the forward side produces the overhanging 
rim of metal on one side of a cavity, but there is no satisfactory 
explanation for an overhanging rim of metal entirely surrounding the 
cavity. If the moving air pushes metal into the cavity, we are unable 



SEVEN SIDE'RITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 



355 



to understand why the air which has to escape will not bend some 
metal the other way. 

Although it is our belief that the shape of these cavities and their 
overhanging rims of metal point to the existence of the cavities before 
the meteorite entered our atmosphere, R. N. Thomas 3 has a different 
and interesting explanation for the shape of the cavities. He con- 
siders that if a hole existed, it acted as an energy trap (fig. 3). The 
particles that collided with the outside of the meteorite were reflected 
away, while those that hit within the cavity were reflected against the 
side walls; this bombardment undercut the sides. 



a 






Figure 4. — Cross sections of theoretical cavity in a meteorite representing the progressive 
changes (a, b, c) when the long axis lies parallel to the direction in which the mass is 
falling. The stagnation point is indicated by the "x." The small arrows indicate the 
direction of the lateral flow. The ablation, at the opening to the cavity, is greater on the 
side towards which the flow is directed. 



A bombardment such as Thomas suggests probably does occur, but 
we believe that the lateral flow of hot air on the front of the meteorite 
is the predominating force. The progressive changes shown in 
figure 4 illustrate our conception of what happens to a deep but 
narrow cavity, essentially normal to the lateral flow, which holds a 
fixed position on the front of a falling iron. Since the air flow origi- 
nates at the center of the front face, the stagnation point, and moves 

■ Personal communications. 



356 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



in all directions, the cavity rim farthest away from the stagnation 
point would get the direct impact of the lateral flow. The metal in 
the rim would be heated from the top and from within the cavity, 
with the result that the rim would be ablated much faster than the 
surface of the meteorite. It seems clear that this blast of hot air 
would widen the opening of the hole faster than the general surface 
of the meteorite would recede and faster than the cavity would be 
deepened. 



a 






Figure 5. — Cross sections of theoretical cavity in a meteorite representing the progressive 
changes when the long axis is oblique to the direction in which the mass is falling. Similar 
conditions exist here as in figure 4 except for the incline of the long axis. The thin, over- 
hanging lip would be ablated more rapidly than the opposite side. The stagnation point 
is indicated by the "x." 



Although ablation is probably greatest on the rim farthest from 
the stagnation point, the opposite rim is also heat-softened and ablated. 
The lateral current of air blowing across the opening of the cavity 
would establish an eddy in the mouth of the hole. This eddy would 
direct hot gas against the inside wall for a distance down in the cavity 
about equal to the diameter of the opening. The turbulent gas must 
contain solid particles torn from the surface of the meteorite, and these 
particles should ablate the metal on the side walls as fast as heat 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 357 

softens it. Almost simultaneously this lateral flow of hot-air heat 
would soften and ablate the rim around the cavity with the result, 
we believe, that the cavity would be widened faster than it is deepened. 

When the long axis of the cavity makes an acute angle with the 
plane of the lateral flow (fig. 5), the side nearest the stagnation point, 
or the upstream rim, would be widened more rapidly than the opposite 
side. In this case, the eddy established in the cavity opening would 
direct heated air against the inside wall on the upper side of the 
opening. As the overhanging metal is thin, it would be softened and 
more quickly ablated than the lower side. This process could change 
such a cavity into something like that which exists on the Canyon 
Diablo meteorite (see p. 351), or, if there is enough time, the lateral 
flow could make a wide and shallow depression, or "thumbmark." 

Were cavities formed by shrinkage? — H. C. Urey and G. P. Kuiper 4 
independently suggested that cavities in iron meteorities might be 
due to shrinkage when the metal solidified. Although depressions 
occur in cast metals, there are so many differences between the shape 
and location of cavities in ingots and in meteorites that this hypothesis 
seems very unlikely. 

A liquid conforms to the shape of its container, so that only its 
upper surface is free. Thus the cavities in ingots occur in the upper 
part or close to the upper surface. This point was comprehensively 
discussed by Camp and Francis (1951), and their illustration indicates 
that the cavities in ingots usually resemble inverted cones. In all 
but a "killed ingot' ' the conspicuous shrinkage features and cavities 
occur in the core of the upper part. "Killed ingots" cool rapidly, and 
inasmuch as such cooling has no place in the history of meteoritic 
iron we believe that the features of such ingots need not be discussed. 

Were cavities formed by gas or liquids? — The metallic portion of a 
meteorite solidifies at a lower temperature than the silicates. If gas 
or liquid phases are given off as a metallic portion solidifies, these 
would escape through the enclosing silicates as long as they remained 
porous. When the mobile phases can no longer escape and as they do 
not combine with the metallic or silicate constituents, they must 
accumulate somewhere. The most likely place would be between 
a large iron mass and the enclosing zone of silicates. Thus, possibly 
these mobile phases accumulated near the outside edges of the large 
metallic masses. 

The occurrence of metallic phases in stony meteorites indicates 
that the metal was injected after the silicates were formed and in 
the position they now occupy. 



I. Personal communications. 



358 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

In iron meteorites, usually some schreibersite occurs around the 
troilite inclusions. It seems reasonable to assume, therefore, that 
around a large concentration of metallic iron in a silicate body, a 
swathing zone of some type existed which now is completely gone. 
Such an enclosing zone could be rich in chlorides, sulfides, phosphides, 
etc. Such phases may have filled the embayments or cavities in 
the iron and through some unknown process subsequently vanished. 
Although at the present time this is pure speculation, there is a reason- 
able possibility that such a zone existed. 

Nash and Baxter (1947) studied the gas within six meteorites and 
found that four of them contained less than 10 cubic millimeters of 
total gas under normal temperature and pressure per gram of meteor- 
ite. The Canyon Diablo iron had much more gas than the average 
of the six meteorites they studied, and it may be significant that the 
Canyon Diablo individuals contain cavitites. 

If Baxter's values for the Canyon Diablo iron are taken for the 

Goose Lake meteorite, there would be about 35.01 cubic meters of gas 

(N.T.P.) within the latter. 

30 cu. mm. x 2573 lbs, x 453.59 gm. per lb. = 35.01 cu. m. 

__ 

An ultraconservative estimate of the liberated gas would be be- 
tween 5 and 10 times the amount of residual gas in a meteorite; for the 
Goose Lake iron, this would give between 175 and 350 cubic meters of 
liberated gas under N.T.P. Considering the pressure and tempera- 
ture the gas would be under when the cavities formed, probably there 
was enough liberated gas to fill these cavities. 

When iron is cast it conforms to the enclosing mold, so that the 
gas cavities or shrinkage features develop only on the upper surface, 
whereas in the Goose Lake meteorite there are cavites on all sides. 
Ingots are, of course, made in the earth's gravitational field, but 
possibly meteoritic iron formed in a gravitational field which was 
not as strong as that of the earth, and therefore cavities might occur 
around the entire mass. 

Were cavities jormed by weathering 1 ! — The corroded surface of a 
buried iron meteorite differs from a weathered exposed surface. The 
pitting on the buried side is usually wide and shallow, and the metal 
ridges separating corrosion pits are generally sharp. Furthermore, 
the iron oxide on the buried surface is rough and usually thicker than 
that on an exposed surface. Corrosion acts on the side of the iron 
next to the ground, or all over a buried iron meteorite, much faster 
than it does on the upper exposed surfaces. 

Many arguments can be marshalled against the formation of cavities 
in the Goose Lake meteorite by weathering, The cavities occur on 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 359 

all sides of the specimen instead of chiefly on the side next to the ground 
where corrosion would be expected to be the greatest. Corrosion on 
an exposed surface is slow, and during the great length of time that 
would have been required to weather out such deep holes on exposed 
surfaces of the meteorite, the surface next to the ground would surely 
have developed the characteristic corrosion pattern of the under side 
of a metorite; this it did not do. 

If the cavities in the Goose Lake iron were made by weathering, 
those in the upper side would have been full of oxide when the speci- 
men was found. We know, however, that the cavities were free from 
oxide because many trained observers were present when the iron 
was relocated and their published accounts contain no mention of 
rust filling any holes. The field notes that the observers published 
contained descriptions of the size and shape of the meteorite, its 
cavities, nature of the terrain, the depression around the iron, the 
altitude and slope of the ground where the specimen was found, but 
not a word about rust in the cavities. Surely these men would have 
mentioned rust if it were abundant in the cavities or if it were found 
on the ground near the meteorite. 

Linsley (1939a) wrote: 

The side which rested on and was partly in the soil has the characteristic appear- 
ance of rusty iron, but is smooth and nowhere crumbling in disintegration. The 
prominent external pits characteristic of iron meteorites were far less numerous 
on this protected side. On the exposed side the external pittings had developed 
into holes, many of which were several inches deep; some extending through the 
specimen. There were no sharp edges or angles on the meteorite. There was 
no accumulation of rusty pieces on the ground around it. 

Deep holes such as those occurring in this meteorite are less common 
on other irons than the shallow, wide depressions or "thumbmarks." 
However, on the Goose Lake iron there are more deep holes than 
"thumbmarks." We disagree with Linsley's observation about the 
exposed pits developing by weathering, and we do not see any con- 
spicuous " thumbmarks." Furthermore, no surface of this iron 
indicates prolonged weathering, and the flight markings on the sides 
exhibiting the deep holes make it seem extremely unlikely that 
weathering produced these cavities. 

One surface of each of the two large Canyon Diablo specimens in 
the National Museum is deeply corroded, with considerable metal 
removed. This is the part that was either buried or next to the 
ground. The oxide on that side is thick, rough, and different in 
appearance from that which occurs on the exposed side. Yet the 
Canyon Diablo irons, like the Goose Lake iron, show flight markings 
on the side with the cavities. We regard this as a significant fact, 



360 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

because the flight markings were made after the cavities. The 
surface of a meteorite that is exposed to the air apparently is extremely 
inert compared to the side next to the earth. 

Everyone who has examined the Goose Lake iron with us agrees 
that no side shows extensive corrosion. It has the appearance of 
being a recent fall, although we have no definite evidence that it is. 
It is definitely not an old fall. 

Are the cavities impact scars? — If a small meteorite collided with a 
large iron, we believe that the impact would make a craterlike scar. 
The material composing the small meteorite is not as important as 
the velocity with which the two bodies collide. If the large mass 
were iron, the impact shock would be absorbed without fracture, as 
meteoritic iron is malleable. We suspect that the impact scar the 
small body would make on the larger mass would resemble the meteor 
craters on this earth, because both are produced by a small body with 
high velocity striking a larger mass. 

Most meteor craters are bowl-shaped and have upturned rims 
around their edges. The diameter across the opening is greater than 
that below the opening. The ratio between the width and depth of 
terrestrial meteor craters and the cavities in the Goose Lake iron are 
different (see table 3). Probably the shape of the terrestrial meteor 
craters has been modified by weathering, and possibly to some extent 
so have the holes in this iron. The difference in shape between the 
meteor craters and the cavities in the Goose Lake meteorite becomes 
conspicuous when the width/depth ratios are compared. 

Table 3. — Comparison of terrestrial meteor craters with four typical cavities in the 

Goose Lake iron 





Width 


Depth 


Width/Dei 


Crater 


(in feet) 


(in feet) 


ratio 


Canyon Diablo, Arizona 


3,900 


570 


6.8 


Wolf Creek, Australia 


2,800 


170 


16.5 


Boxhole, Australia 


575 


52 


11. 1 


Odessa, Texas 


530 


18 


29.4 


Henbury, Australia 


360 


60 


6.0 


Henbury, Australia 


240 


25 


9.6 


Henbury, Australia 


30 


3 


10.0 


Warbar, Arabia 


328 


40 


8.0 


Goose Lake cavities 


(in cm.) 


(in cm.) 




1 


11 


10 


1. 1 


2 


7 


11 


0.63 


3 


2 


8 


0.25 


4 


5 


11 


0.45 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 361 

Since a small meteorite striking a larger one would penetrate the 
large body and possibly volatilize, there might be nothing left to be 
identified. It is likely that the impact would not disturb the struc- 
ture of the Ni-Fe alloy in the large body very far beyond the limits 
of the crater, but we are not certain of this point. 

Wave action within a cavity. — If cavities existed in an iron before it 
entered our atmosphere or if they formed quickly after the iron 
entered, we must not neglect the changes that wave action would 
make within a hole. The lateral flow of heated air over the forward 
side would pass over the opening to the hole, inducing wave action. 
The crests of these waves would strike the sides and be reflected back 
from the bottom of the cavity. 

Solid particles ablated from the surface would get into the cavity 
and be hurled against the side walls and bottom. More work would 
be done on the side walls than on the bottom. Possibly the ablation 
on the walls would exceed that on the exposed surface of the meteorite. 
The reasons for this could be: (1) The heat might be higher within 
the cavity than on the exposed surface; (2) the side walls would be 
both heated and to some degree ablated with a bombardment of 
heated particles; and (3) perhaps the frequency of impacts against 
the side walls would be greater than the collisions on the surface of 
the iron. 

The wave action within a cavity during the fall of a meteorite is 
complex, and our limitations prevent us from fully analyzing the 
reactions. However, we believe that the most violent action would 
occur just inside the opening, and if this is true, the tendency would 
be to widen the opening faster than the cavity is deepened. 

Are the cavities primary structures? — Since we seem to have no 
satisfactory explanation for the formation of a cavity in an iron 
meteorite during its fall, the possibility must be considered that 
cavities existed before the meteorite entered the atmosphere. 

More metal is ablated from the forward side of a falling meteorite 
than from any other surface. But on a tumbling body no surface 
receives the extensive ablation that the front side does when the mass 
holds a fixed position. The Goose Lake iron has no truncated cavities 
and no zone of granulated metal along any of its edges. These facts, 
together with the features previously discussed, to us constitute 
evidence that this iron fell with a lower velocity than many of the 
other meteorites. 

We believe that the surfaces of the Canyon Diablo specimens 
discussed previously were ablated after the cavities were made. Their 
shape and the fact that several of their cavities are truncated by the 
surface, exposing 2 inches of a tubelike depression on the down-slope 



362 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

side, indicate that these holes already existed when the outside surface 
was being ablated. 

It is unrealistic to assume that the cavities in the Canyon Diablo 
irons were much deeper than the combined length of the trough and 
the depth of the present holes. If it is assumed that these holes were 
4 inches deeper than they are now, the cavities would have been about 
6 to 10 inches deep and possibly less than an inch wide. A hole of 
such dimensions would seem most improbable. 

If 2 to 4 inches were lost from one side of the meteorite, the diam- 
eter of the meteorite would have decreased 4 to 8 inches. If that 
much metal were ablated from an iron such as the Goose Lake speci- 
men, the percentage of weight lost would be large. But if our assump- 
tion of the metal lost by ablation is high — and it probably is — the 
dimensions of the meteorite would not have been greatly reduced in 
flight, in which case the present mass may still have some of its 
primary cavities. 

Cavities, as far as we know, do not occur within iron meteorites. 
If these are preflight features, it means that no sizable piece was 
broken from the Goose Lake iron during its fall through our atmos- 
phere. Also, it is unlikely that this meteorite came from the metallic 
core of some planet, for if it had, the implication would be that cavities 
existed there, and such a condition seems improbable. 

It might be suggested that these cavities were filled with some 
mineral which has since vanished, but it is generally assumed that 
meteorites rather reliably represent the body in which they formed 
and also that the composition and structure of the portion that was 
lost in flight are essentially the same as those of the mass still re- 
maining. There is no evidence that any low density minerals were 
concentrated near the outside edges of the larger meteorites. 

The metallography of the metal in the overturned rims of cavities 
needs further study. In a section cut through the rim of a cavity in 
the Goose Lake iron (pi. 6), the Widmanstatten pattern was neither 
obliterated nor granulated. Granulated zones have been found around 
the outside edges of several iron meteorites, and those zones are 
usually wider than the overhanging lips of metal around the cavities. 
In general there is little evidence that heat penetrated the Goose Lake 
meteorite; the limited evidence found is discussed in the section dealing 
with the metallography. However, the feature which did indicate a 
thermal change was found near the surface of this iron. 

After reviewing all the evidence or possibilities outlined in this 
paper relative to the origin of cavities, we are inclined toward the 
view that the deep, narrow holes in the Goose Lake iron existed before 
it entered our atmosphere. The specific manner in which they were 



SEVEN SIDE-RITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 363 

formed is not understood, but our basic reasons for thinking that 
they are preflight may be summarized as follows: 

The most common flight markings on iron meteorites are the broad, 
shallow depressions called "thumbmarks" which definitely originated 
during the fall through the atmosphere. The Goose Lake meteorite 
has many more deep, narrow cavities and fewer " thumbmarks' ' and 
threadlike flight markings on its surface than most iron meteorites. 
The fact that this iron lacks the surface features which suggest a 
high velocity of fall favors the preatmospheric origin for its cavities. 

No evidence was found that heat penetrated this specimen to any 
appreciable depth. The depth of the cavities, their peculiar shape, 
and the overturned rims around them cannot be explained by the 
thermal penetration we observed, by the original shrinkage of the 
metal, or by terrestrial weathering. The possibility that cavities 
represent something that was burned out during the flight through 
our atmosphere seems most unlikely because in the many sections 
cut through this iron, no inclusions were found that even approached 
the dimensions of the cavities. Furthermore, the length of time this 
iron was in flight through the atmosphere seems insufficient for enough 
heat to penetrate to the depth of the cavities and melt the quantities 
of metal that might have filled them. 

Cavities are narrower at the openings than within; if they were 
made by air streaming over the surface of a meteorite during its 
flight, surely the openings would be widened faster than the cavity 
was deepened. Finally, if cavities like these originated during the 
flight in our atmosphere, it seems strange that they occur in only a 
small percentage of the known iron meteorites. 

Summary 

A 2,573-pound iron meteorite from Goose Lake, Modoc County, 
Calif., found in 1938, is described, and a general discussion of the cavi- 
ties in iron meteorites is presented. The chemistry, metallography, and 
physical features of this and seven other meteorites from widely 
scattered places are given. The cavities in this iron, a conspicuous 
feature, are discussed, and reasons are stated why they are believed to 
be primary features. The cavities are compared with those in other 
meteorites. A study of the cavities indicates : (1) That this meteorite 
is not much smaller now than when it formed in some primordial 
body; (2) that no large piece broke off during flight; and (3) that this 
probably is not a portion of the metallic core of the planetlike body 
where it was formed. 

The origin of cavities is a complex subject, and only the general 
theories of their formation are here outlined. It is our hope that this 



364 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

generalized discussion will stimulate further investigations of cavities 
in iron meteorites. Although we believe that the cavities in this 
meteorite existed before it entered our atmosphere, we do not infer 
that all meteoritic cavities are preflight. 

The Cincinnati, Ohio, Meteorite 

Plates 10, 12 

This iron meteorite was said to have been found near a dwelling in 
Cincinnati, Ohio, and was classified as a nickel-poor ataxite. It was 
first mentioned by Wulfing in 1897, and later by Cohen in 1898 and 
1905; a summary of the former descriptions was published by Farring- 
ton in 1915. 

When Perry in 1944 studied this specimen, which was obtained from 
the American Museum of Natural History, he observed numerous 
inclusions and identified them as phosphide bodies. Most of these 
small inclusions were rounded and gave the appearance of having been 
diffused by preterrestrial reheating. Since these particles were 
abundant, we suspected that there was more phosphorus in this iron 
than was shown in the analysis. Because of this and of the possibility 
that other chemical determinations might be unreliable, a restudy of 
the meteorite was made. 

A 16.33-gram slice was removed from the sample lent by the Amer- 
ican Museum of Natural History and was dissolved in HC1 (1 part 
HC1, 2 parts H 2 0) . The gas given off was passed through a solution 
of lead acetate. The lead sulfide was recovered, converted into lead 
sulfate, and calculated to sulfur. The residue, which weighed 0.0067 
gram, was so small that it was impossible to make an analysis, but 
chemical tests proved that this residue was rhabdite. 



Table 4. — Chemical composition of the Cincinnati, C 


)/uo, meteorite 






1 


2 






Sjostrom (in 


New analy- 






Cohen, 1898) 


sis 


Fe 




94.47 


94. 12 


Ni 




5.43 


5.33 


Co 




0.68 


0.74 


Cu 




0.01 


n. d. 


P 




0.05 


0. 19 


S 




0.05 


0.006 


Rhabdite 




— 


0.05 


Total 


100. 69 


100. 436 


Density 




7.68 


7.71 


Mol. ratio 


Fe 


16.41 


16.51 



Ni+Co 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 365 

The agreement between the densities of the two samples indicates 
that the sample we restudied was similar to the one Sjostrom had. 
However, these densities are low for meteoritic iron. The pieces 
restudied came from a small specimen that was somewhat altered, and 
it was therefore impossible to avoid including some altered material. 
There was not enough oxidization to make a significant difference in 
the analysis, but the included phosphide and the oxide reduced the 
density of the iron. 

The main difference between these analyses is in the phosphorus 
content; the reanalysis has almost four times as much phosphorus as 
Sjostrom reported. The higher value is more consistent with the 
metallography shown in plate 12. 

The amount of schreibersite or rhabdite in the analyzed sample 
may be calculated from the phosphorus reported. To simplify the 
calculation, the phosphorus content of the mineral was rounded off 
at 15 percent. Thus, the sample reported in analysis 2 contains 1.26 
percent of phosphides by weight. For some reason most of the phos- 
phide inclusions are soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid, which is 
contrary to the usual finding. 

The photomicrographs of the Cincinnati iron (pi. 10) indicate that 
the rhabdite reacted with the matrix. This reaction, we believe, 
occurred subsequent to the original segregation of the rhabdite and 
either before the meteor entered our atmosphere or during its fall 
through the air. When the temperature of the mass was raised, the 
inclusions partly redissolved in the matrix. The cooling process which 
followed was so rapid that the material taken up from the matrix in 
the reheating process could not be rejected. We suspect that the 
reheating had something to do with making the phosphide soluble. 
Also, we found in other meteorites, where similar metallographic 
evidence of reheating occurs, that an appreciable amount of phosphorus 
dissolved in the same strength of acid. 

Because many old analyses of iron meteorites are inaccurate, it is 
worthy of note when one which seemed to be incorrect was found to be 
good. 

We express our appreciation to Dr. Frederick H. Pough, formerly 
of the American Museum of Natural History, for making this meteorite 
available for restudy. 

Summary 

A new analysis confirms the old analysis with the exception of the 
phosphorus determination. The phosphide mineral in the meteorite 
is largely soluble in acid. This iron apparently was reheated after it 
originally cooled. 



366 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Meteorite 

Plates 11, 13-15 

This 292-pound iron was found in a field along Miller's Run, 
Allegheny County, Pa., in 1850. Shortly thereafter the main mass 
was carried to Pittsburgh and wrought into a bar; thus most of the 
meteorite was lost to science before it was studied. Since there are 
conflicting statements in the descriptions of this iron, a reinvestigation 
was desirable. 

When the Pennsylvania meteorites are plotted on a map, the 
Pittsburgh, New Baltimore, Mount Joy, and Shrewsbury irons lie 
on a line starting near Pittsburgh and extending eastward for about 
180 miles. Because of this alinement it might be suspected that the 
falls are related. Our reexamination of the Pittsburgh meteorite 
makes it possible to compare the four Pennsylvania irons and also one 
from Wooster, Ohio, lying on the same line but to the west of Pitts- 
burgh. 

The data on the Pittsburgh meteorite were summarized by Farring- 
ton (1915b) and by Stone (1932), and, since their publications are more 
readily accessible than the original descriptions, no references are 
made to the earlier work on this meteorite. 

We were fortunate in having two specimens because they differ in 
some respects. Tbe Yale sample is granulated, indicating that it 
had been reheated, whereas the Harvard sample apparently had 
undergone no thermal treatment. 

The Pittsburgh meteorite has been classified as both a coarse 
octahedrite and a hexahedrite by Farrington (1915b), but it is definitely 
a coarse octahedrite. Most of its kamacite occurs in irregular masses, 
but one area in the Yale specimen shows a Widmanstatten structure 
(pi. 11, top). The Yale sample is granulated, so that the outline of 
many of its kamacite areas are not sharply defined ; thus measurements 
of the widths of those bands are unsatisfactory. The average width 
for several of the lamellae in plate 11 is 2.08 millimeters. The orienta- 
tion of the cut was not determined, but the lamellae are wide enough 
to place the Pittsburgh iron among the coarse octahedrites. 

The irregular kamacite areas in the Harvard sample are partly 
bounded by taenite. Open fractures occur between some of these 
kamacite granules, but this is a common feature for coarse octahedrites. 
One small trigonal plessite area was found. The kamacite in the 
Harvard specimen shows three sets of Neumann lines, but none was 
found in the Yale sample. Possibly they were lost when the piece 
was heated. 

Most of the kamacite areas in this meteorite are not enclosed by a 
continuous band of taenite. When the taenite thickens, its centers 



SEVEN SIDE-RITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 



367 



consist of dark, untransformed alpha-gamma iron. Numerous 
rhabdite needles occur in some of the kamacite (pi. 13); cohenite 
inclusions were identified (pi. 15), and a few plessite areas were found 
(pis. 14, 15). 

Since both the Harvard and Yale sections were small, neither con- 
tained much of the original crust of the meteorite; the small amount 
that remained was similar on both. The surface oxide and other 
features show clearly that the two samples came from the same 
meteorite. 

Our analysis was made on a piece taken from the Yale specimen. 
The sample was dissolved in HC1 (1 part HC1, 2 parts H 2 0), and the 
magnetic part of the insoluble residue was retained in the flask by 
attaching a strong magnet to the bottom of the container while the 
solution was filtered to recover the carbon. By counting the grains 
in a portion of the magnetic residue, we estimated that there was 
about 10 percent cohenite and 90 percent rhabdite in the residue, and 
both minerals were later identified by X-ray. 



Table 5. — Chemical composition of the Pittsburgh meteorite 



Fe 
Ni 
Co 
P 

S 
Cu 

c 

Cr 

Mn 

Rhabdite! 
Cohenite f 



By difference. 



(1) 



New analysis 

by E. P. 

Henderson 

•91. 6 

6.77 

0.66 

0. 12 

0.018 



0. 76 



(2) 

Calculated 

composition 

after correcting 

for rhabdite 

and cohenite 

92. 15 

6.99 

0.67 

0.22 

0.018 

0.001 



(3) 

Genth's analysis 

(Farrington, 

1915b) 

92.80 

4.66 

0.39 

0.25 

0.03 

0.03 



0. 14 



(4) 



100. 00 



98.30 



Hildebrand's 

analysis 

(Farrington, 

1915b) 

93.38 

5.89 

1.24 

0. 15 

0.05 

0.05 

0.2 



100. 80 



As the residue contained rhabdite as well as a small amount of 
cohenite, and as some loss occurred during the picking operations, 
we decided to correct the figures for Fe, Ni, Co, and P for the quan- 
tities contained in the residue. The nickel content of rhabdite was 
arbitrarily set at 25 percent, the phosphorus at 15 percent, and the 
cobalt at 0.75 percent. The difference between the sum of these 
elements and 100 was taken to be iron. Incompleted studies by the 
authors show that cohenite has a fixed composition, with a carbon 



368 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



content of approximately 6.5 percent; therefore, the iron it contains 
can be obtained by difference. Thus, if our estimates for the pro- 
portions of rhabdite and cohenite and the assumed compositions are 
about right, it is possible to correct the analysis in column 1 of table 5, 
for these two minerals. The adjusted analysis is given in column 2 of 
the table. 

The specimen analyzed had a density of 7.89, which is low for a 
meteorite belonging to the coarsest octahedrite group (Henderson 
and Perry, 1954). But the sample selected contained traces of oxide 
and some included minerals, and it had been thermally treated, all 
of which reduce the density of meteoritic iron. 




Figure 6. — Map showing the locations of the iron meteorites that have been found in 
eastern Ohio and in Pennsylvania. 1, Wooster, Wayne County, Ohio; 2, Pittsburgh, 
Allegheny County, Pa.; 3, New Baltimore, Somerset County, Pa.; 4, Mount Joy, Adams 
County, Pa.; 5, Shrewsbury, York County, Pa. 



The five iron meteorites plotted in figure 6 were found almost on a 
straight line extending about 275 miles eastward from and slightly 
south of Wooster, Ohio. There are no historical records of the date 
of fall of any of these irons, but the pattern of distribution might sug- 
gest that all five represent a meteor shower. Their analyses are 
listed in table 6. 

The Wooster, Ohio, meteorite apparently has not been reinvesti- 
gated since Smith (1864) described it. He gave the density of this 
iron as 7.901, and by calculating the density from the analysis we got 
7.903. Such agreement indicates that the analysis is consistent with 
the density Smith reported; hence the analysis is essentially correct. 





Wooster, 


Pittsburgh, 


New Balti- 


Mount Joy, 




Ohio 


Pa. 


more, Pa. 


Pa. 


Fe 


93.61 


92. 15 


93.25 


92.93 


Ni 


6.01 


6.99 


6.42 


5.76 


Co 


0.73 


0.67 


0. 32 


0.61 


P 


0. 13 


0.22 


0.037 


— 


S 


— 


0.018 


— 


— 


c 


— 


0.001 


0.015 


— 


Si 


— 


— 


0.01 


— 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 369 

This reanalysis of the Pittsburgh iron, the reanalysis of the Mount 
Joy iron (Henderson, 1941), and the analyses of the New Baltimore 
(Merrill, 1923) and the Shrewsbury (Farrington, 1910) irons are all 

Table 6. — Chemical composition of the five meteorites located in figure 6 

Shrewsbury, 
Pa. 
90.84 
8.80 
trace 
0.29 
0.01 



sufficiently different to make it certain that these are independent 
meteorites. Furthermore, when sections of the five irons are com- 
pared, structural differences can be seen in their etched patterns. 

Summary 

This reanalysis brings the composition of the Pittsburgh iron into 
agreement with that of other meteorites having similar structures. 
The Pittsburgh iron differs from other iron meteorites that have been 
found along the southern border of Pennsylvania. The metallography 
of the meteorite is discussed. 

The Breece, New Mexico, Meteorite 

Plate 16 

An iron meteorite weighing approximately 50 kilograms from near 
Breece, McKinley County, N. Mex., was described by Beck, La Paz, 
and Goldsmith (1951) as a medium octahedrite containing lamellae 
of cohenite. This is the first reported occurrence of cohenite lamellae. 
Previous to that study, we had examined the Breece meteorite without 
recognizing cohenite, and after the above-named authors reported 
cohenite in Reichenbach lamellae we restudied the sample of that 
iron in the U. S. National Museum. 

Our speciment (pi. 16) is very similar to the one pictured by Beck, 
La Paz, and Goldsmith. We tested each of the lamellae shown in 
plate 16 by etching tests without getting any typical reactions for 
cohenite. Powders from these lamellae were also X-rayed, and in 
each case the pattern proved to be that of schreibersite. 

Perry (1944, pi. 47) pictured inclusions similar to those in our plate 16 
and referred to them in a way which indicated that he believed them 
to be troilite. Although he did not call them troilite, Perry described 

433890—58 3 



370 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

them "as an example of Reichenbach lamellae remarkable for their 
fineness and regularity." Since all the other illustrations in Perry's 
plate 47 were troilite, the inference is that he considered the lamellae 
in the Breece iron to be troilite. 

Two samples, together weighing 21.69 grams and both containing 
the elongated inclusions which had once been identified as cohenite, 
were prepared for analysis. Since the densities of these pieces were 
7.86 and 7.87, apparently both portions had about equal quantities 
of these lamellar inclusions. Both samples were dissolved in HC1 
(1 part HC1, 2 parts H 2 0), as a result of which the cohenite and 
schreibersite should concentrate in the residue. After the kamacitic 
iron dissolved, a strong magnet was attached to the bottom of the 
flask to hold the magnetic residue in the container while the solution 
was decanted off. 

A visual examination of this residue showed that it contained two 
minerals. The most abundant one had the color and luster of the 
mineral which occurred in the lamellae shown in plate 16. The other 
was a dark carbonlike particle, feebly magnetic, brittle, and very soft. 

Cohenite and Carbon Pseudomorphs of Cohenite 

This dark component was unlike anything we had seen in a meteor- 
ite. Because of the size of some of these aggregates, it was difficult to 
believe that they could be common in iron meteorites and have 
escaped detection until now. Others who had examined this iron 
apparently had not observed these carbon aggregates. We found them 
because our sample was dissolved so that the analyst could observe the 
progress of the acid attack on the meteorite. 

Cohen (1897c) found a carbon compound in the Cranbourne 
meteorite that may have been similar to the carbon we recovered. 
As the Cranbourne iron contains cohenite, possibly the black carbon 
aggregrate that Cohen noticed was iron carbide that had become 
graphitized. When some silicate minerals are attacked by acid they 
will leave a skeleton made of one of their constituents, and carbon in 
cohenite may behave in the same way. 

The color and luster of these dark bodies from the residue of the 
Breece iron were remarkably constant. Some were soft, black, and 
slightly magnetic, others were nonmagnetic. The X-ray pattern 
was different from those of graphite, cohenite, or schreibersite. 

Thus, if cohenite is slightly soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid, 
possibly it existed in the portion we analyzed from the Breece iron. 
Its decomposition products may have escaped unnoticed as hydro- 
carbons, and perhaps those carbonlike aggregates were a product of 
the reaction of the acid on cohenite. 



Intensity 


d(A) 


1 


2. 51 


1 


2.34 


5 


2. 18 


5 


2. 11 


2 


2.06 


3 


2.00 


5 


1.97 


4 


1.93 


3 


1.91 


4 


1.86 



SEVEN S1DERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 371 

Cohenite obtained from another meteorite was given a prolonged 
treatment in dilute hydrochloric acid. Detectable amounts of 
hydrocarbons were liberated, but, what is more unusual, some car- 
bon pseudomorphs of cohenite formed. Since these had the shape 
and color of cohenite, the unaided eye could not distinguish them 
from that mineral. However, these pseudomorphs are essentially 
nonmagnetic, while cohenite is strongly magnetic. A characteristic 

Table 7. — Spacings of unknown black residue from HCl solution of the Breece, 

N. Mex.y meteorite l 

Fe Radiation, Fe K« = 1.9373 A 

Intensity d (A) 

3 4.46 

3 4.23 

2 4. 13 

1 3.73 

1 3.44 

7 3.35 

10 3. 06 

9 3.01 

9 2.96 

1 2.88 
1 By George Switzer. 

feature of most cohenite inclusions is the small island of kamacite 
enclosed within the grains. These carbon pseudomorphs had a 
sharply defined hole, which must be the place where some kamacite 
dissolved out. 

The soft aggregates of carbon found when the Breece iron was 
dissolved are possibly similar in origin to the carbon pseudomorphs 
of cohenite, but perhaps these should be called skeletons or aggregates 
of carbon. 

Although we obtained no such well-defined carbon pseudomorphs 
when the Breece iron was dissolved, we will concede that these black 
carbon aggregates indicate that some cohenite was concealed in the 
sample we dissolved. Although we failed to detect cohenite in that 
portion of the Breece iron, Beck, La Paz, and Goldsmith isolated and 
identified some from this meteorite. Those authors, however, were 
mistaken in reporting that cohenite made up the Reichenbach lamallae, 
because we tested all the lathlike inclusions and found them to be 
schreibersite. 

Beck recovered enough cohenite to analyze and identify it by 
X-ray. Because the density Beck reported for cohenite was closer 
to schreibersite than to cohenite, we became suspicious of the identi- 
fication. His X-ray film of cohenite matched the lines in our standard 

433890—58 1 



372 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



cohenite film, but we could not understand why the lines in his film 
were indistinct. Now we suspect that the cohenite Beck X-rayed 
was partly graphitized or carbonized. 

Although present in limited amounts in the Breece meteorite, 
cohenite is difficult to detect; yet it is a rather common mineral in 
coarse octahedrites. Cohenite apparently becomes less and less 
abundant as the Ni content increases above that which is normal for 
the coarse octahedrites. Nickel apparently partly graphitizes or 
carbonizes the cohenite; thus it is unlikely than an iron meteorite 
like the Breece would contain more than a trace of cohenite. Further- 
more, since carbon pseudomorphs are made by prolonged treatment 
of cohenite in dilute HC1, possibly the carbon aggregates we found 
originated from cohenite. Thus, the acid treatment given the sample 
may have partly carbonized the cohenite that Beck X-rayed. 

Chemical Analyses of the Matrix and the Schreibersite 
in the Breece Meteorite 

Table 8 contains all the reported analyses of this meteorite. The 
failure of Martin (analysis 2) to report phosphorus probably influ- 
enced Beck, La Paz, and Goldsmith to call these lamellae cohenite. 
All the other analyses show phosphorus, and all except No. 5 show 
only traces of sulfur. Possibly, Carlisle's sample contained a bit of 
troilite. 

Table 8. — Findings, by various analysts, of the chemical composition of the Breece, 







N. Mex.y 


, meteorite 








(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 




Henderson 












(new analysis) 


Martin 1 


Herpers 2 


Nichols 2 


Carlisle 3 


Fe 


89. 627 


89.87 


89.97 


90.06 


88.69 


Ni 


9. 167 


9. 26 


9.46 


8.67 


9. 58 


Co 


0.635 


0.89 


0. 19 


0.62 


1.02 


S 


trace 


0. 11 


trace 


0.03 


0.23 


c 


trace 


0.03 


— 


— 


0. 10 


p 


0. 571 


0.00 


0.219 


0.47 


0.46 


CI 


— 


0.00 


— 


— 


— 


Cu 


— 


0.00 


0.002 


0.02 


— 



1 In Beck, La Paz, and Goldsmith (1951, p. 537). 

2 Personal communication from S. K. Roy, Chicago Museum of Natural 
History. 

8 Personal communication from L. La Pax, University of New Mexico. 



The magnetic portion of the insoluble residue makes up 3.63 percent 
of the meteorite by weight. If the schreibersite in the material repre- 
sented by analyses 1, 4, and 5 of table 8 is calculated, all these 
analyses contain about the same amount of schreibersite. 



SEVEN SIDE RITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 373 

Table 9. — Chemical composition of the insoluble residue (schreibersite) from the 

Breece meteorite 





Analysis by 




Analysis by 






Carlisle 


Ratio 


Henderson 


Ratio 


Fe 


60.82 


1.09 ] 


» 59. 93 


1.0711 


Ni 


24. 52 


0. 418 3. 52 


24. 18 


0.412 2. 93 


Co 


0. 15 


0. 002J 


0.014 


0. 002 J 


P 


13. 19 


0. 425 1 


15.75 


0. 507 1 


S 


0.00 


0.00 


— 


— 


c 


1.06 


0.09 


b 0. 002 


— 



* By difference. 

b Carbon not determined, but observed. 

The carbon that Carlisle reported, 1.06 percent, was not all derived 
from the decomposition of cohenite by acid used to dissolve the 
sample, because if there is 1.06 percent carbon and all of it came from 
cohenite, the Breece meteorite would contain about 7 percent cohenite. 
Such quantities of cohenite are not present in this meteorite. Al- 
though some of the carbon Carlisle reported may have been derived 
from cohenite, most of it represents disseminated carbon in the 
meteoritic iron. 

Summary 

The mineral in the lamellar inclusions formerly was incorrectly 
identified as cohenite. This restudy proves that the mineral is 
schreibersite and confirms the presence of cohenite in this meteorite. 

The Tombigbee, Alabama, Meteorite 

Plate 17 

The Tombigbee meteorite was restudied because the old analyses 
reported less nickel than we believed should occur in a hexahedrite. 
Since hexahedrites are essentially kamacitic iron and usually contain 
about 5.5 percent Ni, it seemed important to check the accuracy of 
some analyses reporting low nickel percentages. If such analyses are 
correct, some explanation must be given for the apparent deficiency 
of nickel. 

This meteorite contains many large schreibersite inclusions as well 
as rhabdite needles; therefore, it is particularly suited to an investiga- 
tion of the composition of the phosphide inclusions, the kamacitic 
groundmass, and the kamacite adjacent to the large schreibersite 
bodies. 

Since the areas to be analyzed were selected from a slice about 
one-eighth inch thick (pi. 17), it was possible to have some control 
over the homogeneity of the selected samples. The findings reported 



374 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

are based upon studies of special areas, thus they do not truly represent 
the composition of the meteorite. A representative analysis of a 
meteorite such as this one is possible only if special attention is given 
to the selection of the sample. To sample the Tombigbee iron 
properly, it is necessary to get the actual proportion of inclusions and 
matrix in the main mass. Because of this difficulty the analyses of 
such a meteorite may vary more than those of the normal hexahedrites 
or fine-grained octahedrites. 

Farrington (1915b) gave a comprehensive summary of the historical 
and descriptive data on this iron, which he called De Sotoville. Foote 
(1899) described six specimens that were found along a straight line 
about 16 kilometers long. Three pieces were from south of De Soto- 
ville in Choctaw County, Alabama, and three from farther north, in 
Sumter County. It is important to note that the heaviest of the six 
was the one farthest north and the smallest was at the south. All 
were found between 1858 and 1886 and were extensively altered when 
discovered. 

Classification 

This meteorite has been classified in three different ways : Berwerth 

(1903) called it an ataxite; Klein (1903) called it a finest octahedrite; 
and Farrington (1903) noted its cubic character. Brezina and Cohen 

(1904) observed that different pieces of this iron had different struc- 
tures. They said: 

Mass 1 considered by itself alone, may be regarded as hexahedral iron; Mass 
VI, as the same, though possessing in places a granular structure, while in Mass III 
only traces of Neumann lines are visible .... It must be assumed that various 
masses of the De Sotoville iron were originally normal hexahedrites and in varying 
degree of extent were subject to agencies which wrought a change of structure. 
Probably different degrees of heating may account for the difference, which in 
the case of some of the masses may have been carried to the extent of softening or 
complete melting of the entire mass .... It cannot be determined with cer- 
tainty whether the masses in question were heated by the finders, as so often 
happened in the case of meteoric iron, or whether a secondary softening took 
place before or during their fall .... Since, however, in the neighborhood of 
the displacement and veins, occur structural changes similar to those of the 
apparently thermally altered portions, the conclusion may be drawn that the 
thermal process is also not of artificial or terrestrial origin, but of the same cosmic 
nature as the mechanical changes; and that through heating and pressure there 
was a gradual change of a hexahedral iron into an ataxite .... 

Perry (1944) classified the Tombigbee iron as a hexahedrite. It has 
a clear primary granulation and shows no diffusion around the phos- 
phide needles. Neumann lines are profuse but delicate, and their 
diverse orientation in the grains is similar to that occurring in typical 
hexahedrites. 

Although taenite and plessite may be present in this iron, they were 
not observed. The numerous dark spots scattered through the 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 375 

meteorite are, we assume, phosphide particles; however, they are 
visible only in higher magnification and are distinct from rhabdite. 
The kamacite shows a microscopic granulation, but no evidence was 
found of any octahedral arrangement. 

Chemical Composition 

An area containing a large schreibersite inclusion and a narrow zone 
of enclosing kamacitic iron was selected from the prepared slice for an 
analysis of both the kamacite and schreibersite. The portion selected, 
which weighed 23.379 grams, was placed in HC1 (1 part HC1, 2 parts 
H 2 0) until all the kamacite dissolved. The analysis of the acid- 
soluble part gives the composition of the kamacite adjacent to the 
schreibersite. The insoluble residue, the schreibersite, was then 
dissolved in HN0 3 and separately analyzed, table 10. 

Table 10. — Chemical composition of swathing kamacite and schreibersite in the 

Tombigbee meteorite 



98 



Ni+Co 

" By difference. 

Fe 

The average molecular ratio XT . , — for hexahedrites is about 

Ni+Co 

16.50. This average does not include several octahedrites that have 
been incorrectly classified as hexahedrites. It does include several 
analyses which we suspect are not entirely accurate. Thus, a molecu- 
lar ratio of 23.45 for swathing kamacite is so different from the average 
kamacite in a hexahedrite that some reason must be given in explana- 
tion. 

The material analyzed in table 10 consisted of 16.8 percent schreiber- 
site and 83.2 percent kamacite. Probably the material analyzed as 
swathing kamacite was a mixture of kamacite adjacent to the phos- 
phide and some of the groundmass. In some unpublished studies we 
found that the swathing kamacite around schreibersite bodies con- 
tained several percent less Ni than the groundmass of the meteorite. 

A composite analysis, calculated from the analyses of the matrix and 
the schreibersite in table 10, shows that the abundance of Fe, Ni, and 
Co in an area made up of both kamacite and schreibersite is similar to 
that in a normal hexahedrite. 







Swathing 
kamacite 


Ratio 


Schreiber- 
site 


Ratio 


Fe 




» 95. 64 


1.712 


71.78 


1. 285] 


Ni 




3.78 


0.064 


12.03 


0.205-2, 


Co 




0.58 


0.009 


0.58 


0. 009J 


P 




— 


— 


15.59 


0. 503 - 1 


Mol. ratio „. 


Fe 


- = 23.45 









376 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Table 11. — A composite analysis of an area in the Tombigbee iron consisting of 
kamacite and schreibersite, and an average analysis of hexahedrites 

(1) (2) 





Composite analysis of 
an area consisting 
of kamacite and 
schreibersite 


Average of 
hexahedrites 


Fe 




91.86 




93. 76 


Ni 




5. 10 




5.51 


Co 




0.64 




0.56 


P 




2.64 




— 


FeS 




0.016 




— 


Insol. 




0.01 




— 


Fe 
Mol. ratio — — - 




17. 13 




16.45 



Ni+Co 

A comparison of the molecular ratios of a composite analysis of a 
section of the Tombigbee iron with that of an average of 39 iron, 41 
nickel, and 39 cobalt determinations on different hexahedrites shows 
that the Tombigbee iron is a hexahedrite rich in phosphide inclusions. 

Other areas from the matrix in this iron were analyzed to verify the 
composition of the matrix. These analyses are given in tables 12 and 
13. Swathing kamacite contains 0.55 percent less Ni than the 
average of the analyses of the ground mass (table 14). However, it 
is more than likely that the swathing kamacite studied was con- 
taminated by some of the matrix. Possibly the kamacite adjacent to 
the phosphide contains less Ni than our findings report. 

Table 12. — Chemical composition of the average kamacite in groundmass in the 
Tombigbee meteorite, remote from any schreibersite inclusions 

Grams Percent Ratio 

Fe 10. 5570 94. 19 1. 687 

Ni 0. 4927 4. 39 0. 074 

Co 0. 0773 0. 69 0. 011 

P — — 

Insol. 0. 0070 0. 06 



11.1340 99.33 

Fe 
Mol. ratio XT . , V, =19.84 

Ni + Co 

Weight of original sample, 11.208 gm. 
Weight of recovered material, 11.134 gm. 
Unaccounted for, 0.074 gm. (0.66 percent). 

All the unaccountable portion in table 12 should not be assigned to 
an error in the iron determination, although some of it may belong 
there. After all the soluble material had dissolved, the insoluble 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 377 

residue had such a low density and was so finely divided that the 
solution could not be decanted without carrying off some of the 
residue. Unfortunately, this solution was decanted onto a paper 
filter and when an effort was made to recover the residue enough was 
embedded in the filter to account for most of the loss. 

Another sample of the matrix was selected at some distance from a 
schreibersite body to confirm the composition of the matrix and to 
get enough rhabdite to determine its nickel and cobalt content. 

The portion selected, weighing 28.603 grams, was dissolved in 1 part 
HC1 and 4 parts H 2 in a flask. The vapors were condensed and 
returned to the solution to prevent the acid from concentrating. 
The insoluble residue weighed 0.2425 gram and consisted of magnetic 
particles that had the identical form and color of the rhabdite we had 
recovered from other meteorites. Thus, the matrix of the Tombigbee 
iron contains about 1 percent of rhabdite. 

This residue was dissolved in HN0 3 and HCi so that the nickel and 
cobalt determinations could be made. The matrix of this iron, the 
portion that dissolved in the 1-4 HCI, was partially analyzed. Both 
analyses are given in table 13. 

Table 13. — Partial analyses of the kamacite and rhabdite in groundmass in the 

Tombigee meteorite 





Kamacite 


Rhabdite 


Fe 


»95. 09 


— 


Ni 


4.28 


19.53 


Co 


0.63 


0. 58 


P 


None 


b 


Cu 


— 


trace 


Insol. 


— 


0.83 



* By difference. 

b Qualitatively confirmed but not determined. 

The point we desire to prove is that the kamacite adjacent to the 
schreibersite is essentially different from the matrix that is remote 
from these large phosphide bodies. The data for the preceding tables 
that support this contention are summarized in table 14. 

Table 14. — Comparison of analyses of the Tombigbee meteorite 





Composite 
analysis 


Kamacite in 


groundmass 


Swathing 
kamacite 




(Table 11) 


(Table 12) 


(Table 13) 


(Table 10) 


Fe 


91.86 


94. 19 


95.09 


95.64 


Ni 


5. 10 


4.39 


4.28 


3.78 


Co 


0.64 


0.69 


0.63 


0.58 


P 


2.64 


— 


— 


— 



378 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



•8 


CO 


cc 


00 




OJ 


iC 


lO 


1 


? 

w 


d 


os 


© 


i 


>, 


tC 


-H 






00 










Q 










Oj 










> ~- 


O 


oo 


<m 


LO 


8 


l> 


lO 


CO 


T* 




_<' 


oi 


d 


irf 


t^ 









-H 00 M 00 © 

° N O »fl lO 
3 

5 i-i <N O lO 






-2 — 



2? "** 
<3 O 



O Tfl 

CO CO 



OS 



N N O 
N O CO 



lO TjH 

OS 



■g OS 00 CO 

I ON© 

e id tjh d 

3 



OS 



OS os OS 

rH CO CO 



^ ^ o 

OS 



lO CO 
OS 



o S 5 >-N 

<3 -5 .•« rf 00 00 

"S3 -^ S CO N iO 

5 § si *0 CO O 

"» 5 s 5 OS 



CO N CD 
00 CO CO 



0) ;h O 
P* £ O PL, 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 379 

A comparison of the nickel content of the swathing kamacite with 
that of the kamacitic groundmass shows that the kamacite adjacent 
to the schreibersite contains less nickel. We believe this to be the 
first time that this has been shown. In table 15 the nickel content of 
the schreibersite is shown to be between 12.03 and 12.58 percent 
and that of the rhabdites 19.53 percent. Thus, the rhabdite contains 
about 7 percent more nickel than the schreibersite. 

All available previous analyses of the Tombigbee meteorite are 
given in table 15. 

The Ni content of the kamacite in the matrix of this iron ranges 
between 3.62 and 4.39. The analyses of schreibersite agree fairly 
well. Brezina and Cohen (1904) noted that the Tombigbee schreib- 
ersite was unusually low in Ni and asked if the rhabdite in this iron 
contained more Ni than the schreibersite. The new analysis con- 
firms the low Ni content of the schreibersite, and the partial analysis 
of the rhabdite shows that the smaller phosphide bodies contain 
much more Ni than the schreibersite. 

Farrington (1915a) listed 24 schreibersite analyses. The one with 
the lowest Ni, 10.72 percent, came from the Zacatecas meteorite 
(Cohen 1897a, p. 49). Only five of those analyses had less than 15 
percent Ni. In the Tombigbee iron the Ni is near the average of the 
hexahedrites, the schreibersite contains slightly more than twice as 
much Ni as the matrix, and the rhabdite has between four and five 
times as much as the matrix. It will be interesting to see if similar 
differences exist in other meteorites of this type. 

A Theory for the Origin of Swathing Kamacite 

The partition constant governing the distribution of Ni between 
kamacite and schreibersite is unknown. We suspect that the phos- 
phide molecule which existed while the matrix was at higher tem- 
peratures was essentially an iron phosphide. At temperatures just 
below those at which the Ni-Fe alloy solidified, the phosphide probably 
was a liquid and was deficient in Ni. 

At temperatures above 1000° C. the Ni-Fe matrix is a solid and 
in the gamma phase, but the phosphide is still a liquid. At this 
temperature the nickel entering the phosphide and replacing iron is 
assimilated by the phosphide. The replaced iron solidifies because 
the temperature is below its melting point. These particles of 
rejected iron migrate to the edge of the phosphide. 

The above process happens simultaneously with the formation of 
the Ni-impoverished zone surrounding the phosphide inclusion. The 
diffusion rate of iron into the matrix must be slower than the rate at 
which nickel enters the phosphide; otherwise these swathing zones 



380 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

would not exist. Thus, we suspect the following theory outlines the 
origin for the swathing kamacite around schreibersite inclusions. 

The swathing zone represents a reaction zone. Possibly the liquid 
phosphide that segregated at a high temperature was essentially 
Fe 3 P, and the Ni-Fe matrix that enclosed it was in the gamma phase. 
As Ni migrates from the matrix into the phosphide, Fe is replaced. 
The rejected Fe which migrated to the edge of the phosphide together 
with the enclosing Ni-impoverished zone effectively sealed off the 
available source of Ni. Thus, the swathing kamacite may represent 
two processes, the rejection of the iron from the phosphide and the 
formation of a zone of Ni-impoverished iron in the matrix that en- 
closed the schreibersite. 

Perry (1944) reports eutectic structures in schreibersite bodies in 
the Chesterville, Cincinnati, and Rio Loa meteorites. He explains 
the structures by saying that the schreibersite bodies were remelted 
and that the liquid phosphide absorbed kamacite from the ground- 
mass. Then, as the liquid cooled, the absorbed Fe, in the excess of 
the Fe-Fe 3 P eutectic ratio, was rejected in the form of droplike 
particles in the interior and in a border around the periphery. 

Whatever process produced these droplike kamacite particles that 
occur within the phosphide inclusions, we suspect their presence 
indicates that the temperature was lowered too rapidly for the drops 
to migrate the short distance to the periphery of these bodies. This 
idea is supported by the way these features occur in the Cincinnati 
and the Rio Loa irons, although in those meteorites the structures 
were found in the zone of alteration. 

In all probability the swathing kamacite is made during the original 
cooling. The metal in the zone containing both Ni-impoverished 
iron and the iron rejected from the schreibersite is in the gamma 
phase and, being Ni-poor, transforms to kamacite at higher tempera- 
tures than those at which the matrix will transform. The swathing 
zones around sizable schreibersite bodies are wider than the kamacite 
lamellae within the Widmanstatten structures because the displaced 
iron from the phosphide accumulated against the Ni-impoverished 
iron. 

There is no difference in the appearance of the matrix in the Tom- 
bigbee iron and the swathing kamacite because both are kamacitic 
iron. However, the matrix and the zone adjacent to the phosphide 
inclusions have different hardnesses (table 16). We have also observed 
differences in the chemical composition of swathing zone around 
schreibersite and the matrix in other meteorites. 

At the time the Ni-Fe alloy solidified, most of the phosphide had 
been rejected as large liquid blobs. Some phosphide, however, dis- 
solved in the matrix and that portion became enriched in nickel. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 381 

Phosphide is more soluble in taenite than in kamacite. Both the 
taenite and rhabdite, which separate as the temperatures are lowered, 
contain increased percentages of nickel. The information needed to 
follow the changes in composition that occur in the phosphide that 
separates from the matrix as cooling takes place is not available. 

Hardness Measurements on Swathing Kamacite 

A series of Knoop hardness tests were made on the Tombigbee 
meteorite at the Department of Metallurgy, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, through arrangements made by Prof. H. H. Uhlig. 
These values, given in table 16, show a progresive increase in hardness 
as the distance from the phosphide increases. The Knoop hardness 

Table 16. — Knoop hardness numbers on swathing zone around schreibersite, load 
100 grams, in Tombigbee meteorite 



Test 


Knoop 1 


1 


211.6 


2 


253.0 


3 


246.3 


4 


253.0 


5 


233.9 


6 


246.3 


7 


253.0 


8 


274.5 



values confirm the analytical results by showing that there is a differ- 
ence in the composition of the metal in the swathing zone around 
schreibersite bodies and in the matrix. 

The lowest value reported was 211.6, and the highest 274.4. The 
higher value we suspect is essentially that of the matrix. Dalton 
(1950) reported that the hardness of hexahedrites is consistent at 
about 180 on the Knoop scale and that the hardness of kamacite in 
octahedrites is approximately 260. 

Hexahedrites Containing an Abundance of Schreibersite 

The La Primitiva, Chile, iron (Cohen, 1897b, p. 123) is rich in 
schreibersite and was classified as an altered hexahedrite. We assume 
that Cohen meant the meteorite had a structure modified by reheating 
rather than weathering or chemical alteration. Prior (1914), in a 
description of the Angela, Chile, meteorite, said this iron "is honey- 
combed by schreibersite, which on one piece is estimated to amount to 
nearly a quarter of the mass." La Primitiva and Angela are now 
regarded as the same meteorite. 

The kamacite in the Soper, Oklahoma, iron (Henderson and Perry, 
1948b) is unusually low in nickel. Here the numerous phosphide in- 
clusions occur as small masses between kamacite grains. Apparently, 



382 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

this iron solidified before the phosphide could coalesce. With the 
phosphide scattered as small bodies, the contact between the schreiber- 
site and kamacite is greater than if the schreibersite is segregated into 
one large body. Hence, a favorable opportunity existed for the phos- 
phide bodies in the Soper to acquire more nickel than did the schreiber- 
site in the Tombigbee iron. The Soper schreibersite contains 15.61 
percent Ni, while the large inclusions in the Tombigbee contain only 
between 12.02 and 12.58 percent. 

Table 17. — Chemical corn-position of kamacite in the Soper, Angela, and 
La Primitiva meteorites 





Soper 


Angela 


La Primitiva 


Fe 


93.35 


95.03 


94.72 


Ni 


4. 11 


4.52 


4.72 


Co 


0.51 


0.65 


0.71 


P 


— 


trace 


0. 18 



Since the above analyses of the groundmass of the Soper and Angela 
meteorites are free from phosphorus and were made on material con- 
taining no schreibersite, all the nickel belongs to the kamacite. The 
La Primitiva analysis shows 0.18 percent P, or about 1.2 percent 
schreibersite. If this mineral contains the same percentage of nickel 
as the Soper schreibersite, and if the La Primitiva analysis was cor- 
rected for that amount of schreibersite, then the nickel content of the 
kamacitic groundmass in La Primitiva is approximately the same as 
that found in Angela. 

Summary 

Analyses of the matrix, the metal adjacent to the large schreibersite 
bodies, the large schreibersite, and the rhabdite needles of the Tom- 
bigbee meteorite are given. The distribution of Ni in the matrix is 
uniform, but the zone of swathing kamacite immediately enclosing 
the large schreibersite contains less Ni than the matrix. The evidence 
indicates that large schreibersite bodies became enriched in Ni. The 
diffusion of Ni from the matrix into the swathing kamacite zone or the 
diffusion of the rejected iron from the phosphide into the matrix was 
not fast enough to equalize the abundance of Ni in the matrix and the 
swathing kamacite. The hardness measurements show a difference 
between the matrix and the swathing kamacite. Thus, the matrix of 
those hexahedrites which have many large phosphide bodies enclosed 
within them may contain less nickel than the average hexahedrite. A 
few analyses of other meteorites of this type are given. 



SEVEN S1DERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 383 

The Soroti, Uganda, Africa, Meteorite 

Plates 18,19 
Fall a ad Description 

The Soroti meteorite fell about 12 miles northeast of Soroti, Uganda, 
Africa (lat. 1°41' N., long. 33°38' E.) at 1.10 (probably p. m.) on 
Sept. 17, 1945. It was named after the native village of Soroti by 
R. O. Roberts (1947), who first described it and to whom we are 
indebted for both the historical records and the samples we studied. 

The District Commissioner at Teso, in a report dated Sept. 22, 
1945, stated: 

... at almost exactly 10 minutes past one on Monday 17th of September, a low- 
rumble, as of thunder, but without claps, was heard. It was, indeed, so similar 
to thunder that people indoors took little notice for half a minute. It rose 
slightly in volume and its persistence soon drew everyone to look skyward. Many 
thousands of feet high (wild guess is 20,000) a vapor trail could be seen. This 
trail extended across the sky which was clear as it could be. After about a 
minute the sound abruptly stopped. The trail disintegrated after about 5 minutes. 
Everybody had a different idea as to the direction, I personally thought north- 
south, another European thought south-north, and all points of the compass 
were mentioned. 

A woman from Melok village, about 3 miles southwest of Katine Etem (Gom- 
bolola) Headquarters said, "I was sitting in my hut with my three children 
yesterday morning. I heard something like thunder. So I went out of my hut 
and went to a tree nearby with my oldest child. I told him to kneel down and 
pray to God. We had just knelt down, when a thing came from the sky and 
went into the ground near the tree. I and my child were blinded by smoke for 
a little while. When we could see again, I went to the place where the thing had 
fallen." 

There w r as found a small crater a foot deep and only 3 feet from the spot where 
they had been praying. Other pieces of metal were found scattered around 
within a radius of a mile or more. Some are believed to have fallen in Omunyal 
Sw r amp. 

Pieces brought to the District Office evoked great interest and some 500 people 
had seen it within an hour of the arrival in Soroti. Many hundreds more have 
come to see them since. 

Summarizing, it may be stated that the phenomenon was observed in Eastern 
Buganda, at Aloi, 18 miles to the East of Lira in Lango District, at Budaka, 
17 miles west-south of Mbale, in Mbale District, and at Soroti and Tosoma, in 
Teso District, that is, within an area of at least 4,200 sq. miles. Fragments of 
the meteorite are known to have fallen only in Teso, particularly near Soroti. 

The velocity of the Soroti meteorite at the time the native woman 
heard the noise may have been greater than the speed of sound, 
although the terminal velocity of the piece which struck near her was 
not high. Of course it is impossible to prove that the sounds first 
heard originated when those pieces were sheared off, for probably 



384 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

many pieces were broken off the meteorite while it was decelerating. 
Most of these pieces either were essentially consumed in the air or 
fell unnoticed and have not as yet been found. 

Thus, possibly the noise that the woman heard originated back 
along the path of the meteorite. Sound waves travel at greater 
speeds than those at which the fragments would fall, so that the 
noise could be heard several seconds before any of the pieces landed. 
The sounds that were heard may have been produced when the 
meteorite encountered or passed through the sound barrier. The 
noises which alerted the native mother possibly were made after the 
pieces were broken off. 

We were given the two small specimens for restudy and a picture 
of all four specimens. The approximate weights of the four Soroti 
specimens are 1,000, 700, 190, and 170 grams. 

The specimens consist of nickel-iron and troilite and have rough 
surfaces similar to that of a pallasite. Numerous bits of metal pro- 
trude from the surface of the specimen, some of them partly coated 
with a black fusion crust in which delicate flight markings are pre- 
served. The troilite is covered with a thicker crust of fusion products 
than the Ni-Fe alloy, probably because troilite melts at a lower 
temperature. 

The cross section through the two Soroti specimens (pi. 18, top) 
shows that the distribution of the metallic veins determined the shape 
of the meteorite. The troilite is held by the Ni-Fe alloy in the same 
way that olivine is held in the pallasites. 

Apparently the troilite on the surface receded by ablation during 
the flight slightly faster than did the metallic phase and for reasons 
given on page 392. The troilite exposed on the surface is badly 
fractured, indicating that mechanical action probably had as much to 
do with the loss of troilite as thermal action. 

The black crust covering many of the troilite areas on this meteorite 
may be essentially the fusion product of troilite, although possibly 
some material from the Ni-Fe alloy contaminates it. In color and 
texture, the fusion crust on the troilite is indistinguishable from the 
crust on the Ni-Fe alloy, but there is no reason to suppose that it 
should be otherwise. 

The unique character of this meteorite, we believe, makes it worthy 
of a class name. The name sorotiite is proposed for meteorites con- 
sisting of Ni-Fe and troilite which have structures similar to those of 
the pallasites. 

Normally one studies the polished surface of a slice through a 
meteorite and then selects a typical area from that slice for the 
chemical analysis. As it did not seem desirable to slice either of these 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 385 

two small specimens and consume the material in the chemical analy- 
sis, we decided to cut them in half with a hacksaw and use the cuttings 
in the analysis. 

A few of the pieces of metal that fell off during the cutting had 
some troilite attached to them. These were picked out, and with 
the use of a steel needle we then removed much of the troilite. These 
pieces were next hammered on a steel block in an attempt to break 
off more troilite, and although most of the remaining troilite was 
removed, possibly some of it was beaten into the iron. After the 
battered pieces of metal were brushed to remove the loosely attached 
troilite, they were added to the magnetic portion of the saw cuttings. 
Dust from the hacksaw blade may possibly have contaminated the 
sample, and some troilite may have been lost as a fine powder, but 
we estimate that these disadvantages were more than offset by the 
advantages of having cross sections from two pieces of this iron 
available for study and of preserving more material. 

The magnetic material from the saw cuttings, consisting of Ni-Fe 
alloy and schreibersite, was placed in a flask and covered with 1 part 
of HC1 and 3 parts of H 2 0. The gas given off was passed through 
acidified lead acetate solution. The portion that dissolved in hydro- 
chloric acid was decanted off for analysis. The magnetic residue, 
later identified as schreibersite, made up 0.98 percent of the sample. 
The lead sulfide that formed in the lead acetate solution was con- 
verted to lead sulfate and calculated as sulfur. 

The results given in table 18 closely approximate the composition 
of the Ni-Fe phase and the troilite. Roberts (1947) gives Fe as 91.13 
and Ni as 8.87. As our sample was of necessity prepared in a manner 
not entirely satisfactory, we prefer to consider the results as a partial 
analysis. 



r 


rABi 


iE 18. — Partial analysis of the Soroti meteorite 










Ni-Fe phase 

including 
schreibersite 








Ni-Fe phase 


Troilite 


Schreibersite 


Fe 




83. 51 


84. 21 


62.80 


— 


Ni 




12.67 


12.80 


— 


13.75 


Co 




0.62 


0.62 


— 


n. d. 


P 




0.00 


0. 15 


— 


15.65 


FeJ 


{ 


0.81 


0.81 


35. 84 


— 


•1.41 


1.41 


— 


— 


Schreibersite 




0.98 


— 


— 


— 


Cr 




— 


— 


b 0. 062 


— 


Insol. 




— 


— 


0.53 


— 



* Calculated from sulfur. 

b Determined on separate sample. 



386 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The percentages of Fe, Ni, and Co in the metallic phase of the 
Soroti iron agree with the composition of the meteorites in table 19. 
Metallographically the Alt Bela (Smycka, 1899) and the Illinois 
Gulch (Cohen, 1900) irons are different. The Widmanstatten struc- 
tures of the Carlton (Howell, 1890), Edmonton (Henderson and 
Perry, 1947), and Soroti meteorites are so similar that it would be 
difficult to distinguish between them if only the Ni-Fe phases were 
compared. 

Table 19. — Iron, nickel, and cobalt content of four meteorites that are similar 

chemically to the Soroti. 

Illinois 
Soroti Edmonton * Carlton * Alt Bela 2 Gulch 2 

Fe 84. 21 86. 61 86. 54 85. 34 86. 77 

Ni 12. 80 12. 57 12. 77 12. 89 12. 67 

Co 0. 62 0. 79 0. 63 0. 41 0. 81 

1 Also similar metallurgical^ to Soroti. 

2 Different metallurgically from Soroti. 

Koberts (1947) reported the density for the largest Soroti specimen 
to be 5.86. The density of a meteorite like the Soroti would vary 
depending upon the proportion of Ni-Fe to troilite. The measured 
densities of the four halves of our two specimens were 5.98, 6.11, 6.16, 
and 6.24. An average of all the reported densities on this meteorite 
is 6.07, but since there was a little oxide on each specimen, the true 
density would be slightly higher than 6.07. Henderson and Perry 
(1954) demonstrated that the densities of hexahedrites, coarsest 
octahedrites, and nickel-poor ataxites can be calculated very closely 
from the chemical analyses. It is not known, however, whether the 
density of a meteorite containing as much plessite as the Soroti can 
be accurately calculated. The density of the magnetic portion was 
found to be 7.864 by substituting the needed data in the following 
formula, but a density so determined may be low because the magnetic 
portion contained 2.22 percent of troilite. 

Where S = schreibersite, T= troilite, and d = density: 

Density of magnetic portion^ % Qf Fe % Qf y . g° of Q g % g g 

d of Fe + d of Ni + d of Co" 1 " dofT + dofS 

The analysis of the Ni-Fe portion probably should be corrected for 
the 2.22 percent FeS before the density is calculated, because there 
is not that much troilite in the metallic portion of this meteorite. 
Table 21 gives the analysis of the magnetic portion of the Soroti 
meteorite before and after it was corrected for troilite. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON- AND PERRY 387 

Table 20. — Recalculation of the partial analysis (table 8) of the Soroti meteorite 

Ni-Fe phase Composition of Percentage of 

including schreibersite components in 

schreibersite deducted Ni-Fe analysis 

Fe 84. 21 0. 71 83. 50 

Ni 12. 80 0. 137 12. 67 

Co 0. 62 0. 01 0. 61 

P 0. 15 0. 15 — 

FeS 2. 22 — 2. 22 

Schreibersite — — 0. 99 

Table 21. — Analysis of the magnetic part of the Soroti iron before and after deducting 
the troilite; also, the calculation of the density of the metallic phase 





Analysis 

Percentage of after deduct- 

components ing FeS, 

in Ni-Fe calculated 

analysis to 100% 


Density of 
constituents 


Quotient 


Fe 


83. 50 


85. 41 


7. 86 = 


10. 866 


Ni 


12.67 


12. 96 


8. 90 = 


1.456 


Co 


0.61 


0.62 


8. 90 = 


0.069 


Schreibersite 


0.99 


1.01 


7. 00 = 


0. 144 


Troilite 


2. 22 






— 




12. 535 


Densitv r 


nrrecteH for trt 


«m*= 10 ° =7 


977 





__„., _„ v »™ TO 12535 ..... 

Roberts (1947) calculated the density for the metallic phase at 7.95, 
but the formula he used is not entirely reliable. 

The relative proportions of N-Fe and troilite in the Soroti can be 
obtained by the following formula, where 

x= weight percentage of troilite 
100— x = weight percentage of Ni-Fe 
6.07= average density of meteorite 
7.977 = calculated density of Ni-Fe 
4. 77 = density of troilite 



we have 



x 100-x = 100 

4.77" 1 " 7.977 ~6.07 



By the above calculation, the troilite makes up 46.727 percent and 
Ni-Fe 53.274 percent by weight of this meteorite. To make the 
percentage more useful to the reader who examines plate 18 (top), the 
weight percentage of troilite has been recalculated to volume percent- 
age as follows: 



433890—58- 



388 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Weight percentage of troilite T , . ,. _ t „, 

Density of troilite = Volume proportion of troilite (1) 

Weight percentage of Ni-Fe xr . ,. __. _ 

Density of Ni . Fe = Volume proportion of Ni-Fe (2) 

Substituting in equation (1) we have 

^=9.796, 

and substituting in equation (2) we have 

53.274 



7.977 



6,678. 



Thus, the total volume proportion of troilite and Ni-Fe is 16.474. 
Reducing to volume percentage of troilite we have 



79 %X 100=59.46. 



16.474' 
And reducing to volume percentage of nickel-iron we have 

6.678 



16.474 



X 100 = 40.45 



Summarizing, the Soroti meteorite has 46.727 percent of troilite 
and 53.274 percent of nickel-iron by weight; and it has 59.46 percent 
of troilite and 40.54 percent of Ni-Fe by volume. 

Metallography 

The unique feature of this iron is the ratio between the troilite and 
the Ni-Fe, although neither phase by itself is unusual. Of all the 
many meteorites that have been studied, none resembles this iron. 
It is therefore unlikely that numerous examples of this type will be 
found, but it does not necessarily follow that such meteorites could not 
be relatively abundant among those that enter our atmosphere. 

The kamacite bands in the Soroti, measured in the direction of the 
cut, have a width of less than 1 millimeter. Schreibersite, which so 
commonly occurs between the troilite and the metal in other irons, 
in this case is essentially within the Ni-Fe alloy. The zone of swathing 
kamacite that encloses the entire Ni-Fe portion is nearly twice as 
thick as the average kamacite lamella in this meteorite. Since 
nickel does not replace iron in troilite, as it does in schreibersite, the 
additional widths of swathing kamacite must have a different explana- 
tion from that given for the swathing kamacite around the schreiber- 
site in the Tombigbee iron (p. 379). Possibly troilite at higher 
temperatures had some excess iron which, as cooling took place, was 
rejected and the swathing kamacite was produced. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 389 

Troilite is both immiscible in molten Ni-Fe and of lower density 
than Ni-Fe. Hence, if FeS and Ni-Fe were slowly cooled from a melt, 
the FeS, or troilite, should completely segregate from the Ni-Fe 
phase and exist as a liquid above the solidified Ni-Fe phase. The 
abundance of plessite and the narrow kamacitic lamellae are inter- 
preted to indicate a rather rapid cooling or perhaps a sudden relief of 
pressure. 

Although the mechanism of producing a meteorite containing about 
50 percent troilite dispersed in a network of Ni-Fe alloy is not under- 
stood, the process should be no more complicated than that which 
produces a pallasite. If an acquiescent body of molten material 
with the composition of a pallasite slowly cooled, olivine would 
solidify before the Ni-Fe. As the density of olivine is lower than 
that of Ni-Fe, it should completely separate itself from the metal if 
the cooling takes place slowly in an appreciable field of gravity. 
Due to surface cohesion, the olivine might carry up some metal, but 
surely not enough to account for the Ni-Fe in pallasites. 

Apparently such a simple condition did not exist in the case of the 
Soroti. Thus, it is pertinent to speculate about the conditions that 
did exist and those which seem to be consistent with the structures 
and mineral assemblages found in pallasites and in meteorites like the 
Soroti. Pallasites probably cooled from a magna, with the olivine 
solidifying first. Regardless of its lower density, the olivine in 
pallasites is mixed with Ni-Fe alloy, indicating either that the body in 
which the pallasites formed was small or that there were no appreciable 
gravitational forces. Pallasites or meteorites like the Soroti iron 
could, however, be made in a large body if the process took place near 
the center, because there the gravitional forces would be neglibile. 

Troilite in the Soroti meteorite is analogous to the olivine in pal- 
lasties, and for this reason the comparison of the occurrence of olivine 
and troilite in meteorities should be pursued further. Olivine is much 
more abundant than troilite in stony meteorites, but less so in iron 
meteorites. Occasionally olivine occurs in an iron meteorite which is 
not a pallasite, but such an iron could originate adjacent to a pallasitic 
aggregrate. 

Abundance of Troilite in Meteorites 

Troilite is relatively abundant in meteorites. According to Daly 
(1943), the chondrites contain about 5 percent FeS and the achondrites 
about 1.5 percent. According to these figures troilite is 4 times more 
abundant in chrondrites and 12 times more abundant in achondrites 
than it is in metallic meteorites. However, the sections of meteorites 
in museum collections and the pictures of sections in published descrip- 
tions do not support Daly's figures. 



390 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



A preliminary investigation of the abundance of troilite in a few 
irons was made. If there were more troilite than the above data 
indicate, it would support our contention that material such as that 
occurring in the Soroti iron could exist in quantities in the body from 
whence meterorites came. 

Daly probably obtained his figures for sulfur from the chemical 
analysis, but our experience indicates that this is the wrong place to 
get such information. An author describing an iron meteorite is 
generally more interested in the metallic matrix than in an inclusion 
like troilite. Thus, the analyses of most of the irons are not suited for 
the calculation of sulfur because the troilite areas were not included 
in the portion selected for study. 

To investigate this, the sulfur in a number of irons was calculated. 
The sulfur content of four coarse octahedrites (table 22) was estab- 
lished by measuring the width across a section and then measuring the 
total distance occupied by troilite along that line. Similar parallel 
traverses were made at one-eighth inch intervals. 

Table 22. — Comparison of sulfur percentages determined chemically by analyses of 
coarse octahedrites with sulfur percentages determined statistically by measuring 
sections from the same meteorites 

(The sulfur chemically determined is a weight percentage and is not equivalent to sulfur reported in the 
last column, which was obtained after estimating the percentage of troilite in the total area of a slice.) 



Meteor 


Chemical determination 


Statistical determina- 
tion 




Reference 


% Sulfur 


% Troilite 
in section 


% Sulfur 
in section 




Hodge-Smith, 1937 


1.27 

none 

trace 

0.004 

0.005 

0.01 

0.13 

0.03 

0.02 

None 


4.76 


1.73 




Henderson, 1951 






Noissan, 1904 


5.95 


2.17 




Barringer, 1905 






Merrill & Tassin, 1907 








Merrill, 1913 








Buddhue, 1950 






Odessa, Tex 


Merrill, 1922. 


3.43 


1.15 




Beck & La Paz, 1951 




Osseo, Canada 


Marble, 1938 


3.42 
2.72 


1.25 


Wichita County, Tex. 




1.00 











When more than one section of a specimen was measured, a 
weighted average was calculated for the percentage of troilite. We 
do not claim that the coarse octahedrites selected are representative 
for that group. Only a small number of sections have been measured 
through the Canyon Diablo and the Odessa meteorites, whereas 
there are tons of the Canyon Diablo and possibty many hundreds of 
pounds of the Odessa iron. Also the areas that were measured on 
both were too small to represent either meteorite. Yet the per- 
centages so obtained appear to be more reliable than the values 
Daly reported after calculating the analysis of a sample weighing 
but a few grams. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 391 

The measurements reported in table 22 were made on the same 
meteorite that the chemist analyzed but not on the same sample. 

Troilite (stoichiometric FeS) with NiAs crystal structure is ex- 
clusively a meteoritic mineral, with the one exception of the Del 
Norte, Calif., occurrence. According to Eakle (1922), the California 
troilite occurs in a serpentine in an old copper mine. Apparently 
no specimens were found with the troilite in the matrix. We are not 
challenging the terrestrial origin of the California troilite, but it is 
important to keep its uniqueness in mind. If the theory proposed 
in the following pages for the disintegration of a meteorite made of 
about 50 percent troilite and 50 percent Ni-Fe is correct, possibly 
meteoritic troilite is scattered over the earth; however, the chances 
of finding such specimens would be very slim indeed. 

Meteorites Like the Soroti Are Likely To Be Consumed in Flight 

All meteorites are fragments of some large cosmic body. It would 
be impossible for a meteorite such as the Soroti to be broken from its 
parent mass without acquiring a rough and hackly surface, with 
projecting veins of metal extending slightly beyond the troilite. Also, 
the troilite occurring all over the surface and perhaps that occurring 
slightly below the surface would be fractured, as troilite is brittle 
at normal temperatures. In the Soroti, such troilite probably was 
brittle at the temperature existing when the original body broke up. 
(Gunard Kullerud, of the Geophysical Laboratory, reports in personal 
communications that FeS made at 550° C. appeared to be more brittle 
than FeS made at 400° C.) 

Most meteorites seen in collections have rather evenly rounded 
surfaces, but this does not mean that they entered our atmosphere 
with a smooth surface. Possibly a prominent external irregularity 
on a mass entering the atmosphere is removed during the interval 
the meteorite undergoes its maximum deceleration. After the mete- 
orites with homogeneous textures become rounded, their dimensions 
probably decrease only slightly during the remainder of their flight. 

A surface made up of either troilite or olivine held in a network of 
metal will not become smooth because of stresses and strains. The 
mechanical forces applied to such a surface supplements the loss of 
material by normal thermal ablation ; hence the vapor trails from such 
meteorites should be more pronounced and enduring than those from 
homogeneous meteorites. 

The most violent reactions occur on the forward face of a falling 
meteorite. Enough energy was released in the collision of the air 
molecules with the Soroti meteorite to vaporize both the Ni-Fe alloy 
and the troilite. Many irons show that heat-softened metal flowed 
over their surfaces. Troilite, which has a lower melting point than 



392 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

the Ni-Fe alloy and is brittle, was either burned away or mechanically 
lost at a faster rate than the Ni-Fe alloy. Thus an aggregrate of 
minerals like the Soroti, in which small veins of metal protrude from 
the surface, loses more material from its surface than the average 
meteorite. Furthermore, the reduction possibly continues through 
more of the flight than in the case of a homogenous meteorite. 

After the velocity of the Soroti meteorite was decelerated to a point 
where the temperature on its front face was not high enough to heat 
the sides, possibly physical action continued to disintegrate the 
brittle troilite. A spine of Ni-Fe alloy extending beyond the surface 
might, by means of the atmospheric drag, be bent backward. If this 
happened, the spine of Ni-Fe would fracture the sulfide against which 
it is pressed, with a simultaneous breaking of the bond between the 
metal and the troilite on the forward side of the metallic spine. 

Such a falling meteorite may undergo major changes in its form 
during flight, and, if so, it probably would not hold a fixed position. 
If such a body tumbles during its high-velocity flight, fractures would 
be produced and widened between the metal and the troilite over all 
surfaces. Such violent action may shatter more of the troilite and 
cause the loose pieces to fall out. As the troilite is lost, more rough 
metal surfaces would become exposed, and these, in turn, would be 
subjected to the shearing-off process. 

Thus, the stresses and strains applied to these meteorites with 
hackly surfaces, such as those of the Soroti type and the pallasites, 
cause material to be lost as long as the mass is moving with a velocity 
high enough to cause bending of the metallic veins. Troilite, because 
of its low melting point, should react to the temperatures on the front 
of such a meteorite after the other minerals have ceased to react. In 
addition, the FeS and Ni-Fe portions have different thermal conduc- 
tivities and coefficients of expansion. Therefore, both thermal and 
mechanical stresses are operating simulteneously on the surface of such 
a meteorite during its fall. 

Summary 

This meteorite fell Sept. 17, 1945, at 1.10 (probably p. m.) near 
Soroti, Uganda, Africa. Four pieces were recovered, together weighing 
2,060 grams. The composition and metallography of the meteorite 
are given. The abundance of sulfur in iron meteorites is discussed, 
and a probable reason is given for the variety of such meteorites as the 
Soroti iron. This iron represents a new type of meteorite, analogous 
to the pallasites, with troilite taking the place of olivine. The name 
sorotiite is proposed for this type. 



SEVEN SIDE RITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 393 

The Keen Mountain, Virginia, Meteorite 

Plates 20-22 

A 14.75-pound iron meteorite, a new hexahedrite, was found in 1950 
by Fred Matney at approximately 30 feet from the crest of the south 
face of Keen Mountain, Buchannon County, Virginia, near the head 
waters of Pigeon Branch. The coordinates of the point of discovery 
are lat. 37°13' X., long. 82°0' W. 

Mr. Matney observed this dark object along a path he frequently 
used. It attracted his attention because it was noticeably different 
from the other rocks. When he discovered it was metallic he cut off a 
small piece and sent it to the U. S. Geological Survey, Washington, 
D. C. Dr. Charles Milton, of the Survey, suspected it was a meteorite 
and referred the correspondence to the U. S. National Museum. 

When Mr. Matney learned that his specimen was a meteorite and 
that the National Museum was interested in it, he offered to bring it 
to Washington on his next trip north or hold it until someone from the 
Museum would visit him. Gordon Davis of the Geophysical Labora- 
tory, Washington, D. C, was in the Museum shortly after this speci- 
men was identified, and, since he was going to Buchannon County, 
Virginia, he offered to negotiate with Mr. Matney for the meteorite. 

When Mr. Davis delivered the iron to Washington, Stuart H. Perry 
bought it and presented it to the National Museum. 

Description 

The Keen Mountain meteorite probably fell recently, although the 
fall was not witnessed. On its surface there are sizable patches of 
unaltered black fusion crust that contain flight markings. In a few 
places the silver color of the Ni-iron alloy can be seen through the 
fusion crust. However, on the surface of this iron, patches of loosely 
attached oxide as well as some small corrosion pits occur. The 
meteorite, according to Mr. Davis, was found at a place where it would 
be wet by ground seepage for about four months of each year. Proba- 
bly no iron meteorite would remain fresh in such an environment very 
long. Although it is impossible to establish the year it fell, we suspect 
its weathered surface could develop within five or ten years if it was 
wet as much of the time Mr. Davis estimates. Thus, the Keen 
Mountain iron possibly fell between 1940 and 1950. 

Apparently this fall attracted no local attention. Mr. Matney, who 
lived close to where the meteorite was found, did not associate it with 
any meteor display. Finding this iron near the top of the southern 
slope of Keen Mountain indicates that it did not come from a northerly 
direction. 



394 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The rough areas shown in plate 20 are due to surface alteration. 
Some of the corrosion pits range between 2 and 4 millimeters in width 
and are about the same in depth. When this meteorite was received 
the pits were nearly filled with loosely bonded brown iron oxide. The 
rust was removed from most of these places to probe the depth of the 
oxidization. 

The depression in the central part of plate 20 (top) is about 7 or 8 
millimeters deep. After 2 or 3 millimeters of oxide were removed 
from this cavity, troilite was exposed at the bottom. The bottom 
dimensions of this cavity are approximately 8 by 10 millimeters, while 
the diameter at the surface is nearly 15 millimeters. Apparently, 
during the flight of this iron through our atmosphere, this depression 
increased in diameter faster than it deepened. 

The surface of the iron surrounding this cavity is covered with 
fusion crust containing flight markings. However, some oxidization is 
superimposed on some parts of the fusion crust. Since the surface of 
the iron surrounding this depression has a black crust over it, this 
feature was made during the flight of the meteorite in our atmosphere. 
Some of the troilite in this depression was burned away during the 
flight, so the heat generated on the surface was not sustained long 
enough to remove all the sulfide. 

The delicate striae preserved in the glossy fusion crust and the shape 
of this meteorite indicate that the forward face during most of its flight 
through the atmosphere is the one shown in plate 20 (bottom) . 

A study of the surface features of unaltered meteorites is important 
but unfortunately this topic has not attracted much attention. Plate 
20 shows the surface features of the Keen Mountain iron and permits 
others to interpret these features. 

The Keen Mountain meteorite cannot be paired with any other 
meteorite. If other pieces fell they have not been found, and if such 
pieces are not discovered soon they will be weathered and it will be 
difficult to relate them to this iron. 

The other known hexahedrite from Virginia was found 100 miles 
east of Keen Mountain, at Indian Valley, Floyd County, in 1887. It 
was described by Kuntz and Weinschenk (1892) who said: 

In the spring of 1887 a mass of meteoritic iron was turned up by John Sho waiter 
while plowing his tobacco patch, situated in Indian Valley Township near Carroll 
and Pulaski lines and near the base of the south side of Floyd Mountain, 6 miles 
south east of Radford Furnace, Virginia .... This meteorite weighs 31 pounds 
.... The surface of the iron is very much corroded and is entirely covered with a 
limonite crust, only a little of the original crust is visible. On the exterior are deep 
depressions from 2 to 4 cm. in diameter. 

Although both hexahedrites were found on the southern face of 
mountains we believe this is only a coincidence. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 



395 



A slice 2.5 millimeters thick was cut for study (plate 21, bottom) 
aud three areas were selected for density determinations. We assumed 
that the area with the highest density was the purest kamacite, so this 
portion was analyzed. 

Table 23. — Density measurements of three areas from one slice of the Keen Mountain 
meteorite before and after the oxide was removed 



Density of piece as 
Area it was removed 

1 7. 766 

2 7. 908 

3 7. 859 



Density of piece after 
oxide was removed 

7.907 
7. 908 

7. 895 



Composition 

All but a small proportion of area 2 (table 23) dissolved in dilute 
HC1. The insoluble part was filtered off, weighed, and found to have 
the crystal habit of rhabdite. A partial analysis of this residue is 
shown in table 24. The rhabdite in this section of the Keen Mountain 
iron makes up 0.98 percent by weight. 

The nickel content of the rhabdite was determined. We obtained 
phosphorus by calculation, because rhabdite has a fixed phosphorus 
content. 



Table 24. — Analysis of the acid soluble part of the Keen Mountain meteorite, a 
partial analysis of the reside, and a calculated composite analysis of the meteorite 

(1) (2) (3) 





Portion that 

dissolved in 

HCl 


Partial analysis 
of rhabdite 


Composite 
analysis of 
the meteorite 


Fe 


■ 92. 92 


■ 46. 80 


93.38 


Ni 


5. 28, 5. 27 


37.7 


5.65 


Co 


0.72 


b 0. 50 


0.73 


P 


0.04 


b 15. 00 


0. 19 


S 


none 


none 


none 


c 


0.06 


— 


0.06 




100. 00 


100. 00 


100. 00 


Fe 

Molecular ratio „. . _ =16.46 







Ni + Co 

• By difference. 

b See discussion (p. 397) . 

The composition of the meteorite may be estimated by combining 
the analyses in columns 1 and 2 of table 24. The cobalt content in 
several rhabdite analyses averaged about 0.50 percent; therefore, 
that value was assumed to be present. The iron in each case was 



396 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

obtained by difference. Chemically the composite analysis is similar 
to other hexahedrites. 

Both the Cincinnati (pi. 10) and the Keen Mountain (pi. 22) 
meteorites have eutectic structures; also, some phosphorus in both 
irons dissolved in acid. Possibly the process that produced these 
eutectic structures had something to do with the making of the 
phosphides soluble. Certainly the phosphorus in both meteorites 
originally was either in a rhabdite or schreibersite body and was 
insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid. In the analyzed specimen of 
the Keen Mountain iron, 25 percent of all the phosphorus dissolved 
in dilute acid. 

All the insoluble residue, which consisted of rhabdite needles, was 
used in a nickel determination. Unfortunately, there was not enough 
material for a complete analysis. The rhabdite in the Keen Mountain 
iron contains about 37 percent nickel. 

The sulfur content was determined by estimating the volume of 
troilite in the slices shown in plate 21 (bottom). The volume per- 
centages (3.49 and 4.25, obtained by two different methods) were 
averaged, and 3.91 percent is reported for the troilite content of this 
meteorite. 

Since only a few slices have been removed from this meteorite, we 
do not know whether they represent an average for this iron. More 
sulfur than phosphorus is present in the slices thus far removed. 
However, there may be more phosphorus in the Keen Mountain iron 
than sulfur because the phosphides are uniformly dispersed through 
the metal while sulfur occurs as localized troilite. 

Hexahedrites as well as all iron meteorites probably contain much 
more sulfur and phosphorus than their analyses indicate. Possibly 
the error in the abundance of sulfur is greater than the error in the 
abundance of phosphorus. 

Metallography 

The zone of granulated metal immediately underlying the crust 
(pi. 21) usually is assumed to represent the penetration of heat into 
the meteorite during its flight. It is important to establish where the 
greatest thermal penetration occurs on oriented meteorites. Nininger 
(1940) said that it was unreasonable to expect the front face of 
oriented meteorites to show the deepest penetration of heat because 
the maximum ablation occurs on the front of a falling meteorite. 

Two sections cut through the Keen Mountain meteorite (pi. 21) 
show a zone of granulation around the edges of the cuts. The thick- 
ness of the zone is not uniform in both slices. The slice with the 
widest zone of granulated metal was removed where section AA' 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 397 

crosses the specimen (pi. 20, top). The place where the granulation 
is the widest corresponds to the lower edge of what we believe was 
the front face. Our opinion about the orientation of this specimen 
was based on the shape of the meteorite and on the flight markings. 

The Bruno, Canada, iron (Nininger, 1936) is another example of 
thermal alteration within a hexahedrite. Unfortunately, the illus- 
tration Nininger used did not show the magnification; therefore, it gives 
one the impression that the heated zone around this iron is unusually 
thick. On a recent visit to the American Meteorite Museum in 
Sedona, Ariz., we examined the iron and found that the pictures 
Nininger published in both 1936 and 1952 were enlarged nearly three 
times. Thus the thermal penetration into the Bruno iron is about 
the same as occurs in the Keen Mountain specimen. 

The Neumann lines in plate 21 (top) are curved, but this is not the 
first time such Neumann lines have been observed. Such lines in- 
dicate some deformation after the Neumann lines formed because 
originally they were straight. 

Some normal rhabdite occurs in the kamacite in this meteorite but 
two unusual habits for rhabdite are shown in plate 22 (top). Both 
rhabdites are made up of fragmented particles. One consists of a 
localized path of similarly orientated particles separated by a narrow 
channel of kamacite. The other phosphide inclusion is an elongated 
wavy-body, but in place of being a continuous unit it consists of a 
series of broken segments. 

When these phosphides formed they possibly were no different from 
the normal phosphides seen in most meteorites. We think these 
unusual habits indicate a thermal reaction: the matrix was heated 
high enough for the phosphide particles to react with the surrounding 
alloy. Since these peculiar phosphide inclusions occur close to the 
surface, they may have been made during the flight of the iron through 
the atmosphere. This and other evidence indicates that a study of the 
phosphide inclusions within meteorites may provide an excellent means 
of determining the thermal penetration into iron meteorites. 

The manner in which the rhabdite was obtained for the analysis 
precluded it from being anything but an average of the phosphide 
particles in this meteorite. The Keen Mountain rhabdite, which con- 
tains 37 percent of Ni, falls within the upper limits of the nickel values 
for rhabdite. Unfortunately, there are not enough analyses of this 
mineral to determine if this rhabdite is unusually rich in nickel. 

The rhabdite from the Annaheim, Canada, meteorite (Johnston and 
Ellsworth, 1921) had 41.36 percent Ni; and the rhabdite in the Cran- 
bourne, Australia, meteorite (Cohen, 1897c) had 42.16 percent Ni. 



398 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Both of these irons are coarse octahedrites, so there is more nickel 
available for the rhabdites to acquire than there is in the Keen 
Mountain meteorite. 

Plate 21 (top) shows a phosphide body consisting of a cluster of 
orientated particles separated by channels of kamacite. Some 
structural features, possibly Neumann lines, extend to the border of 
these phosphide bodies. Some acicular features existing in the 
kamacite may be structures of a rapidly cooled metal. Such cooling 
would arrest the solution of the phosphide in the kamacite. 

While a high temperature is sustained in the Ni-Fe alloy, nickel may 
migrate from the kamacite into the phosphide where it replaces iron 
that is returned to the kamacite. All Ni-Fe phase diagrams show that 
the solubility of nickel in kamacite decreases as the temperature is 
raised. The nickel content of schreibersite varies; thus, as the 
temperature is increased, nickel must enter this mineral from the 
kamacite because there is no other place for nickel to come from. 

The solubility of the phosphide in kamacite apparently increases as 
the temperature is raised. To understand the thermal changes 
observed in this iron, some knowledge of the temperature-time 
relationship for the structures in meteoritic iron is needed. 

There are rhabdites in the center of this piece that have a normal 
habit. Their presence indicates that reheating took place after the 
mass was broken from the body in which it was formed. Although 
reheating may have occurred prior to the flight through our atmos- 
phere, most likely these changes were made during the flight in our 
atmosphere. The thermal changes noted in the Keen Mountain iron 
are not as extensive as those described in the Social Circle, Georgia, 
meteorite (Henderson and Perry, 1951) or the Murnpeowie, Australia, 
meteorite (Spencer, 1935). 

Since the diffusion of Ni and Fe is slow, there is a possibility that 
the changes noted in the phosphide inclusions in the Keen Mountain 
meteorite took place outside our atmosphere. Although almost 
everyone will agree that the thermal changes noted around the out- 
side of the Keen Mountain iron were made during flight within the 
atmosphere, there is a possibility that the zone of metal in which 
these thermal changes are preserved is the remains of some more 
extensive thermal reaction that took place around the outside of the 
mass prior to its entry into our atmosphere. 

The increased solubility of the phosphide in the kamacite probably 
has more to do with the formation of the jagged boundaries of these 
phosphide bodies than the molecular exchanges of Ni and Fe. In 
the Cincinnati, Ohio, iron (pi. 10) we found eutectic structures similar 
to those in the Keen Mountain iron. We believe the eutectic struc- 
tures resulted from the phosphide particles reacting with the kamacite 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 399 

when the temperature was raised. The cooling which followed ap- 
parently was rapid, and since all the iron that separated as blebs did 
not get beyond the limits of the phosphide body, some small blebs 
of iron were trapped (pi. 22, bottom). 

All the various structures described in the Keen Mountain meteorite 
were observed in a single slice. However, the phosphide inclusions 
arranged parallel to the Neumann lines in the center of the slice are 
enclosed by a zone of granulated metal around the edge; this means 
that the reheating occurred after the Keen Mountain iron was small. 

There is no data on the rate heat will penetrate a hexahedrite, and 
we do not know the temperature at which the peculiar features noted 
in these phosphides will form. Moreover, the zone of granulated 
metal around the edges of the section indicates that no sizable pieces 
were broken off during the flight of this mass in our atmosphere. 

Apparently most students of meteorites think that iron meteorites 
fall as single bodies, but it is possible a large hexahedrite could separate 
along a cleavage and produce several smaller bodies. A fusion crust 
would form over the fragments and perhaps some thermal penetra- 
tion would start the moment the larger mass breaks into pieces. 
Stony meteorites break during their fall and produce individual 
pieces that are covered with fusion crust, so why can't irons oc- 
casionally behave in the same manner? 

Summary 

A new 14.75-pound hexahedrite from Buchanan County, Virginia, 
is described. Chemical analyses of the matrix and the rhabdite 
inclusions are given. Certain metallographic features resulting from 
the penetration of heat into the meteorite are described. 

Literature Cited 

Akulov, N. S., and Brukhatov, N. L. 

1941. Magnetic methods for the study of the structure of iron meteorites. 
Meteoritica, vol. 1, pp. 23-31, pis. 1-16. 
Anonymous 

1939. Great meteorite found by two Crocket men. Cubelet Press, vol. 4, 
No. 10, p. 7. (California and Hawaiian Sugar Refining Corp., 
Ltd.) 
Barringer, A. M. 

1905. Coon Mountain and its crater. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 
vol. 57, pp. 861-886. 
Beck, C, and La Paz, L. 

1951. The Odessa, Texas, siderite. Pop. Astron., vol. 59, No. 3, pp. 145-151. 
Beck, C, La Paz, L., and Goldsmith, L. H. 

1951. The Breece, ' New Mexico, meteoritic iron. Mineralogical Mag., 
vol. 29, pp. 531-537. 



400 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Berwerth, F. 

1903. Verzeichnis der Meteoriten im k. k. naturhistorischen Hof museum. 

Ann. k. k. naturh. Hofmus. Wien, vol. 18, pp. 1-90. 
Brezina, A., and Cohen, E. 

1904. tTber Meteoreisen von De Sotoville. Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 

Math-naturw. Klasse, Abt. 1, pp. 89-103. 
Buddhue, J. H. 

1950. New chemical analyses of Canyon Diablo, Arizona, and Arispe, 

Sonora, Mexico, siderites. Pop. Astron., vol. 58, pp. 190. 
Camp, J. M., and Francis, C. B. 

1951. Making, shaping and treating of steel. Especially pp. 571-574. 

(U. S. Steel Co.) 
Cohen, E. 

1897a. Meteoreisen-Studien, V. Ann. Naturhist. Hofmus., Wien. vol. 12, 

heft 1, pp. 42-62. 
1897b. Meteoreisen-Studien, VI. Ann. Naturhist. Hofmus., Wien, vol. 12, 

pp. 119-126. 
1897c. Ein neues Meteoreisen von Beaconfield, Colonie Victoria, Australien. 

Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, vol. 2, pp. 1035-1050. 
1898. tJber das Meteoreisen von Cincinnati, Vereinigte Staaten. Sitzber. 

Akad. Wiss. Berlin, vol. 32, pp. 428-430. 
1900. Meteoreisen-Studien, XI. Ann. k. k. naturhist. Hofmus., Wien, vol. 

15, pp. 351-353. 
1903. Meteoritenkunde, Heft 2. Strukturformen; Versuche kunstlicher 

Nachbildung von Meteoriten; Rinde und schwarze Adern; Relief 

der Oberflache, Gestalt, Zahl und Grosse der Meteorite, xii+302 

pp. 

1905. Meteoritenkunde, Heft 3. Classification und Nomenclatur; Kornige 

bis dichte Eisen, Hexaedrite, Oktaedrite mit feinsten und feinen 
Lamellen . x vi + 4 1 9 pp . 

CULLISON, J. S., AND MuiLENBURG, G. A. 

1934 A newly found meteorite from Lanton, Howell County, Missouri. 
Journ. Geol., vol. 42, pp. 305-308. 
Dalton, F. K. 

1950. Microhardness testing of iron meteorites. Journ. Roy. Astron. Soc. 
Canada, vol. 44, pp. 1-11, 185-195. 
Daly, R. A. 

1943. Meteorites and an earth model. Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., vol. 54, pp. 
401-455. 
Eakle, A. S. 

1922. Massive troilite from Del Norte County, California. Amer. Miner- 
alogist, vol. 7, pp. 77-80. 
Edwards, A. B., and Mawson, D. 

1946. The Moorumbunna meteorite. Trans. Roy. Soc. Australia, vol. 70, 
pp. 348-353, 2 pis. 
Farrington, O. C. 

1903. Catalogue of the collection of meteorites, May 1, 1903, Field Colum- 
bian Mus. Publ. 77, Geol. Ser. No. 2, 9 pis. 
1910. New Pennsylvania meteorite. Amer. Journ. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 29, pp. 

350-352, 2 plates. 
1915a. Meteorites. 233 pp., 65 illustrations. (Privately published.) 
1915b. Catalogue of the meteorites of North America to January 1, 1909. 
Mem. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 13, 513 pp.., 36 pis. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 401 

Foote, W. M. 

1899. Note ou a new meteoritic iron found near the Tombigbee River in 
Choctaw and Sumter Counties, Alabama, U. S. A. Amer. Journ. 
Sci., ser. 4., vol. 8, pp. 153-156. 
Grantham, D. R., and Oates, F. 

1931. The Mbosi meteoritic iron, Tanganyika Territory. Mineralogical 
Mag., vol. 22, pp. 487-493. 
Guppey, D. J., and Matheson, R. S. 

1950. Wolf Creek meteorite crater, Western Australia. Journ. Geol., 

vol. 58, pp. 30-36. Reprinted in Smithsonian Inst. Ann. Rep. 
for 1950, pp. 317-325, illus. 
Henderson, E. P. 

1941. Corrections to published analyses of meteorites. Amer. Journ. 

Sci., vol. 239, pp. 407-411. 
1949. The Aggie Creek meteorite from Seward Peninsula, Alaska. Amer. 
Mineralogist, vol. 34, pp. 229-232, 1 fig. 

1951. A restudy of the Coolac, New South Wales, Australian meteorite. 

Pop. Astron., vol. 59, pp. 205-209. 
Henderson, E. P., and Perry, S. H. 

1942a. The Freda, North Dakota, meteorite, a nickel-rich ataxite. Proc. 

U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 92, pp. 21-23, pis. 1-4. 
1942b. Meteorites and their metallic constituents. Ann. Rep. Smithsonian 

Inst, for 1942, pp. 235-251, pis. 1-6. 
1947. The Edmonton, Kentucky, meteorite. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., 

vol. 107, No. 13, pp. 1-4. 
1948a. The Drum Mountains, Utah, meteorite. Smithsonian Misc. Coll., 

vol. 110, No. 12, pp. 1-7, pis. 1-5. 
1948b. Reexamination of the Soper, Oklahoma, meteorite. Amer. Mineral- 
ogist, vol. 33, pp. 692-694, 2 pis. 
1949. The Pima County (Arizona) meteorite. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 

vol. 99, pp. 353-355, pis. 19-20. 
1951. A restudy of the Social Circle, Georgia, meteorite. Amer. Min- 
eralogist, vol. 36, pp. 603-608, 2 figs. 
1954. A discussion of the densities of iron meteorites. Geochim. Cos- 

mochim. Acta, vol. 6, pp. 221-240. 
Hodge-Smith, T. H. 

1937. An unrecorded meteorite from Coolac, New South Wales. Rec. 

Australian Mus., vol. 20, pp. 130-132, 1 pi. 
Howell, E. D. 

1890. Notice of two new iron meteorites from Hamilton Co., Texas, and 

Puquios, Chile, S. A. Amer. Journ. Sci., ser. 3, vol. 40, pp. 

223-226. 
Johnston, R. A. A., and Ellsworth, H. V. 

1921. The Annaheim meteorite. Proc. and Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, 

ser. 3, vol. 15, sec. 4, pp. 69-92, 14 pis. 
Klein, C. 

1903. Die Meteoritensammlung der Koniglichen Friedrich-Wilhelms Uni- 

versitat zu Berlin, am 5 Februar 1903. Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. 

Berlin, No. 7, pp. 139-172. 
Kuntz, G. F., and Weinschenk, E. 

1892. On two meteoric irons. Amer. Journ. Sci, ser. 3, vol. 43, pp. 

424-426. 



402 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Leonard, F. C. 

1939a. Preliminary announcement of the Goose Lake, California, meteorite. 

Science, vol. 89, p. 508. 
1939b. The Goose Lake siderite, California's largest known meteorite. 

Pop. Astron., vol. 47, pp. 322-324, 2 figs. 
1940. The Goose Lake siderite; the largest known meteorite of California. 

Griffith Observer, vol. 4, No 1, pp. 2-8, illus. 
1950. On the identification and the recovery of the Goose Lake, California, 

siderite. Pop. Astron., vol. 58, pp. 516-517; also Contr. Meteorit- 

ical Soc, vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 323-334. 
Linsley, E. G. 

1939a. The great Goose Lake meteorite. Eastbay Astron. Assoc, pp. 1-3 

(mimeogr.) . 
1939b. The giant Goose Lake meteorite from Modoc County, California. 

California Journ. Mines Geol., rep. No. 35, pp. 308-312, 3 figs. 
Marble, J. P. 

1938. The Osseo, Canada, meteorite. Amer. Mineralogist, vol. 23, pp 

282-285, 2 pis. 
Merrill, G. P. 

1913. On the minor constituents of meteorites. Amer. Journ. Sci., ser. 4, 

vol. 35, pp. 509-525. 

1922. Meteoric iron from Odessa, Ector Co., Texas. Amer. Journ. Sci., 

ser. 5, vol. 3, pp. 335-337. 

1923. The New Baltimore, Somerset County, Pennsylvania, meteoric 

iron, supplemental note. Amer. Journ. Sci., ser. 5, vol. 6, pp. 
262-264, 1 pi. 
1929. The story of meteorites. Smithsonian Sci. Ser., vol. 3, pt. 1, especially 
pi. 32. 
Merrill, G. P., and Tassin, W. 

1907. Contributions to the study of the Canyon Diablo meteorite. Smith- 
sonian Misc. Coll., vol. 50, pp. 203-215, 4 pis. 
Moissan, M. 

1904. Nouvelles recherches sur la meteorite de Canon Diablo. Compt. 
Rend. Paris, vol. 139, pp. 773-780. 
Nash, L. K., and Baxter, G. P. 

1947. The determination of the gases in meteoritic and terrestrial irons and 
steels. Journ. Amer. Chem. Soc, vol. 69, pp. 2534-2544. 
Nininger, H. H. 

1936. The Bruno meteorite. Amer. Journ. Sci., ser. 5, vol. 31, pp. 209-222, 

7 figs. 
1940. A new type of nickel-iron meteorite from the vicinity of the Arizona 

Meteorite Crater. Pop. Astron., vol. 48, pp. 328-332. 
1952. Out of the sky. 336 pp., 22 figs., 52 pis. 
Palache, C, and Gonyer, F. A. 

1932. Two new iron meteorites from Chile and Texas. Amer. Mineralogist, 
vol. 17, pp. 357-359, pis. 1, 2. 
Perry, S. H. 

1944. The metallography of meteoric iron. U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 184, 
especially p. 79. 



SEVEN SIDERITES — HENDERSON AND PERRY 403 

Pbior, G. T. 

1914. The meteorites of Uwet, Kota Kota and Angela; redeterminations of 
nickel and iron in the Baroti and Wittekrantz meteoric stones. 
Mineralogical Mag., vol. 17, pp. 127-134. 
1923. The meteoric iron of Karee Kloof and the meteoric stones of Leeuw- 
fontein and Sinai Peninsula. Mineralogical Mag., vol. 20, pp. 
134-139, 1 pi. 
Roberts, R. O. 

1947. Meteorites in Uganda. Uganda Journ., vol. 11, pp. 42-46. 
Simmons, K. 

1942. Cranial capacities by both plastic and water techniques with cranial 
linear measurements of the Reserve Collection; White and Negro. 
Human Biol., vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 473-498. 
Smith, J. L. 

1864. A new meteoritic iron from Wayne County, Ohio, and some remarks 
on a recently described meteorite from Atacama, Chile. Amer. 
Journ. Sci., ser. 2, vol. 38, pp. 385-387. 
Smycka, F. 

1899. Bericht iiber das erste mahrische Meteoreisen, gefunden bei Alt Bela. 
Programm. des bohischen Gymnasium in Makr-Ostrau, 7 pp. 
Spencer, L. J. 

1935. Murnpeowie (South Australia), a granular type meteoric iron. 
Mineralogical Mag., vol. 24, pp. 13-20, pis. 1-3. 
Stone, R. W. 

1932. Meteorites found in Pennsylvania. Bull. Pennsylvania Topogr. 
Geol. Surv., ser. 4, bull. G2, pp. 350-352. 
Thomas, R. N. 

1953. (Cavities in meteorites.) Paper presented at Amer. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 
Astron. Sec, Boston, Mass., Dec. 30, 1953. 
Wright, F. W., and Whipple, F. L. 

1953. The photographic Perseid meteors. Harvard Coll. Observ. Techn. 
Rep. 11, pp. 1-38. 
Wulfing, E. A. 

1897. Die Meteoriten in Sammlungen und ihre Literature. Pp. xlvi + 
460. 
Zavaritzkit, A. N., and Kvasha, L. G. 

1952. Meteorites of the U. S. S. R. Publ. Acad. Sci. U. S. S. R. for 1952, 
illustr. on pp. 34 and 53. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 




General view of the Goose Lake meteorite. Note the rim of curled metal bending into 
the large cavity at the left. (Chabot Observatory photograph.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 2 




\ iew of the Goose Lake meteorite. This probably is the rear face of the meteorite 
because it has fewer layers of deformed metal than the opposite side. Both white rods 
are 8 inches long. The upper one shows two cavities, which are connected below the 
bridge of metal. The hole below the upper end of the rod connects with the cavity under 
the metal bridge. A model of the large cavity at the center of the picture is shown in the 
bottom photographs of plate 4; its volume is 686 cc. The small round hole near the bottom 
center with one end of the white rod showing is the opening of the tunnel through the 
meteorite. The flat area, upper right, is where the slices were cut off. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 3 




A view of a portion of the face of the Goose Lake meteorite. It is assumed that this 
portion was part of the front face during most of the fall because there are more layers of 
deformed metal. A model of the cavity, left of center, is shown in the lower photographs 
of plate 5. The arrow locates the large cavity leading to the tunnel. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY. PLATE 4 




Top. — Two views, normal to each other, of a cast of a depression on the rear face of the 
Goose Lake meteorite. In the photo at right, the lower left corner of the cavity is close to 
the surface of the meteorite; the broken line at bottom indicates where the surface of the 
meteorite crosses at the opening. 

Bottom. — Two views, normal to each other, of a cast of a hole in the meteorite. The 
dotted line on photograph at right locates the opening to the stirface of the meteorite. 

The space between lines in the center strip represents 1 cm. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY PLATE 5 




Top.- — Two views, at right angles to each other, of a cavity in the Goose Lake meteo- 
rite that appears to be twisted and restricted in width about midway of its depth. The 
diameter of the opening at the surface is approximately 50 percent of the maximum width 
of this cavity. 

Bottom. — Two views, at right angles to each other, of a cast of a cavity in the forward 
face of the meteorite. The width of the cross section at the widest point is about double 
the diameter of the surface opening. 

The space between lines in the center strip represents 1 cm. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 6 




A cross section through a wide but shallow cavity in the Goose Lake meteorite. The 
dark crescent is the shadow formed by the bent lip, which has curled back into the depres- 
sion until it reaches the plane of the cut. Note the curved kamacite at the upper edge 
of the cavity. The Widmanstatten structure runs to the limits of this cavity. At the 
edges, the structure appears slightly distorted because the metal is so thin that it was de- 
formed by the grinding and polishing. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 7 




J 



-o 


p 


<L> 


T3 


+-> 




rt 


TJ 


bo 


<u 






z 


. v 


W 














<u 


w 


S-H 


T3 


CU 


CJ 


£ 


aS 




J2 


<u 




as 


<D 





o ^ 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 8 




An irregular atypical plessite field about 1 inch below the surface of Goose Lake meteorite. 
Area at bottom is filled with spheroidized taenite and enclosed by a dark border of imper- 
fectly transformed taenite. Rest of the field is kamacite with some darkened taenite. 
Dark area in the upper right corner is imperfectly transformed gamma-alpha mixture with 
orientated (white) kamacite lamellae. Small schreibersite bodies are at the left and at the 
upper left corner of the plessite field. (Picral applied for 30 seconds; magnification, 100.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 9 




A plessite field in the Goose Lake meteorite, the central part of which shows spheroidized 
taenite. At the top, left, and bottom, the kamacite lamellae are orientated. At center 
left is an irregular schreibersite body. Invading hydroxide, due to weathering, appears as 
dark area along a grain boundary (lower right), a border along the lower end of the plessite 
field as a much thicker curved area, and adjacent to the schreibersite body. (Picral 
applied for 30 seconds; magnification, 100.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 10 



- f. 



<1 o<*> 



4 :r> 
o 

ri 



/ 



I '( 



vj 



<i .• 



• j ( . ^^■—^ rrKJ » 



.'>• 



n*. ". >' n 


• 


•> J -Tn 


' *£ f\ 


> J • f 




• 


1 V 





j0>:^ 



\\ 



.■> 



1 i — 



o> 






V 



, .X 



< 



f\ ; ' * 




> 



The Cincinnati meteorite. Explanation on facing page. 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 11 





* 



J> --\ 










'%' ' 






'^. 




^^^r 



Slices of the Pittsburgh meteorite. The slice shown at top was lent by Yale University; 
that shown at bottom was lent by Harvard College. (Magnification, 2.) 



Explanation of Plate 10 (Opposite) 

The Cincinnati meteorite. Top. — The phosphides in the Cincinnati meteorite are rounded 
and appear to have been diffused by reheating. This structure indicates that reheating 
was for a brief interval and was followed by quick cooling. (Picral applied for 40 seconds; 
magnification, 150.) 

Bottom.- — An iron phosphide eutectic of unusual fineness and regularity. The excess of 
iron that was rejected in the cooling was unable to migrate to the edge of the structure. 
A feature with such perfect structure is indicative of slow cooling. (Picral applied for 60 
seconds; magnification, 100.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 






HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 12 



^ ^ aft ' 1. V -*V« ^ '.J2\ • ^ *•■ • ' % ' 






W 



"'•• "klwr -" 



Zv&? 



mm 



*■ r ; 






> 



,"•.«» 



\ 



••- > ,■4.4 V 



*T ^ • f : 



a / 






.v * -- 






X> 



v« 



> 






T 5 , 



£# 



•it- • > -* ' ^ 















^.^ T* ^>.v 



<P 



V 



v ' * , " .' v »- ■¥ r s ^>'- < > % vi 



v-v 






<?Q 



OTp 



vA 



O 









l \ 



#.. 









<; V P. ^ 






An area in the central part of the Cincinnati meteorite showing numerous rhabdites. 
Many of these have frayed ends and some have irregular sides, indicating only that these 
inclusions had undergone little change in the reheating. (Picral applied for 80 seconds; 
magnification, 50.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 






HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 13 

m ■\:.-.V' 






f 



:< A j 



■fe'-:- 



; .^ m 













m .•>■ 



\*?C'*^ 



*£' ■■* 









;.f & 



■w 



aw & a G«4»wu 






Kamacite containing rhabdite inclusions in a parallel arrangement, Pittsburgh meteorite. 

(Magnification, 100.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 14 




'4 



£V v, •; 



lift'- 




*&» 



v V 











W- 



Coarse plessite surrounded by granulated kamacite, Pittsburgh mete< 
picrate applied for 70 seconds; magnification, 100.) 



(podium 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY. PLATE 15 




A large cohenite with the characteristic kamacite inclusions, Pittsburgh meteorite. 
Above this cohenite there occurs an elongated plessite area, in one corner of which is a dark 
island of gamma-alpha iron; in the opposite upper corner there are some delicate acicular 
kamacite needles. The kamacitic groundmass is granular, and small dark grains are 
localized along the boundary of the kamacite. (Picral, 5 percent, applied for 130 seconds; 
magnification, 50.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 16 




View of the Breece meteorite. Samples were taken from five of the long lathlike inclu- 
sions, Reichenbach lamellae, for X-ray, and in every case the film matched the lines on the 
standard schreibersite film. (Natural size.) 



PROC U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 17 




An etched cross section of the Tombigbee meteorite. Numerous irregular schreibersite 
bodies are dispersed in the matrix; the rhabdite inclusions are not shown. The areas 
selected for analysis are outlined. (Natural size.) 



Explanation of Plate 18 

The Soroti meteorite. Top. — Macrophotographs of two specimens taken in reflected 
light so that the plessite fields appear white. (Natural size.) 

Bottom. — An area of fine octahedrite structure, the kamacite bands enclosing lamellae 
of taenite. Dense (imperfectly transformed) plessite in the interstices. (Picral, 4 percent, 
applied for 12 seconds; magnification, 50.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 18 





The Soroti meteorite. Explanation on facing page. 



Explanation of Plate 19 

The Soroti meteorite. Top. — The central inclusion with the dark spots is schreibersite » 
and it contacts a dark hexagonal body, troilite. The kamacite practically surrounding 
the schreibersite and extending downward to the lower right and left corners of the plate 
contains transformation structures. The large inclusion below the troilite and kamacite 
was not positively identified, but its chipped surface suggests schreibersite. The light area at 
the lower right also may be schreibersite. The dense plessite fields at the left, right, and top 
have lamellae of kamacite. (Picral 5 percent, applied for 40 seconds; magnification, 50.) 

Bottom. — A plessite area with needles of kamacite. Much of the kamacite shows lines 
which may be transformation structures or Neumann lines. Transformation structures 
may simulate Neumann lines very closely. The dark area at the upper right corner is troil- 
ite. (Picral, 5 percent, applied for 40 seconds; magnification, 50.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 19 




The Soroti meteorite. Explanation on facing page. 



Explanation of Plate 20 

The Keen Mountain meteorite. Top: Troilite is exposed on the bottom of the depression 
in the center of this face after about two millimeters of oxide were removed. The surface 
of the meteorite immediately surrounding this depression is partly corroded and some of 
the oxidization products rest on an unaltered fusion crust. The cuts, at the right end, were 
made by the finder before the object was identified. The slice used in the analysis (pi. 21, 
bottom) was cut along the line made by projecting A to A'. (About two-thirds natural size.) 

Bottom: This meteorite lacks the typical "thumbmark" depressions common to most 
iron meteorites. The shallow cavity at the lower right is surrounded with unaltered fusion 
crust in which flight markings are present. The file mark above the depression exposes 
fresh metal. The rougher surfaces represent corrosion. If the guide lines (at the sides and 
bottom of the picture) were projected they would cross over the spot believed to be the center 
of the forward face (stagnation point) during the fall of this meteorite. (Natural size.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 20 



/ A' 




The Keen Mountain meteorite. Explanation on facing page. 



Explanation of Plate 21 

The Keen Mountain meteorite. Top. — The curved Neumann lines in the central portion 
end abruptly at the inner edge of the granulated zone. Sufficient heat was absorbed by 
this iron to granulate the metal from 7 to 9 millimeters in from the existing surface and to 
obliterate the Neumann lines. The fractures in the thermally altered zorte possibly represent 
a volume adjustment made when the outside shell was reheated. The reheating and rapid 
cooling of the outside zone may have had something to do with the deformation of the 
Neumann lines and the displacement of the phosphide lamellae shown in plate 22 (bottom). 
(Magnification, 1.2.) 

Bottom. — This thin slice was removed about 15 millimeters further into the meteorite 
than the slice pictured at top, and the thermally granulated zone around the edges is not as 
wide as the zone shown in that slice. The Neumann lines in the center are slightly deformed. 
This slice was cut along the dotted lines and the density of sections 1-3 was determined. 
The analysis was made on section No. 2. (Magnification, 1.3.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 21 

t ' ■■'r'r'IIW Mill 



t 



w 










The Keen Mountain Meteorite. Explanation on facing page. 



Explanation of Plate 22 

The Keen Mountain meteorite. Top. — A group of phosphide particles with their pointed 
ends lying in the same direction and separated by channels of kamacitic iron. This habit 
suggests that these phosphides reacted with the matrix. The phosphide in the lamella at 
the left is broken into small segments but the particles are not separated very far. There 
are many such lamellae in this slice. Fewer rhabdites occur in the kamacite immediately 
adjacent to these long lamellae than are found in the kamacite some distance away. Many 
of these long lamellae are not straight and we assume that they have been deformed by 
movement of the kamacitic matrix. (Magnification, 150.) 

Bottom. — These inclusions indicate Fe-Fe3P eutectic structures which formed by re- 
heating. The rhabdite lost its original form and became rounded. This eutectic inclusion 
could be formed by melting but possibly these bodies never became liquid. After their 
reheating, they cooled so fast that the excess iron could not migrate beyond the limits of 
the inclusion. (Magnification, 150.) 



PROC. U. S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 107 



HENDERSON AND PERRY, PLATE 22 







The Keen Mountain meteorite. Explanation on facing page 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1958 




PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Vol. 107 Washington : 1958 No. 3389 

NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS OF THE FAMILY BRACONIDAE 
(HYMENOPTERA) IN THE U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



By C. F. W. Muesebeck 1 



The parasitic Hymenoptera of the Neotropical region are still 
mostly undescribed ; accordingly it is not possible to give specific 
names for the majority of samples that are received for identification. 
In the Braconidae alone a very considerable number of new species 
from Neotropical localities have accumulated in the collections of the 
U. S. National Museum, most of them received from workers interested 
in the biological control of various insect pests. For some of these 
new species, names have been wanted for a rather long time. Finally, 
a beginning is being made on the task of naming and describing them. 
For the present paper I have selected forms that, because of their 
host associations or distribution or because they add significantly to 
our understanding of the superspecific groups involved, are of more 
than usual interest. Unfortunately, it is not at present feasible, or 
possible, to include workable keys to the Neotropical species of such 



1 U. S. Department of Agriculture, Entomology Research Branch, Insect Identification and Parasite 
Introduction Section. 

405 



406 PROCEEDING'S OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. w 

large genera as Apanteles, Opius, and Meteorus, but for a few small 
groups this has been done. In addition, two new genera are described 
and some new synonymy and new combinations are indicated. 

For the drawings I am indebted to Mr. K. A. Cushman, artist of 
the Entomology Research Branch, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 

Genus Microctonus Wesmael 

The species of this genus often have been assigned erroneously to 
Perilitus Nees, and the single known South American species identi- 
fiable as a Microctonus was described by Szepligeti as Perilitus 
brasiliensis. It appears to be closely similar superficially to the second 
of the two new species described here. 

Microctonus brasiliensis (Szepligeti), new combination 

Perilitus brasiliensis Szepligeti, Termes. Fuzetek, vol. 25, p. 80, 1902. 

This species was described from a single male from Brazil in the 
collection of the Hungarian National Museum. 

Microctonus audax, new species 

Figures l,k; 4,e 

This new species is distinguished from the other known South Amer- 
ican species by its large eyes, short malar space, and evenly rugulose, 
nonareolate propodeum. 

Female: Length about 3 mm. Head broader than thorax; face 
broader than long, minutely punctate; eye longer than narrowest 
width of face; clypeus punctate, twice as long as malar space, its 
base defined by a sharply impressed line; frons, vertex, and temples 
smooth and shining; a dimple-like impression between posterior 
ocelli; antennae usually 30- to 33-segmented, about as long as body. 

Mesoscutum smooth and shining; notaulices foveolate and meeting 
behind in a rugose area that is divided by a median longitudinal carina ; 
median lobe with short, sparse pubescence; lateral lobes bare; scutellum 
strongly convex, impunctate, polished; propodeum uniformly closely 
rugose, without prominent carinae, its posterior face vertical and 
conspicuously hollowed out in the middle; mesosternal groove coarsely 
foveate; mesopleuron smooth and shining above, extensively rugulose 
punctate below; radial cell on wing margin nearly as long as stigma; 
lower abscissa of basella shorter than nervellus. 

Abdomen at widest point much narrower than thorax; first tergite 
more than twice as long as broad at apex, the petiole polished, the 
expanded portion finely aciculate; remainder of abdomen polished; 
ovipositor sheath a little shorter than hind femur. 

Head black; temples, cheeks and mandibles more or less brown; 
antennae dark brown to black; thorax black, sometimes reddish brown 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 407 

on sides and below; legs including all coxae reddish brown; wings 
hyaline, stigma yellowish, margined with brown; abdomen reddish 
brown, first tergite more or less blackish. 

Male: Like the female but usually somewhat darker in color, 
with thorax entirely black, abdomen mostly piceous, posterior coxae 
darkened at bases, hind tibiae and tarsi more or less darkened, some- 
times all tarsi dark ; also the antennae longer than the body, normally 
34- to 36-segmented ; face broader than eye height; malar space two- 
thirds as long as clypeus. 

Type: USNM 63044. 

Type locality: Santa Fe, Argentina. 

Described from 8 females and 8 males reared from adult weevils of 
the genus Listroderes by H. L. Parker in October 1944. According to 
Dr. Parker the female has the remarkable habit of ovipositing in 
the host weevil through the mouth. 

Microctonus berryi, new species 

This new species apparently is very similar to Microctonus brasi- 
liensis (Szepligeti) but smaller, and is further distinguished by the 
somewhat shorter antennae, yellow scapes, and reticulate propodeum. 

Female: Length about 2.5 mm. Head slightly broader than 
thorax ; face at least 1 % times as broad as long, not distinctly punctate, 
covered with very short pile; clypeus slightly longer than malar 
space; frons, vertex, and temples smooth and polished; antennae 
with about 24 segments. 

Mesoscutum smooth and shining; lateral lobes bare; surface of 
middle lobe with short pubescence; notaulices sharply impressed, 
foveolate, meeting at posterior margin of mesoscutum ; a short median 
keel extending forward from point of union of notaulices; scutellum 
slightly convex, impunctate; dorsal face of propodeum reticulate, 
with two large, transverse, nearly smooth areas at base, posterior 
face rugulose, excavated in the middle; mesosternal groove finely 
foveolate; mesopleuron smooth and polished, sometimes with a few 
coarse punctures below; venation essentially like that of M. audax; 
radial cell on wing margin two-thirds as long as stigma; first abscissa 
of radius less than half as long as width of stigma; lower abscissa of 
basella and nervellus subequal. 

Abdomen at widest point only slightly narrower than thorax; first 
tergite much more than twice as long as broad on caudal margin, 
smooth and polished on basal third, usually striate beyond; remainder 
of abdomen polished; ovipositor sheath fully as long as hind femur. 

Head yellow, with a small blackish spot enclosing ocelli; antennal 
flagellum brown, paler toward base beneath; scape reddish yellow; 
dorsum of thorax including propodeum blackish, with scutellum 



408 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

and areas bounding notaulices reddish; pleura and sternum reddish 
yellow; wings hyaline, stigma yellowish bordered with brown; legs 
reddish yellow, all tarsi and posterior tibiae fuscous to blackish; 
abdomen yellowish brown, first tergite piceous except at base where 
it is yellowish. 

Male: Differs from the female in the slightly longer antennae, 
which have around 26 segments, in having the thorax black except for 
the yellowish prothorax and reddish mesopleura, in the nearly smooth 
first tergite, and in having the second and following tergites piceous. 

Type: USNM 63045. 

Type locality: Angol, Chile. 

Described from 11 females and 7 males reared by Paul A. Berry from 
a chrysomelid on willow, Mar. 9, 1941, at Angol, Chile; 2 females 
and 1 male reared by L. Duran from adults of the chrysomelid 
Plagiodera erythroptera (Blanchard), October 1940, at Panquehue, 
Chile; and 1 female reared by H. L. Parker from the same host at 
Angol, Chile, Feb. 22, 1941. 

Genus Meteor us Haliday 
Meteorus eaclidis, new species 

Figures l,z; 2,b 

This new species is closely similar to townsendi Muesebeck but dis- 
tinguished by having the middle lobe of mesoscutum convex rather than 
shallowly impressed, by the relatively wider cubitellan cell, by the 
paler tegulae, and by the noninterstitial recurrent vein. Moreover, 
the cocoons of this species are formed singly whereas those of M. 
townsendi are arranged in a compact mass that is encased in loose silk. 

Female: Length about 4 mm. Head a little wider than thorax, 
smooth; temples gradually receding; occipital carina narrowly inter- 
rupted at middle; face 1% times as broad as long; malar space longer 
than basal width of mandible; ocellocular line about twice the diameter 
of an ocellus; antennae a little longer than body, usually 30- to 32- 
segmented. 

Thorax stout; notaulices sharply impressed; middle lobe of meso- 
scutum convex, not impressed down middle, weakly punctate; 
scutellum convex, polished, 1% times as long as the large bifoveate 
sulcus at its base; propodeum coarsely rugose-reticulate, the posterior 
declivity deeply excavated medially; side of pronotum smooth and 
shining except for the median depression, which is crossed by a few 
strong rugae; mesopleuron mostly smooth but with the broad longi- 
tudinal impression coarsely rugose; hind coxae punctate; longer cal- 
carium of hind tibia about as long as second segment of hind tarsus ; 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 409 

radius issuing from beyond middle of stigma; first abscissa of radius 
as long as, or longer than, second, the latter about half as long as 
second intercubitus ; radial cell nearly attaining extreme apex of wing; 
recurrent vein joining first cubital cell; lower abscissa of basella longer 
than nervellus; cubitellan cell at narrowest point at least 1% times as 
wide as greatest width of radiellan cell. 

Abdomen a little narrower than thorax; first tergite without dorsal 
fossae, finely, closely aciculate except at base, the ventral margins 
joined from base to postpetiole; ovipositor sheath shorter than hind 
tibia. 

Honey yellow; palpi paler; antennae black; tegulae brownish yellow, 
blackish on outer margins; wings noticeably infumated; stigma and 
veins dark brown ; hind tibia black apically ; hind tarsus fuscous, basal 
half of metatarsus pale. 

Male : Differs in no significant details from the female. 

Type: USNM 63046. 

Type locality: Sao Paulo, Brazil. 

Described from four females and one male reared from Eacles magni- 
fied Walker by E. J. Hambleton at the type locality June 10, 1935, 
and 18 females and 11 males reared from an unidentified lepidopterous 
larva at Tiete, Sao Paulo, Brazil, in February 1939 by M. Antonio 
and submitted by L. O. T. Mendes. 

Meteorus kraussi, new species 

Figures 3,d,i 

This species immediately suggests M. vulgaris (Cresson), but the 
ventral margins of the first tergite are closely joined from the base to 
the postpetiole; the postpetiole is more coarsely sculptured, and the 
malar space is much longer than in M. vulgaris. 

Female: Length about 3.5 mm. Face very finely roughened, 
subopaque, at its narrowest point fully as wide as length of eye; malar 
space distinctly longer than basal width of mandible; vertex and 
temples polished; temple convex, three-fourths as wide as eye; ocell- 
ocular line more than twice as long as greatest diameter of an ocellus ; 
antennae a little longer than body, 26- to 28-segmented. 

Mesoscutum shining, shallowly punctate, the lateral lobes very 
weakly so; propodeum coarsely reticulately sculptured; 1st abscissa 
of radius usually about as long as 2d; recurrent vein interstitial with 
first intercubitus; nervulus slightly postf ureal; lower abscissa of 
basella much longer than nervellus; legs very slender. 

First tergite without dorsal fossae; ventral margins of petiole closely 
joined throughout; postpetiole closely longitudinally striate; ovipositor 



410 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

sheath a little shorter than abdomen; ovipositor greatly thickened 
toward base, as in M. vulgaris. 

Honey yellow; antennae more or less brownish; postpetiole a little 
darkened, at least laterally; wings hyaline, stigma hyaline, margined 
with brown; legs brownish yellow, hind tibiae and tarsi weakly 
infuscated. 

Male : Like the female in essential details. 

Type: USNM 63047. 

Type locality: Cuernavaca, Mexico. 

Described from 23 females and 3 males reared by N. L. H. Krauss 
Aug. 28, 1944, from a lepidopterous larva on Eupatorium adenophorum. 
Another series of 16 females and 1 male is labeled " Cuernavaca, Mex., 
Nov. 1944, N. L. H. Krauss," without further data. As in the case 
of M. vulgaris, a number of individuals develop in a single host 
caterpillar. 

Genus Centistes Haliday 

The genus Leiophron was proposed by Nees in 1818 (Nova Acta 
Acad. Caes. Leop. Carol., vol. 9, p. 303). He showed that he was 
basing the genus on three species but, unfortunately, he did not name 
or describe any of them in that paper. All three were described in 
1834 (Hymenopterorum ichneumonibus affinium, Monographic, vol. 
1, pp. 44, 45) when Nees treated the genus in more detail. In the 
meantime, however, Haliday (Ent. Mag., vol. 1, pp. 263, 264, April 
1833) had placed three new species in Leiophron, describing them very 
briefly in a key, and Curtis (British Entomology, vol. 10, p. 476, 
November 1833) had included nine, one of which, pallipes Curtis, he 
had designated as type. In 1839 Westwood (Introduction to the 
modern classification of insects, vol. 2, Synopsis p. 62) selected ater 
Nees as type of Leiophron, which permitted use of the generic name 
in its original sense, and that concept has been generally adopted. 
However, recently the International Commission on Zoological 
Nomenclature (Bull. Zool. Norn., vol. 4, pp. 130, 346, 1950) has de- 
clared that in the case of generic names proposed before January 1, 
1931, without originally included species, only those species which 
are first referred to such a genus after publication of the name may 
be considered eligible for type selection. Accordingly, Viereck's 
designation of Leiophron apicalis (Curtis) Haliday (U. S. Nat. Mus. 
Bull. 83, p. 83, 1914) must be accepted as the first valid designation; 
and since L. apicalis is considered to be congeneric with the type of 
Euphorus Nees, this generic name must be suppressed as a synonym 
of Leiophron. For Leiophron of Authors it seems to be necessary to 
use Centistes Haliday, the synonymy of which is as follows: 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBEiCK 411 

Ancylus Haliday, Ent. Mag., vol. 1, p. 261, 1833. Preoccupied by Ancylus 

Mueller, 1774, in Mollusca. Type, A. cuspidatus Haliday, by designation 

of Viereck, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 83, p. 10, 1914. 
Centistes Haliday, Ent. Mag., vol. 2, pp. 459, 462, 1835. Type, Ancylus cuspidatus 

Haliday, by monotypy. 
Ancylocentrus Foerster, Verh. Naturh. Ver. Preuss. Rhienl., vol. 19, p. 254, 1862. 

Type, Ancylus excrucians Haliday, by monotypy. 
Euphoridea Ashmead, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 23, p. 116, 1900. Type, 

Euphoridea claripennis Ashmead, by monotypy and original designation. 
Liosigalphus Ashmead, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 23, p. 125, 1900. Type, 

Liosigalphus politus Ashmead, by monotypy and original designation. 

Pygostolus Haliday, 1833, was proposed as a subgenus of Leiophrom 
It is, however, quite distinct from that genus, being, in fact, properly 
placed in the Blacinae rather than in the Euphorinae; but although it 
is very closely related to Centistes (which it antedates), I consider it 
generically distinct. It differs most conspicuoulsy in the long 
ovipositor sheath, which is half as long as the abdomen, in the presence 
of a basal median plate on the first tergite, which is defined by carinae 
that converge caudad, and by having the radius going to the extreme 
apex of the wing. 

Centistes epicaeri, new species 
Figures l t l; 3,a 

This is apparently the first species of the genus to be recorded 
from the Neotropical region. It is very similar to the European C. 
lituratus (Haliday) but may be distinguished at once by the lack of a 
ventral tooth near the apex of the hind coxa. From C. edentatus 
(Haliday), another European species, it differs especially in its much 
larger and virtually parallel-sided first tergite. 

Female: Length about 3 mm. Head strongly transverse; temples 
receding; frons and vertex polished; face slightly broader than long, 
with minute and faint punctures; malar space not quite as iong as 
clypeus; antennae filiform, about as long as body, usually 30-seg- 
mented; ocellocular line very slightly longer than greatest diameter 
of an ocellus; occiput completely carinately margined. 

Mesoscutum shining; notaulices shallow but distinct, meeting well 
before posterior margin of mesoscutum; mesonotal lobes faintly 
punctate anteriorly; scutellum smooth, convex; propodeum basally 
with two very weak, irregular, slightly divergent, median longitudinal 
carinae, each extending to posterior declivity and there leading into a 
tranverse carina that extends to the lateral margin; the two large basal 
areas of propodeum smooth basally toward middle, finely punctate- 
ruguiose laterally and posteriorly; posterior declivity gradual, rugulose; 
mesopleuron with a long, finely foveolate, longitudinal furrow; wing 
venation as illustrated. 



412 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Abdomen narrower than thorax; first tergite at spiracles fully half 
as wide as propodeum is wide at base, parallel-sided from spiracles 
to apex and closely, finely striate; remaining tergites smooth and 
polished; ovipositor sheath and ovipositor as illustrated. 

Black; lower half of clypeus, mandibles, and antennae, basally 
below, dark brown ; legs unif ormally brownish yellow except for hind 
coxae, which are blackish toward bases; wings hyaline, stigma dark 
brown. 

Male: Unknown. 

Type: USNM 63048. 

Type locality: Santa Ana, El Salvador. 

Described from 114 female specimens reared by Paul A. Berry in 
1951 from Epicaerus capetillensis Sharp, a curculionid on coffee. 

Genus Leiophron Nees 

Leiophron Nees, Nova Acta Acad. Leop. Carol., vol. 9, p. 303, 1818. No species. 
Leiophron Nees, Haliday, Ent. Mag., vol. 1, p. 263, 1833. Three species. Type, 

L. apicalis (Curtis) Haliday, by designation of Viereck, 1914. 
Euphorus Nees, Hymenopterorum ichneumonibus affinium, Monographic, vol. 2, 

p. 360, 1834. Type, E. pallicornis Nees, by monotypy. New synonymy. 

As pointed out in the foregoing discussion under Centistes, the type 
of Euphorus is congeneric with the species which must be accepted 
as type of Leiophron under a recent ruling of the International Com- 
mission on Zoological Nomenclature. Accordiugly, Euphorus must 
be suppressed as a synonym of Leiophron. 

Genus Microgaster Latreille 

Five species are now known from the Neotropical region that belong 
in that section of the genus Microgaster in which (1) the habitus is that 
oiApanteles, (2) the propodeum lacks a median longitudinal carina and 
has, instead, a more or less distinct areola, (3) the mesoscutum is 
covered with shallow, separated punctures, and (4) the second cubital 
cell is minute, with the second intercubitas hyaline and arising from 
the first intercubitus rather than from the end of the first abscissa of 
radius. After more is known about this group it may prove advisable 
to set it off as a separate genus. For the present it seems best to keep 
it in Microgaster. 

The structural differences between the five Neotropical species 
are rather subtle and not easily defined, but the following color key 
will distinguish these forms. 

1. Thorax black 2 

At least mesoscutum testaceous 3 

2. Hind coxa black, at least on basal half; abdomen black, with second and third 

tergites sometimes testaceous ecdytolophae Muesebeck 

Hind coxa entirely reddish yellow; abdomen reddish yellow, with apical 
tergites usually black or blackish jocarae, new species 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MTJESEBECK 413 

3. Thorax entirely testaceous; abdomen testaceous except at apex. 

imitator (Ashmead) 
At least propodeum black; first tergite black or piceous 4 

4. Wings somewhat smoky blanchardi, new name 

Wings clear hyaline, iridescent diaphaniae, new species 

Microgaster ecdytolophae Muesebeck 

Microgaster ecdytolophae Muesebeck, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 61, Art. 16, pp. 
21, 24, 1922. 

This species, which is widely distributed in the Nearctic region 
where it occurs from Nova Scotia to Texas, has also been reared in 
Cuba from Hippia insvlaris (Grote) and in Guatemala from Rhobondo 
guarisana Walker. 

Microgaster jocarae, new species 

This new species is very similar to M. diaphaniae but with the 
thorax black and the abdomen pale yellow except for blackish median 
spots on the fourth and following tergites. 

Female: Length about 3 mm. Face closely punctate and sub- 
opaque; clypeus slightly longer than malar space, punctate; vertex 
and temples punctate and rather dull; frons weakly punctate toward 
sides and directly below ocelli; head abruptly declivous behind ocelli; 
occiput polished, impunctate; antennae about as long as the body. 

Mesoscutum more densely punctate than in M. diaphaniae and less 
shining, the punctures larger and almost or quite contiguous; disc of 
scutellum polished, with only a few scattered, weak punctures; 
polished area on lateral face of scutellum large, broadly triangular; 
propodeum finely rugulose, with a fairly well defined, more or less 
pentagonal areola, and weakly delimited, largely smooth and shining, 
apical lateral areas; mesopleuron polished but with sharp punctures 
anteriorly and below as well as a few in upper posterior angle; meta- 
pleuron polished except at posterior margin where it is rugulose; 
hind coxa with an elongate, flattened, finely rugulose area on dorsal 
edge toward base, punctate on outer face; inner calcarium of hind 
tibia much longer than outer and more than half as long as metatarsus ; 
stigma short and broad, shorter than metacarpus, emitting radius 
from be}^ond its middle; first abscissa of radius arched and joining 
first intercubitus in an even curve; second intercubitus very short, 
inconspicuous; second cubital cell minute; nervellus nearly straight 
and nearly perpendicular to anterior margin of wing. 

Abdomen much narrower than thorax; first tergite broadening very 
slightly caudad, longer than broad, smooth and shining except for a 
few scattered punctures on posterior half; second and following ter- 
gites smooth and polished, the plate of the second three times as broad 
on posterior margin as long and defined laterally by oblique grooves, 



414 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

its posterior margin arcuate ; ovipositor sheath slender but broadening 
gradually to near apex, about as long as hind tibia. 

Head and thorax black; clypeus, labrum, mandibles, and palpi 
yellow; scape yellow with a dark streak outwardly toward the front; 
flagellum dark brown; tegulae and wing bases yellowish white; wings 
hyaline, stigma and most of veins brown, second intercubitus hyaline; 
anterior and middle legs entirely yellow; posterior leg yellow except 
apex of femur, apical two-fifths or more of tibia, and tarsus, which are 
black; abdomen entirely yellow above and below except for median 
blotches on fourth and following tergites which are sometimes joined 
to form a median dark streak. 

Male : Like the female but with the apical abdominal tergites more 
extensively black. 

Type :USNM 63049. 

Type locality: Santiago de las Vegas, Cuba. 

Described from four females and three males reared by A. Otero 
from the larva of Jocara jerrijusalis Hampson. The U. S. National 
Museum has, in addition, nine males of the same species reared from 
Pilocrosis inguinalis Guenee, at Cayey, Puerto Rico, Jan. 7, 1941, by 
L. F. Martorell. 

MicTogaster imitator (Ashmead) 

Urogaster imitator Ashmead, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1900, pt. 2, p. 288, 1900. 
Microgaster imitator (Ashmead), Wilkinson, Bull. Ent. Research, vol. 21, p. 157, 
1930. 

This species is known only from the unique type, described from 
St. Vincent, which is in the British Museum. 

Microgaster blanchardi, new name 
Apanteles areolaris Blanchard, Arthropoda, vol. 1, No. 1, p. 6, 1947. 

Although this species belongs in a group whose members have the 
habitus of Apanteles, it falls in Microgaster as that genus is currently 
defined. With its transfer to Microgaster the specific name needs to 
be changed, since it is preoccupied by Microgaster areolaris Thomson, 
1895. 

The species is known to me only from the original description. 
Apparently the type is the only known specimen. It is recorded as 
having been reared from an unidentified larva of Gelechiidae on 
Solarium bonariensis in Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

Microgaster diaphaniae, new species 

This new species is exceedingly similar to M. blanchardi Muesebeck, 
which I know only from the original description, but apparently it 
may be distinguished by its clear hyaline, iridescent wings. In 
M. blanchardi the wings are said to be a little smoky. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MTJESEBE€K 415 

Female: Length about 3 mm. Face much broader than long, 
closely punctate and subopaque; malar space slightly shorter than 
clypeus; temple narrow, rounded, punctate; head evenly hollowed out 
behind, descending vertically directly behind the ocelli; antennae 
about as long as the body. 

Mesoscutum shining, with sharp, but shallow, separated punctures, 
those on posterior half being more than a puncture's width apart; 
prescutellar furrow finely foveolate; disc of scutellum flat, impunctate, 
polished; polished area on lateral face of scutellum large, triangular; 
propodeum weakly rugulose at base, and with a rather well defined 
areola and large apical lateral areas that are smooth and shining; 
mesopleuron smooth and shining except for well-separated punctures 
anteriorly and below; metapleuron polished; hind coxa smooth 
and shining except on dorsal edge which is finely rugulose; inner 
calcarium of hind tibia much longer than outer and more than half 
as long as metatarsus; first abscissa of radius slightly arched, much 
longer than first intercubitus ; second cubital cell minute ; second inter- 
cubitus very weak; nervellus straight. 

Abdomen slender; plate of first tergite broadening very slightly 
caudad, much longer than broad at apex, and with a few large, 
scattered punctures on caudal half; second tergite much shorter than 
third, smooth and polished, the median plate set off by lateral, oblique 
grooves; remainder of abdomen smooth and polished; ovipositor 
sheath slender but broadening gradually apically, about as long as 
hind tibia. 

Head black; clypeus, labrum, mandibles, and scape except for a 
dark blotch outwardly, reddish yellow; antennal flagellum dark brown; 
thorax black except prothorax and mesonotum which are testaceous 
or reddish; tegulae and wing bases pale yellow; wings hyaline, costa, 
stigma and most of the veins brown ; anterior and middle legs entirely 
yellow, posterior leg yellow except femur at apex, apical two-fifths 
or more of tibia and the tarsus, which are blackish; abdomen black, 
sometimes third tergite more or less reddish toward apex, and occa- 
sionally third and fourth tergites largely reddish. 

Male: Like the female except that the mesoscutum tends to be 
dark red rather than testaceous. 

Type: USNM 63050. 

Type locality: San Pedro de Montes de Oca, Costa Kica. 

Described from 2 females and 8 males reared from Diaphania 
nitidalis (Stoll), February 1935, by C. H. Ballou; 5 females from La 
Ceiba, El Salvador, received from Vera Wellborn; and 8 females and 
2 males (most of the specimens headless) collected by J. Camelo-G. 
at Tuxtepec, Oaxaca, Mexico, in June 1934. The U. S. National 



416 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Museum also has 4 female specimens reared from D. nitidalis in Federal 
District, Brazil, July 1945, by C. K. Goncalves, that differ from the 
material from Central America and Mexico in having the scutellum 
testaceous. Structurally all are essentially the same and I do not 
believe that even subspecific rank for the Brazilian specimens is 
warranted. 

Genus Promicrogaster Brues and Richardson 

Promicrogaster Brues and Richardson, Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. 32, p. 
499, 1913. Type, P. terebrator Brues and Richardson, by monotypy and 
original designation. 

This genus is very similar to Microgaster Latreille, and when more 
species are known it may prove to be untenable. For the present, 
however, it seems best to recognize it as a separate genus distinguished 
from Microgaster by the following combination of characters: Head 
very thin, the temples strongly receding; ciypeus not separated 
from face; labium protruding conspicuously and deeply bifurcate at 
apex; areolet of forewing minute; longer calcarium of hind tibia not 
more, usually less, than half as long as metatarsus ; disc of scutellum 
longer than broad, the polished area each side of disc occupying 
nearly all of lateral face; hypopygium large, plowshare-like; ovi- 
positor sheath much longer than abdomen. Distribution, Neo- 
tropical. 

Key to the known species of Promicrogaster 

1. Propodeum with a prominent median longitudinal carina; first tergite not 

narrowing caudad, smooth and shining; malar space at least half as long as 

eye; length about 6 mm 2 

Propodeum without a median carina; first tergite narrowing caudad and 
rugulose or coarsely punctate on apical half; malar space much shorter; 
length usually 4 to 5 mm 3 

2. Middle and hind legs beyond coxae largely black. 

terebrator Brues and Richardson 
Legs reddish yellow miranda, new species 

3. Abdomen largely reddish yellow above and entirely so below; hmd coxae not 

black basally; length about 5 mm munda, new species 

Abdomen black, the third and following segments narrowly white on posterior 
margins; hind coxae black basally; length not over 4 mm. 

polyporicola, new species 

Promicrogaster terebrator Brues and Richardson 

Promicrogaster terebrator Brues and Richardson, Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 
vol. 32, p. 500, 1913. 

This species is known from a single specimen collected at Cheno- 
powu, British Guiana. It is apparently exceedingly similar to P. 
miranda, from which it differs most conspicuously in the color of the 
legs, the middle and hind legs beyond the coxae being black. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 



417 




Figure 1. — a-l, Anterior and posterior wings of: a, Optus aldrichi, new species; b, 0. diver- 
gens, new species, c, Fornicia bailout, new species; d, Percnobracon secundus, new species; 
e, Phaenocarpa anastrephae, new species;/, Opius toxotrypanae, new species; g, Leurinion 
primum, new species; h, Opius capsicola, new species; i, Meteorus eaclidis, new species; 
;', Apanteles cofeellae, new species; k, Microctonus audax, new species; /, Centistes epicaeri, 
new species, m, n, Dasylagon aegeriae, new species: m, stigma and first and second cubital 
cells; n, nervellus. o, Microplitis minutalis, new species: stigma and first and second 
cubital cells, p, Promicrogaster miranda, new species: portion of anterior wing. 



418 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 








Figure 2. — a, First and second tergites of Apanteles concinnus, new species; b, propodeum 
of Meteotus eaclidis, new species; c, lateral view of head of Leurinion primum, new species; 
d y propodeum and abdomen of Apanteles paradoxus, new species; e, front view of head of 
Pro-micro gaster miranda, new species; /, first and second tergites of Apanteles coffeellae, 
new species; g, propodeum of Dasylagon aegeriae, new species; h, front view of head of 
Optus toxotrypanae, new species; i t cocoon of Apanteles concinnus, new species. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MTJESEBECK 



419 




Figure 3. — a, Lateral view of abdomen of Centistes epicaeri, new species; b, front view of 
head of Opius diver gens, new species; c, front view of head of Phaenocarpa anastrephae, 
new species; d, ovipositor of Meteorus kraussi, new species; e, front view of head of Opius 
capsicola, new species; /, lateral view of abdomen of Opius aldrichi, new species; g, first 
tergite and, h, propodeum of Leurinion primum, new species; i, ventral view of first abdomi- 
nal segment of Meteorus kraussi, new species. 



420 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure 4. — a, Dorsal view and, b, lateral view of Percnobracon secundus, new species; c, 
dorsal view of body of Fornicia bailout, new species; d, first and second tergites of Apanteles 
schini; e> base of abdomen of Microctonus audax, new species; /, first, second, and third 
tergites of Apanteles alius, new species; g, first and second tergites of Apanteles malthacae, 
new species. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 421 

Promicrogaster miranda, new species 

Figures l,p; 2,e 

This species is known to me from a single female specimen. It is 
very similar to the genotype, P. terebrator Brues and Kichardson, 
1913, but may be distinguished by its reddish yellow legs. 

Female: Length 6 mm. Head much narrower than thorax; 
clypeal foveae below level of lower eye margins; malar space more 
than half as long as width of face; clypeus unusually long, rather flat, 
broadly emarginate at apex; face and clypeus closely punctate and 
thickly hairy; vertex and temples finely and closely punctate, the 
punctures in large part concealed by the dense pilosity; antennae a 
little shorter than the body. 

Thorax very stout; mesoscutum closely punctate and densely 
pilose; disc of scutellum longer than broad at base, with a few scattered 
punctures and with a fringe of long hairs along the sides; polished 
area each side of the disc triangular and occupying nearly all of the 
lateral face of scutellum; propodeum finely roughened toward base, 
with coarse rugae apically and with a complete, prominent median 
longitudinal carina; mesopleuron punctate and hairy anteriorly and 
below the longitudinal impression, smooth and virtually bare in 
the impression and above it, posterior groove foveate; metapleuron 
coarsely punctate and thickly hairy; hind coxa nearly as long as 
femur, smooth and shining; inner caicarium of hind tibia not quite 
half as long as metatarsus; stigma very narrow, at least three times 
as long as its greatest breadth, much shorter than metacarpus; first 
abscissa of radius about as long as 1st abscissa of cubitus, evenly 
arched, five times as long as first intercubitus ; second cubital cell 
minute; second intercubitus very weak. 

Abdomen large; first tergite parallel-sided, gently and broadly 
excavated on basal half, emarginate at apex, its lateral margins promi- 
nent, its lateral apical angles rounded, its surface smooth and shining; 
second tergite smooth and shining, at least three times as broad as long 
down the middle where it is much longer than at the sides ; third and 
following tergites smooth and polished; hypopygium large and plow- 
share-shaped; ovipositor sheath slender, 4 mm. long. 

Head and thorax black; clypeus reddish yellow except at base; 
labrum and scape testaceous; pedicel and flagellum of antenna dark 
brown; tegulae and wing bases white; wings whitish hyaline; costa 
yellowish white; stigma brown, pale at base and apex, most of the veins 
hyaline; legs, including all coxae, yellowish red; posterior legs a little 
more reddish than the others and having the apices of tibiae and the 
tarsi blackish; abdomen reddish yellow with black blotches medially 
on tergites 4 to 8, those on tergites 5 and 6 the largest. 

433891—58 2 



422 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Type: USNM 63051. 

Type locality: Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone. 
Described from a single female collected by James Zetek early in 
1944. 

Promicrogaster munda, new species 

In habitus and size this species approaches P. miranda, but in the 
sculptured first tergite, the lack of a median carina on the propodeum, 
and the relatively short malar space it is more similar to P. polypori- 
cola, from which it is easily distinguished, however, by the color 
characters given in the key. 

Female: Length 5 mm. Face and clypeus with shallow, closely 
placed punctures; malar space longer than clypeus but less than one- 
third as long as eye or width of face ; antennae about as long as body. 

Mesoscutum shining but covered with closely placed, shallow punc- 
tures and fine hair, the hair longest and most conspicuous in the con- 
verging, shallow depressions of posterior half that represent the un- 
developed notaulices; propodeum finely rugulose, without a median 
carina, not or barely longer than scutellum; mesopleuron finely, closely 
punctate and shining except posteriorly where it is polished and 
impunctate; metapleuron smooth at base, finely rugulose at apex; 
hind coxa large, fully twice as long as propodeum, shining, weakly 
punctate; stigma three times as long as broad; metacarpus much 
longer than stigma; outer side of first cubital cell strongly arched; 
nervellus a little curved. 

Abdomen compressed, much narrower than thorax; sclerotized 
plate of first tergite narrowing gradually from base to apex, finely 
rugulose on apical half; median plate of second tergite smooth and 
shining, defined laterally by oblique grooves, more than twice as wide 
on posterior margin as long down the middle, about half as long as 
third; third and following tergites smooth and polished; ovipositor 
sheath 1% times as long as abdomen; ovipositor decurved at apex. 

Head and thorax black; scape reddish brown at base in front; lower 
edge of clypeus and the labrum reddish yellow; palpi and labium a 
little paler; tegulae transparent yellow; wing bases pale yellow; wings 
hyaline, stigma dark brown; legs, including all coxae, reddish yellow 
(hind tarsi missing); abdomen reddish yellow, median plate of first 
tergite apically, and the fourth and following tergites medially, piceous; 
ovipositor sheath blackish. 

Type: USNM 63052. 

Type locality. Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 

Described from a single female specimen collected July 23, 1917, 
by F. J. Dyer. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 423 

Promicrogaster polyporicola, new species 

This new species may be distinguished from P. terebrator and P. 
miranda by its smaller size, lack of a median carina on the propodeum, 
sculptured first tergite and relatively shorter malar space; from P. 
munda it is easily separated by its smaller size and by the color 
characters given in the key. 

Female: Length about 4 mm. Face and clypeus strongly shining, 
covered with closely placed, very shallow punctures; malar space 
about as long as clypeus, less than one-third as long as width of face; 
ocellocular line hardly twice as long as greatest diameter of an ocellus ; 
antennae a little shorter than body. 

Mesoscutum shining, closely punctate and covered with short 
pubescence; disc of scutellum smooth and shining, with only a few 
scattered punctures, the polished area each side of the disc triangular 
and occupying nearly all of the lateral face; propodeum finely rugulose, 
with two rather weak, irregular, posteriorly convergent carinae that 
meet near the middle; stigma about twice as long as wide; second 
cubital cell minute, barely noticeable, smaller than in any of the other 
known species of the genus; nervellus straight; hind coxa about as 
long as hind femur but not nearly twice as long as propodeum, smooth 
and polished, with only a few punctures on outer upper edge toward 
base; inner calcarium of hind tibia not nearly half as long as meta- 
tarsus. 

First tergite narrowing slightly caudad, its basal width about equal 
to median length of propodeum, finely rugulose; sclerotized plate of 
second tergite nearly four times as broad on posterior margin as long 
down the middle, much shorter laterally than at middle, smooth and 
polished but sometimes with a row of indefinite punctures just before 
caudal margin; the following tergites smooth and polished; ovipositor 
sheath longer than abdomen or hind tarsus; ovipositor strongly 
decurved at apex. 

Black; labrum, mandibles and scapes yellow; clypeus more or 
less reddish on lower half; wings hyaline; stigma dark brown except 
for a small yellow spot at extreme base; tegulae testaceous; wing 
bases pale yellow; legs brownish yellow, hind coxa black above at 
extreme base, hind femur blackish at extreme apex and hind tibia 
narrowly yellow at base. 

Male : Like the female in essential particulars. 

Type: USNM 63053. 

Type locality: Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone. 

Described from six females and three males reared by James Zetek 
October and November 1941 from a lepidopterous larva infesting a 
polyporaceous fungus of the genus Forties. 



424 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Dasylagon, 2 new genus 

Dasylagon, new genus, resembles Promicrogaster Braes and Richard- 
son in its relatively short tibial spurs, long ovipositor and in not 
having the clypeus distinctly separated from the face; it resembles 
Microgaster Latreille in general habitus and in having the labium not 
prominently protruding and not deeply bifurcate. From both genera 
it differs in its very coarsely areolated propodeum and sinuate nervel- 
lus, and in having the head, thorax, and coxae, especially the sides 
of the thorax, conspicuously hairy. 

Head much narrower than thorax, immargined behind; antennae 
18-segmented, long and thick; eyes hairy; thorax stout; both head and 
thorax, and the coxae also, conspicuously hairy; prescutellar furrow 
coarsely foveate; propodeum areolated, the separating carinae very 
prominent; prepectus immargined; second cubital cell minute; nervel- 
lus sinuate; wings very weakly hairy basally; longer calcarium of 
middle tibia much shorter than middle metatarsus; that of hind 
tibia less than half as long as hind metatarsus; abdomen broad 
basally; first tergite very large; hypopygium large, plowshare-like; 
ovipositor much longer than abdomen. 

Type: Dasylagon aegeriae, new species. 

Key to the two known species of Dasylagon 

A prominent median carina from base of propodeum to base of areola; nervulus 
postfurcal by not more than its length aegeriae, new species 

Propodeum with a small median area instead of a median carina basad of areola; 
nervulus postfurcal by much more than its length .... simulans, new species 

Dasylagon aegeriae, new species 

Figures l,m,n; 2,g 

D. aegeriae is distinguished from the only other known species as 
shown in the preceding key. 

Female: Length about 5.5 mm. Head noticeably hairy, about 
two-thirds as wide as thorax; face at least as wide as eye height, 
smooth and shining with only extremely shallow punctures; malar 
space as long as clypeus, weakly punctate; ocellocular line twice as 
long as diameter of an ocellus; antennae as long as the body, the 
apical third tapering noticeably. 

Thorax and coxae covered with long, conspicuous hair; mesoscutum 
strongly shining, with small, separated punctures; prescutellar furrow 
divided into six or seven large foveae; disc of scutellum longer than 
broad, flat, with some weak punctures laterally; lateral face of scutel- 



2 From the Greek dasys, hairy, and lagon, side. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 425 

lum with a large, triangular, hairless, polished area which is separated 
from the disc by a coarsely foveate groove; metanotum with a few 
strong rugae and a sharply defined ovate median area; propodeum 
with two large basal areas separated by a median longitudinal carina 
that extends to the areola; areola pentagonal, flanked on each side by 
a large, coarsely rugose area; spiracular area small but sharply de- 
limited; all carinae of propodeum very prominent; mesopleuron 
smooth and polished, weakly punctate anteriorly; metapleuron rugose; 
stigma three times as long as broad; outer side of first cubital cell 
strongly arched; second cubital cell tiny, the second intercubitus 
very short and slender; nervulus postfurcal by not more than its 
length; forewing very sparsely hairy on basal half, the submedian 
cell almost entirely glabrous; nervellus strongly sinuate; inner cal- 
carium of middle tibia only a little more than half as long as meta- 
tarsus, that of hind tibia about one-third as long as hind metatarsus. 

Abdomen broad basally, narrowing strongly from second tergite 
to apex, entirely smooth and polished; first tergite very large, broader 
than propodeum is long, nearly parallel-sided behind the spiracles, 
somewhat narrowed in front, usually with five or six weak punctures 
near lateral margin well before apex, posterior margin strongly sinuate; 
second tergite strongly transverse, its posterior margin straight; hypo- 
pygium prominent, plowshare-shaped; ovipositor sheath slender, about 
as long as head and thorax combined and with a small hook at apex. 

Black, the long and abundant hair of head, thorax, and coxae con- 
trastingly pale; labrum red; palpi and labium yellowish brown; 
antennae entirely black; wings hyaline, stigma nearly black; legs 
reddish brown, the coxae and trochanters black and the middle and 
hind tarsi blackish; ovipositor sheath black. 

Male : Essentially like the female. 

Type: USNM 63054. 

Type locality: Medellin, Colombia. 

Described from three females and one male reared by F. Luis 
Gallego from an unidentified aegeriid larva in March 1954. 

Dasylagon simulans, new species 

This new species is very similar to D. aegeriae, but it may be dis- 
tinguished without difficulty by use of the characters given in the key. 
In addition, the face is noticeably smoother and the scutellum more 
strongly sculptured. 

Male: Length about 6 mm. Head much narrower than thorax, 
densely hairy; face wider than eye height, smooth and shining, im- 
punctate; malar space about as long as clypeus; ocellocular line less 
than twice as long as diameter of an ocellus. 



426 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Thorax and coxae conspicuously hairy; mesoscutum strongly shining, 
covered with minute, shallow, separated punctures; prescutellar fur- 
row divided into five or six large pits; disc of scutellum longer than 
broad, rather strongly, in part confidently, punctate; the large polished 
area of lateral face of scutellum separated from disc and from mesoscu- 
tum by coarsely foveate grooves; propodeum rugose, with a small, 
nearly square, basal median area followed by a large, more or less 
obovate areola; on each side of these a large basal lateral area, and a 
still larger apical lateral area the apical lateral angle of which extends 
prominently caudad; spiracular area nicely defined and rather large; 
all carinae of propodeum very prominent ; mesopleuron closely, finely 
punctate except for a narrow polished strip along caudal margin; 
metapleuron coarsely rugose; stigma three times as long as wide; 
radius curved outwardly, more than three times as long as first inter- 
cubitus and four times as long as second; nervulus postf ureal by con- 
siderably more than its length; wings very sparsely hairy basally; 
nervellus slightly sinuate; hind coxa smooth and shining; inner spur 
of middle tibia about two-thirds as long as middle metatarsus; inner 
spur of hind tibia less than half as long as hind metatarsus. 

Abdomen much narrower than thorax, entirely smooth and polished; 
first tergite very large, longer than broad, broader than propodeum 
is long, narrowed from spiracles to base, parallel-sided behind spiracles, 
slightly emarginate behind; second tergite much shorter than third, 
three times as broad as long, its posterior margin nearly straight. 

Black, with the abundant pubescence of head and thorax silvery; 
clypeus, mandibles and palpi reddish yellow; wings clear hyaline, 
stigma dark brown; legs reddish yellow, with all coxae and trochanters 
and the hind tarsi black. 

Female: Essentially like the male; ovipositor as long as head and 
thorax combined. The only available female specimen has part of 
its abdomen destroyed, for which reason the male is selected as holo- 
type. 

Type: USNM 63055. 

Type locality: Tegucigalpa, Honduras. 

Described from one male and one female collected June 13, 1918, by 
F. J. Dyer. 

Genus Microplitis Foerster 

Microplitis minutalis, new species 

Figure 1,o 

This is the smallest species of Microplitis known to me. It is, 
further, unusual in having all femora somewhat thickened and in 
having a narrow, triangular, median plate on the second tergite set 
off by oblique grooves. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 427 

Female: Length about 1.6 mm. Head as broad as thorax; temples 
convex, about as broad as eyes; face broader than eye height, minutely, 
closely punctate; clypeus very short, about one-fourth as long as face; 
malar space about as long as clypeus; antennae as long as head and 
thorax combined. 

Thorax depressed, wider than high ; mesoscu turn smooth and shining, 
sparsely and very weakly punctate anteriorly, impunctate posteriorly; 
prescutellar furrow very fine, with numerous minute foveolae; disc of 
scutellum flat, smooth and polished; propodeum only slightly decli- 
vous, largely smooth and shining, with only a little weak, indefinite 
sculpture; mesopleuron smooth and shining, its posterior groove 
coarsely foveate; metapleuron smooth and shining; stigma about as 
long as metacarpus; radius perpendicular to anterior margin of wing 
and not longer than first intercubitus ; second intercubitus weakly 
developed; hind coxae a little longer than propodeum, smooth and 
shining; all femora noticeably thickened; inner spur of hind tibia longer 
than outer and half as long as metatarsus. 

First tergite narrowing from base to apex, less than half as wide at 
apex as at base, smooth and shining, with only a little, very weak 
sculpture laterally near apex; second tergite with a narrow, triangular, 
median plate, which is more than twice as long as wide at base and 
slightly longer than wide at apex, smooth and polished; ovipositor 
sheath slightly exserted, slender. 

Piceous black; mouthparts piceous; antennae black; tegulae brown- 
ish black; wings hyaline, stigma dark brown without a pale spot at 
base; all coxae, trochanters, and femora black; tibiae and tarsi brown. 

Male: Like the female except for the antennae, which are as long 
as the body. 

Type: USNM 63056. 

Type locality: Angol, Chile. 

Described from 7 females and 5 males reared from a lepidopterous 
leaf miner March 13, 1941, by Paul A. Berry. 

Microplitis sordidus (Ashmead), new combination 

Apanteles sordidus Ashmead, Trans. Ent. Soc. London (1900), p. 279, 1900. 
Microplitis carinata Ashmead, Idem, p. 293, 1900. New synonymy. 

Upon examination of the type of sordidus in the British Museum 
some years ago I found it to belong to the genus Microplitis and to be 
identical with M. carinalus, over which it has page priority. Both 
were described from the island of St. Vincent. 

Genus Fornicia Brulle 

Fornicia Brull6, In Lepeletier, Histoire naturelle des insectes. Hym6nopteres, 

vol. 4, p. 511; pi. 44, fig. 3, 1846. 
Odontofornica Enderlein, Ent. Mitteil., vol. 1, p. 260, 1912. 



428 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

In the venation of the fore wing, in the hairy eyes, and in the 18- 
segmented antennae, this genus is like Apanteles Foerster, but it 
differs conspicuously from that genus, as well as from all other known 
Microgasterinae, in having the basal three tergites fused into a large, 
convex carapace within which the remaining abdominal segments are 
retracted. It is further distinguished from all other Microgasterinae 
except Dirrhope Foerster in having the prepectus carinately margined. 
In some species the scutellum is unidentate at the apex, in others it 
is bidentate, which is the case for all the known Neotropical species. 
The nervellus is strongly sinuate in all species I have seen. 

Key to the Neotropical species of Fornicia 

1. Median keel of mesoscutum complete 2 

Median keel of mesoscutum present on posterior half but vanishing anterior- 
ly 3 

2. Mesoscutum finely alutaceous and dull, not punctate or rugulose; pleura not 

unusually hairy balloui, new species 

Mesoscutum shining, not alutaceous but rather punctate or rugulose, especially 
before posterior margin; pleura so densely hairy that integument is obscured. 

pilosa Cushman 

3. Mesopleuron smooth and shining; mesoscutum smooth, impunctate before 

posterior margin; notaulices shallow but distinct clathrata Brulle* 

Mesopleuron punctate over most of its surface; mesoscutum strongly, con- 
fluently punctate or rugose before posterior margin* notaulices not distinct. 

surma men sis, new species 

Fornicia balloui, new species 

Figures 1,c; 4,c 

This new species is distinguished from the other known Neo- 
tropical species of Fornicia by its finely alutaceous and mat mesos- 
cutum. 

Female. Length about 4 mm. Face much broader than long, 
smooth and shining, with only very shallow setigerous punctures; 
clypeus with a conspicuous rounded tubercle medially at base; malar 
space equal to basal width of mandible; frons polished, impressed; 
temple gradually receding directly from eye margin; occiput polished, 
impunctate; antennae at least as long as body. 

Thorax very stout, only slightly longer than broad; mesoscutum 
alutaceous and dull, with a small rugulose area each side anteriorly 
at origin of notaulices; notaulices shallow but rather broad and longi- 
tudinally rugulose, nearly parallel throughout; midway between 
notaulices a well defined and complete longitudinal carina; prescutellar 
furrow broad and deep; disc of scutellum coarsely rugose, strongly 
bidentate at apex; mesopleuron polished except narrowly along anterior 
margin where it is punctate rugulose; metapleuron rugose; hind coxa 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MTJESEBECK: 429 

polished; inner calcarium of hind tibia slightly more than half as 
long as the broadened metatarsus. 

Abdomen very stout; the three tergites comprising the carapace 
rather well defined; first tergite vertical in front, the declivity mar- 
gined above by a scalloped carina, from which there is a median longi- 
tudinal keel that is distinct to apex of first tergite and more poorly 
defined beyond; surface of all three tergites very coarsely longi- 
tudinally rugose reticulate; apex of third tergite very weakly emar- 
ginate; hypopygium not surpassing apex of third tergite; ovipositor 
usually concealed. 

Black; labrum and palpi brown; antennae entirely black; wings 
hyaline, stigma and veins dark brown; anterior and middle legs 
yellowish brown beyond trochanters, except extreme bases of tibiae 
which are whitish and the apical segment of each tarsus which is dark 
brown or black; hind leg entirely black except for a conspicuous 
white annulus covering basal third of tibia and the white calcaria. 

Male. Like the female in all significant particulars except in the 
color of the hind legs, the femur being yellowish brown with the 
apex broadly black, and the tibia tricolored, as usual in males of 
this genus, with approximately the middle third black, the basal 
third whitish, and the distal third yellowish brown. 

Type: USNM 63057. 

Type locality: Caracas, Venezuela. 

Described from 19 females and 6 males reared from larvae of an 
unidentified species of the cochlidiid genus Sibine, by C. H. Ballou, 
for whom the species is named. This is the longest series of any 
species of Fornicia I have seen. 

Fornicia pilosa Cushman 

Fornicia pilosa Cushman, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 79, Art. 14, p. 12, 1931. 

This is an unusually hairy species. It is still known only from the 
holotype female, from Costa Rica. 

Fornicia clathrata Brulle 

Fornicia clathrata Brulle, In Lepeletier, Histoire naturelle des insectes. Hymen- 
opteres, vol. 4, p. 512, pi. 44, fig. 3, 1846. 

Although the author expressed uncertainty concerning the sex of 
the specimen, the description leaves little doubt that the type is a 
male. The type locality is Bahia, Brazil. I am treating as this 
species five males taken by E. J. Hambleton on March 27, 1930, at 
Vicosa, Minas Geraes, Brazil, although they have been identified 
only by comparison with the original description and that description 
is not altogether satisfactory. 



430 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Fornicia surinamensis, new species 

F. surinamensis is distinguished from F. clathrata Bridle*, as I under- 
stand that species, by its closely and strongly punctate mesoscutum 
and finely punctate mesopleuron. 

Male. Length about 4 mm. Head about half as wide as thorax; 
face very finely but closely punctate; clypeus smooth and shining; 
ocellocular line a little longer than diameter of an ocellus; distal third 
of antenna tapering strongly. 

Thorax very short and stout; mesoscutum closely punctate, con- 
fluently so anteriorly and also before posterior margin; median keel 
of mesoscutum weak and incomplete, being distinct only on posterior 
half; notaulices not distinct; scutellum rising a little caudad, coarsely 
rugose, strongly bidentate at apex; propodeum with a small, sub- 
triangular, smooth and polished, basal median area; each side of this 
a transverse, basal lateral area that widens laterally and is defined 
behind by a sinuate carina; laterad of the basal lateral area a small, 
sharply defined spiracular area; areola very broad and largely smooth; 
mesopleuron very finely punctate and subopaque over most of its sur- 
face, smooth and polished along caudal margin; metapleuron coarsely 
rugose except for a small polished space at base; radius longer than 
intercubitus; stigma and metacarpus subequal; inner side of stigma 
at least twice as long as outer; nervellus strongly sinuate; hind coxa 
shining but finely, closely punctate; inner calcarium of hind tibia 
a little more than half as long as hind metatarsus. 

Abdomen extremely convex, very coarsely reticulate rugose, with 
a median longitudinal keel from basal declivity to end of abdomen, 
this keel irregular and not well defined on second and third tergites; 
third tergite shorter than first or second, medially sharply emarginate 
at apex. 

Black; palpi pale except at bases; antennae brownish yellow on 
basal half, dark brown beyond; tegulae and wing bases black; wings 
hyaline, stigma dark brown with a small pale spot in the membrane 
at base; all coxae black; trochanters blackish; all femora red, the 
posterior pair black at apices; fore and middle tibiae and tarsi yellow; 
hind tibia white on basal third, black on middle third and red on 
distal third ; hind metatarsus black. 

Type: USNM 63058. 

Type locality: Paramaribo, Surinam. 

Described from a single male reared from a cochlidiid larva on 
coconut Feb. 2, 1954. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 431 

Genus Apanteles Foerster 

Apanteles aciculatus (Ashmead) 

Urogaster aciculatus Ashmead, Trans. Ent. Soc. London (1900), p. 289, 1900. 
Pseudapanteles sancti-vincenti Ashmead, Idem, p. 291, 1900. (Not Apanteles 

sancti-vincenti Ashmead, idem, p. 279.) New synonymy. 
Apanteles thoracicus Muesebeck, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 58, p. 534, 1921. 

New synonymy. This name was proposed to replace the preoccupied 

sancti-vincenti. 

Study of the types of Urogaster aciculatus and Pseudapanteles 
sancti-vincenti in the British Museum showed them to be the same 
species. The replacement name, A. thoracicus, was proposed before 
there had been an opportunity for examination of the types. A. 
aciculatus was described from Grenada and A. sancti-vincenti from 
St. Vincent, both in the British West Indies. 

Apanteles carpatus (Say) 

Microgaster carpatus Say, Boston Journ. Nat. Hist., vol. 1, p. 263, 1836. 

Urogaster solitarius Ashmead, Trans. Ent. Soc. London (1900), p. 287, 1900. 
Preoccupied by Microgaster solitarius Ratzeburg, 1844, which has been trans- 
ferred to Apanteles. New synonymy. 

Protapanteles hawaiiensis Ashmead, Fauna Hawaiiensis, vol. 1, p. 362, 1901. 

Apanteles piceoventris Muesebeck, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 58, p. 515, 1921. 
Replacement name for the preoccupied Urogaster solitarius (Ashmead). 
New synonymy. 

Apanteles igae Watanabe, Ins. Mats., vol. 7, p. 97, 1932. 

This species, which is a parasite of the clothes moths and certain 
other related Tineidae, is virtually world-wide in distribution. I 
saw the type of Urogaster solitarius (Ashmead) in the British Museum 
and found it to be Microgaster carpatus (Say). It was described 
from the island of Grenada, British West Indies. 

Apanteles balthazari (Ashmead) 

Urogaster balthazari Ashmead, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1900, p. 284, 1900. 
Urogaster meridionalis Ashmead, Idem, p, 285, 1900. New synonymy. 

Examination of the types in the British Museum showed that these 
names apply to the same species. Accordingly, Urogaster meridionalis 
is suppressed as a synonym of Apanteles balthazari, which has page 
priority. The former was described from St. Vincent and Grenada, 
the latter from Grenada. 

Apanteles cqffeellae, new species 

Figures l,j; 2,/ 

This species runs to Apanteles laevicoxis Muesebeck in my key to 
the Nearactic and West Indian species, 3 but it differs from that form 

3 Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 58, p. 488, 1921. 



432 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

most conspicuously in its smoother mesoscutum, in having well- 
developed costulae on the propodeum, and in having the plate of the 
first tergite strongly narrowed apically and the second and third 
tergites confluent, in its dark tegulae, and in its much smaller size. 
A. leucochiloneae Cameron, which is closely related, is at once sepa- 
rated by its whitish tegulae and hyaline stigma and by lacking costulae 
on the propodeum. 

Female: Length barely 2 mm. Face shining, faintly punctate; 
frons polished ; vertex and temples weakly punctate; temples rounded, 
not receding from eye margins; antennae about as long as the body. 

Thorax stout; mesoscutum with sharp, though shallow, closely 
placed punctures over most of its surface, becoming progressively 
smoother caudad, impunctate and polished before posterior margin; 
prescutellar furrow a fine punctate line; disc of scutellum nearly flat, 
impunctate, polished; polished area on lateral face of scutellum tri- 
angular, large, extending nearly to base of disc; propodeum largely 
smooth and shining with distinct costulae and a weakly defined, 
broad, pentagonal areola; mesopleuron and metapleuron impunctate, 
polished, the fine impressed line between them not punctate or 
foveolate; hind coxa impunctate, polished and with an elongate 
flattened area outwardly above at base; inner calcarium of hind 
tibia hardly half as long as basi tarsus; stigma unusually short, only 
two-thirds as long as metacarpus; first abscissa of radius about as long 
as intercubitus, not angled with the latter but joining it in an even 
curve; petiole of first discoidal cell about as long as recurrent vein; 
nervellus straight, perpendicular to mediella, not curving behind 
toward base of wing. 

Abdomen short, entirely smooth and polished; plate of first tergite 
narrowing strongly to apex where it is only one-third as broad as at 
base; second tergite confluent with third and with a short, oblique 
groove on each side at base; hypopygium large, prominent; ovipositor 
sheath very slender, as long as hind femur. 

Black; labrum pale yellow; palpi white; antenna dark brown above, 
yellowish brown beneath, pedicel usually darker than scape and first 
flagellar segment; legs yellow with base of middle coxa and the hind 
coxa black, and posterior tibia apically and posterior tarsus more or 
less dusky, posterior femur immaculate; tegulae and wing bases 
brownish black, wings hyaline, stigma brown, costa pale yellow, 
veins hyaline except outer side of first cubital cell; membranous 
margins of first tergite and venter of abdomen toward base dark 
brown or piceous. 

Male: Differs from female only in the darker legs, the middle 
femur being slightly dusky, and the posterior femur, together with 
the posterior tibia except at base, piceous. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 433 

Type: USNM 63059. 

Type locality: Guadeloupe, French West Indies. 

Described from 7 females and 8 males reared from Leucoptera 
cojfeella (Guerin-Meneville), Sept. 29, 1937, by F. Sein, Jr.; and 1 
female and 7 males reared by Mr. Sein in Puerto Rico from Acrocercops 
dives (Walsingham). 

Apanteles lipomeringis, new species 

This species is distinguished from all known related species by being 
entirely yellow except for the antennal flagellum and by having the 
first tergite deeply longitudinally channeled and the propodeum 
provided with an unusually prominent median longitudinal carina. 

Female: Length about 2.6 mm. Head noticeably hollowed out 
behind; temples receding; face and clypeus minutely punctate and 
shining; malar space not quite as long as clypeus; frons and temples 
smooth and shining; antennae not tapering to apices, about as long 
as the body. 

Mesoscutum weakly, minutely punctate and shining, like face; 
prescutellar furrow finely foveolate; disc of scutellum flat, slightly 
broader at base than long, smooth and shining; propodeum smooth, 
with a very prominent, complete, median longitudinal carina; meso- 
pluron and metapleuron impunctate, polished; hind coxa smooth and 
polished; inner calcarium of hind tibia longer than outer but hardly 
half as long as metatarsus; metacarpus longer than stigma; first 
abscissa of radius about as long as intercubitus and strongly angled 
with it; nervellus oblique but not curved toward base of wing. 

Abdomen much narrower than thorax; first tergite narrowing 
from base to apex, at widest point about half as wide as propodeum, 
deeply, longitudinally channeled along middle line from base almost 
to apex, mostly smooth with only a few weak punctures on apical 
third; median plate of second tergite defined laterally by strongly 
oblique grooves, broader at base than long, about twice as wide 
at apex as at base, impunctate, polished; remainder of abdomen 
polished; ovipositor sheath slender, about as long as hind tarsus. 

Entirely yellow, with only flagellum and a blotch on front of scape 
brown; wings subhyaline; stigma, costal margin, and veins brown. 

Male: Like the female except for the longer, somewhat tapering 
antennae and the relatively slightly longer second tergite. 

Type: USNM 63060. 

Type locality: Summit, Canal Zone. 

Described from 1 female (type) and 6 males reared from the larva 
of Lipomerinx prismatica Walsingham, Apr. 14, 1927, by James 
Zetek, under his No. 2793. 



434 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Apanteles alius, new species 

Figure 4,/ 

This species is very similar to Apanteles glomeratus (Linnaeus), and 
is easily confused with that species. It may be distinguished, however, 
by the paler coxae, the darker cost a, the less shining and more evenly 
sculptured mesoscutum, the absence of a median longitudinal im- 
pression at the base of the propodeum, and the relatively broader 
second tergite, the sculptured part of which is not defined laterally by 
oblique grooves as in A. glomeratus. From A. opsiphanis Schrottky, 
which is known to me only from the original description, it differs in 
the much paler legs and the smoother second tergite. In both A. 
glomeratus and A. opsiphanis all coxae are black or blackish. 

Female: Length about 2.5 mm. Face smooth and shining, 
faintly punctate each side of middle ; antennae slender, at least as long 
as the body. Mesoscutum closely, evenly punctate and subopaque; 
prescutellar furrow sharp, foveate; disc of scutellum smooth and pol- 
ished, with only a few scattered, shallow punctures; propodeum 
strongly rugulose, the median longitudinal carina incomplete or want- 
ing, the spiracles prominent; mesopleuron largely smooth and polished, 
posterior groove finely foveolate; metapleuron impunctate and 
polished on basal half, rugose and dull on apical half; hind coxa smooth 
and shining but with a small, flattened, punctate area on upper edge 
at base; inner calcarium of posterior tibia not, or barely, longer than 
outer and not distinctly half as long as metatarsus; metacarpus 
slightly longer than stigma; first abscissa of radius perpendicular to 
anterior margin of wing, longer than intercubitus and joining it in 
a weak angle; nervellus strongly oblique but straight. 

Abdomen rather stout, almost as broad as thorax; sclerotized plate 
of first tergite broadening gradually from base to apex, a little longer 
than broad at apex, smooth on basal half, punctate apically; second 
tergite rectangular, more than twice as broad as long, much shorter 
than third, smooth and polished medially, usually finally rugulose 
toward sides; second suture very fine; third and following tergites 
impunctate, polished; ovipositor sheath subexserted. 

Black; labrum and mandibles brown; palpi pale yellow; antennae 
wholly brownish black; wings hyaline; stigma and veins brown; 
anterior and middle legs, including coxae, yellow, immaculate; hind 
leg yellow with basal half of coxa, apex of femur, apex of tibia and the 
tarsus, black; abdomen bright yellow on sides and beneath on basal 
half. 

Male: Differs from the female only in its considerably longer and 
more slender antennae. 

Type: USNM 63061. 

Type locality: El Valle, Venezuela. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 435 

Described from 14 females and 1 male reared from Opsiphanes 
c. cassiae (Linnaeus) on Musa sapientum at the type locality, Mar. 16, 
1939, by C. H. Ballou; and 4 females and 1 male reared from 
Opsiphanes sp. at Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, July 27, 1937, by 
H. F. G. Sauer. 

Apanteles ornatricis, new species 

This species is very similar to Apanteles orobenae Forbes and 
A. glomeratus (Linnaeus), but differs from the former in not having 
the mesoscutum confluently punctate, in the paler coxae, in the nar- 
rower first tergite and in the straight nervellus, and differs from 
the latter in the more completely sculptured first tergite and the 
shorter radius. 

Female: Length about 2.3 mm. Head about as wide as thorax; 
face closely, shallowly punctate, about as wide as eye height; malar 
space as long as clypeus ; antennae as long as body. 

Mesoscutum rather uniformly punctate, the punctures contiguous 
but not confluent; prescutellar furrow with around eight foveae; 
scutellum large, smooth and shining; propodeum rugose, usually with 
a more or less distinct median longitudinal carina ; mesopleuron smooth 
and polished except for a small area below tegula which is confluently 
punctate; metapleuron rugose except for a small polished space at 
base; radius issuing from slightly beyond middle of stigma and not 
longer than intercubitus, with which it is sharply angled; nervellus 
strongly oblique but perfectly straight; hind coxae smooth and 
polished, impunctate; inner calcarium of hind tibia barely longer than 
outer and less than half as long as hind metatarsus. 

Abdomen much narrower than thorax ; first tergite distinctly longer 
than broad, broadening only very slightly from base to apex, closely 
rugulose, the apical angles somewhat rounded off, membranous 
margins broad apically; second tergite much shorter than third, with a 
central rugulose area that is twice as wide on posterior margin as long; 
laterally second tergite smooth and shining, without sutures delimiting 
the sculptured part ; third and following tergites smooth and polished ; 
ovipositor sheath subexserted. 

Black; labrum reddish yellow; antennae brownish black with scape 
sometimes pale beneath; tegulae and wing bases dark brown; wings 
hyaline, stigma brown; anterior coxae piceous; middle coxae yellow, 
piceous at bases above; hind coxae black, yellowish apically below; 
remainder of legs honey yellow, except extreme apices of hind femora 
above, hind tibiae apically and hind tarsi, which are weakly infuscated; 
abdomen black, yellow beneath on basal half, also lateral unsculptured 
margins of first and second tergites yellowish and sometimes the third 
tergite more or less reddish yellow apically. 

Male: Like the female but with the middle and hind coxae more 
completely piceous or black. 



436 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Type: USNM 63062. 

Type locality: Chincina, Colombia; altitude 1380 meters. 

Described from 6 females (including holotype) and 6 males reared 
from Utetheisa ornatrix (Linnaeus) at the type locality by A. Cabal-O. 
May 14, 1942; 9 females and 2 males reared from the same host at 
La Esperanza, Colombia, by R. Paul Roba, Jan. 26, 1938; 16 females 
reared from U. ornatrix, "Valle de Medellin y Atlantico," Colombia, 
and 9 females and 12 males, also from that host, reared by R. de Telia 
at Campinas, Brazil, in 1952. 

Apanteles politiventris, new species 

This new species may be readily recognized by the combination of 
a large, apically squarely truncate, and completely polished central 
plate of the first tergite and an ovipositor sheath that is nearly 1% 
times as long as posterior tarsus. 

Female: Length about 2 mm. Head thin; malar space a little 
longer than clypeus; clypeal foveae represented by two sharp punc- 
tures which are on or below lower level of eyes; face, clypeus, frons, 
and vertex smooth and shining; temples faintly punctate posteriorly; 
antennae about as long as the body. 

Thorax stout, a little broader than high; mesoscutum largely very 
finely, contiguously or confidently punctate and opaque, but smooth 
and shining at posterior margin, thickly covered with short pile; 
disc of scutellum flat, impunctate and polished; polished area on lateral 
face of scutellum semicircular, rather small; propodeum punctate and 
shining on dorsal face, but with some rugae on posterior face, and with 
a large, roughly circular areola which is smooth and shining and 
sharply margined; costulae not distinct; mesopleuron smooth and 
polished, the posterior furrow minutely foveolate; metapleuron smooth 
and polished except narrowly at apex; hind coxae smooth and polished ; 
inner calcarium of hind tibia barely longer than outer and not half 
as long as metatarsus; metacarpus a little longer than stigma; first 
abscissa of radius slightly curved, much longer than intercubitus 
which it joins in a very weak angle; nervellus slightly curved. 

Abdomen smooth and polished with no trace of sculpture; median 
plate of first tergite large, parallel-sided, only slightly longer than 
broad, squarely truncate at apex, with no indication of a median 
fovea but slightly impressed in the apical lateral angles; plate of second 
tergite more than four times as broad as long, much shorter laterally 
than at middle, its posterior margin very faint; ovipositor sheath 
very slender, distinctly longer than the abdomen. 

Black; scape black; flagellum dark brown; palpi somewhat infus- 
cated; legs black or blackish; trochanters, apical half of fore femur, 
fore tibia and tarsus, bases of middle and hind tibiae, and middle 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MTJESEBECK 437 

tarsus except last segment brownish yellow; tegulae and wing bases 
whitish; wings whitish hyaline; costa yellowish white; stigma hyaline 
margined with brown; metacarpus brown; other veins hyaline. 

Type: USNM 63063. 

Type locality: Santurce, Puerto Rico. 

Described from 13 females reared by A. S. Mills on May 19, 1934, 
from lepidopterous larvae on Pluchea purpurascens. 

Apanteles impiger, new species 

Most similar to Apanteles pseudoglossae Muesebeck but without 
distinct costulae on the propodeum, with ovipositor sheath relatively 
much longer and with the male legs and tegulae darker. 

Female: Length 2.3 mm. Face closely shallowly punctate; 
clypeus punctate; malar space as long as clypeus; temple rounded; 
vertex and temples closely punctate ; antenna about as long as body 
and covered with conspicuous, short, white pubescence. 

Thorax stout; mesoscutum closely, in part confluently, punctate, 
more or less rugulose posteriorly, mat; scutellar furrow deep and 
broad, strongly foveolate; disc of scutellum flat, shining, smooth al- 
though sometimes with a few very weak punctures; polished area on 
lateral face of scutellum semicircular, remainder of lateral face trav- 
ersed by numerous carinae radiating from polished area; propodeum 
rugulose and dull except in the areola which is large, more or less 
pentagonal, and open at base, costulae incomplete or wanting, pos- 
terior lateral angles not prominent; mesopleuron smooth and shining 
except anteriorly and below where it is closely punctate and dull, 
impressed line along posterior margin very fine and faintly foveolate; 
metapleuron smooth except at extreme apex; hind coxa smooth, 
shining; inner calcarium of hind tibia slightly more than half as long 
as basitarsus; first abscissa of radius slightly curved, very slender, 
longer than intercubitus which it joins in an even curve; metacarpus 
longer than stigma; nervellus curved below toward base of wing. 

Abdomen rather narrow, shorter than thorax; plate of first tergite 
large, parallel-sided to apical fourth and then narrowing a little to 
apex, closely rugulose and dull except for a narrow, shallow, and 
sometimes poorly defined, median longitudinal impression on apical 
half which is shining; plate of second tergite about twice as wide at 
base and nearly four times as wide at apex as long down the middle, 
mostly smooth and polished, but sometimes a little rugulose along 
apical margin; hypopygium acute at apex, extending slightly beyond 
apex of last dorsal segment; ovipositor sheath about as long as hind 
tibia. 

Black; palpi yellow; antenna entirely black, including scape; 
tegulae and wing bases yellow; wings hyaline, costa yellow, stigma 

433891—58 3 



438 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

and outer side of first cubital cell pale brown, other veins hyaline; 
legs entirely bright yellow except anterior coxae piceous, middle and 
hind coxae black and apices of posterior tibiae and the posterior 
tarsi infuscated; hind femora with no suggestion of infuscation at 
apices; abdomen entirely black above and below. 

Male: Essentially like the female, but tegulae and wing bases 
brownish, trochantines of all legs, middle and hind femora, and 
apical half of posterior tibia piceous. 

Cocoons: Solitary, pure white. 

Type: USNM 63064. 

Type locality: Mayaguez, Puerto Rico. 

Described from 8 females and 7 males reared from the melonworm, 
Diaphania hyalinata (Linnaeus), Nov. 10, 1943, by H. K. Plank. I 
have also seen 3 specimens reared from the same host at Santiago de 
las Vegas, Cuba, by A. Otero, Sept. 28, 1931. 

Apanteles croceicornis, new species 

This new species is recognizable by the unusual color combination 
of the antenna, the scape being black and the flagellum orange yellow, 
and by the strongly tuberculate lateral angles of the propodeum. 

Female: Length about 2.6 mm. Face and clypeus minutely punc- 
tate and shining; temples strongly convex; malar space as long as 
clypeus; antennae slightly shorter than body. 

Mesoscutum evenly and contiguously punctate and rather dull, 
the punctures minute and very shallow; disc of scutellum smooth and 
shining; polished area on lateral face of scutellum large, semicircular, 
the area anterior to it crossed by numerous strong rugae; propodeum 
entirely rugose, with a distinct areola that is margined by strong 
carinae on posterior half, costulae incomplete, posterior lateral angles 
very prominent, tuberculate; mesopleuron polished above and pos- 
teriorly, closely strongly punctate and dull below and anteriorly; 
metapleuron mostly smooth but rather dull; hind coxa smooth and 
shining; inner calcarium of hind tibia not distinctly half as long as 
metatarsus; first abscissa of radius and intercubitus subequal, meeting 
in a strong angle. 

Abdomen narrower than thorax; plate of first tergite nearly parallel- 
sided on basal half, narrowing strongly from middle to apex, about as 
wide at apex as second tergite is long, closely rugulose except at base 
and with a poorly defined, elongate, impressed area in middle of pos- 
terior half, extreme apex smooth and polished; lateral membranous 
margins of first and second tergites very broad; plate of second 
tergite strongly transverse, nearly three times as broad at apex as it 
is long or broad at base, defined laterally by sharp, oblique grooves, 
faintly alutaceous and opaque; remainder of abdomen smooth and 
shining; ovipositor sheath nearly as long as hind femur. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 439 

Black; scape black, pedicel and basal two-thirds of flagellum orange 
yellow, apical fourth of nagellum brownish; tegulae and wing bases 
entirely yellow; wings hyaline, stigma and veins light brown; legs 
including all coxae and tarsi golden yellow; plates of first and second 
tergites black, the membranous margins yellow; third tergite mostly 
yellowish, usually blackish at base and sometimes at apex; venter of 
basal three abdominal segments bright yellow; abdomen beyond 
third segment entirely black. 

Male: Like the female except in having the antennae yellow 
almost to the apices, in the relatively narrower plate of second tergite 
and in the largely piceous third tergite. 

Cocoon: Pure white, solitary. 

Type: USNM 63065. 

Type locality: Canete, Peru. 

Described from two females and two males reared by E. J. Hamble- 
ton from Asciodes anormalis (Guenee) on sweet potato. 

Apanteles malthacae, new species 

Figure 4,g 

Exceedinglyjlike Apanteles sarrothripae Weed and rather difficult 
to distinguish from that species; however, the central plates of the 
first and second tergites are narrower, and, unlike that of A. sarro- 
thripae, the hind coxa has the outer upper edge more or less flattened 
toward base and confluently punctate; furthermore, the hind femur 
is blackish at apex whereas that of A. sarrothripae is wholly yellow. 

Female: Length about 2.5 mm. Face smooth and shining; an- 
tenna about as long as body; vertex and temples polished; ocellocular 
line at least twice as long as diameter of an ocellus. 

Mesoscutum strongly shining and nearly smooth, with only very 
minute, extremely shallow, separated punctures; scutellum smooth 
and shining; propodeum smooth and shining across base, its posterior 
declivity gradual and weakly roughened; mesopleuron smooth and 
polished but with some shallow separated punctures below anteriorly; 
hind coxa with a confluently punctate, more or less flattened area on 
outer upper edge toward base; inner spur of hind tibia very slightly 
longer than outer and not, or barely, half as long as metatarsus; 
radius longer than inter cubitus and strongly angled with it. 

Abdomen compressed, less than half as wide as thorax; first tergite 
narrowing gradually caudad, three times as long as broad at apex, 
finely rugulose on apical half; sclerotized plate of second tergite 
triangular, nearly twice as long and more than twice as wide on 
posterior margin, as broad at base, finely rugulose ; third and following 
tergites polished; ovipositor sheath extending slightly beyond apex 
of abdomen. 



440 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. wj 

Black; antennae blackish, scape brownish yellow beneath; stigma 
dark brown; tegulae and wing bases yellow; anterior and middlelegs 
entirely yellow, including coxae; hind legs yellow, with coxae, apices 
of femora and of tibiae, and more or less of the tarsi black or blackish. 

Type: USNM 63066. 

Type locality: Rio Blanco, Vera Cruz, Mexico. 

Described from 17 females and 31 males reared by Owen J. Smith 
in 1951 from the larvae of Malthaca sp. on wild grape. 

Apanteles concinnus, new species 

Figure 2,a,i 

This new species somewhat resembles Apanteles muesebecki Blanch- 
ard but it is easily distinguished by the exceptionally long and narrow 
sclerotized plate of the second tergite, the presence of some sculpture 
on the plates of both the first and second tergites, and the darkened 
base of the hind tibia. Reared specimens are easily identified by the 
very unusual cocoons (fig. 2,i). 

Female: Length about 2.5 mm. Face flat, shining, almost im- 
punctate, and with a low median keel above; temple narrow but not 
sharply receding; malar space at least as long as clypeus; antennae 
slender, longer than body. 

Mesoscutum shining, with numerous, but not contiguous, minute, 
and very shallow setigerous punctures; scutellum convex, impunctate, 
polished; propodeum shining, smooth basally, a little roughened 
behind middle; mesopleuron and metapleuron and hind coxa polished, 
impunctate; inner calcarium of hind tibia half as long as metatarsus; 
first abscissa of radius arising from middle of stigma, as long as, or a 
little longer than, intercubitus. 

Abdomen hardly half as wide as thorax; plate of first tergite nar- 
rowing from base to apex where it is less than half as wide as second 
tergite is long, weakly roughened on apical third, smooth at extreme 
apex; plate of second tergite narrowly triangular, its basal width 
equal to apical width of first tergite, its apical width about equal to 
its length, its sides defined by straight, sharply impressed lines that 
diverge caudad, its surface mostly smooth and polished but with a 
little very weak sculpture toward lateral apical angles; third and fol- 
lowing tergites smooth and shining; ovipositor sheath not surpassing 
last tergite. 

Black; antennae entirely black; palpi pale yellow; tegulae yellow; 
wing bases brownish; wings hyaline, stigma and veins brown; legs 
testaceous, hind coxae piceous, extreme apex of hind femur, base and 
apex of hind tibia and the hind tarsus infuscated; basal half of abdomen 
yellow on sides and venter. 

Male: Like the female in essential details. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBE€K 441 

Cocoon: White, solitary. Of remarkable form, being 6-sided, with 
two large concave lobes representing extensions of the cocoon wall at 
the posterior end, and with the rim of the anterior end ornamented 
with six slightly flaring elongate lobes, each one nearly as long as 
anterior width of cocoon. 

Type: USNM 63067. 

Type locality: Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 

Described from three females and two males reared by H. F. G. 
Sauer in July and October 1937; and three females and one male 
reared in July 1937 by L. Mendes. Both series are from the type 
locality and from larvae of an unknown species of Lepidoptera. 

Apanteles stenomae, new species 

This new species immediately suggests Apanteles concordalis Cam- 
eron, which it closely resembles in sculpture and color as well as in 
general structure. However, it is smaller; it lacks distinct costulae 
on the propodeum (which are well developed, in A. concordalis), and 
it has a more slender abdomen, with the first tergite about twice as 
long as broad at apex. 

Female: Length about 2.5 mm. Face as wide as eye height, 
closely and more or less confluently punctate, and subopaque; ver- 
tex and frons finely rugulose and largely dull; antennae a little shorter 
than body. 

Mesoscutum strongly, closely, and in part confluently punctate and 
dull; disc of scutellum flat, faintly shagreened, and with scattered, 
very shallow punctures; polished area each side of disc rather large 
but not nearly extending to base of lateral face, the broad depression 
in front of it largely smooth and shining (in A. concordalis it is crossed 
by a number of strong, longitudinal rugae) ; propodeum rugose, with 
a well defined areola which narrows caudad and is open at base; 
costulae wanting; spiracular area defined by an irregular carina; apical 
lateral angles of propodeum acute, projecting caudad; mesopleuron 
mat, confluently punctate anteriorly, but the punctures becoming 
progressively weaker and more widely separated on a shagreened sur- 
face posteriorly; metapleuron polished at base, dull, and sculptured 
apically; radius nearly perpendicular to anterior margin of wing, some- 
what longer than intercubitus and weakly angled with it; nervellus 
strongly curved behind toward base of wing; hind coxa impunctate 
but wealdy shagreened and mat on outer side; inner spur of middle 
tibia very nearly as long as middle metatarsus; that of hind tibia 
much longer than outer and about half as long as hind metatarsus. 

Abdomen much narrower than thorax; first tergite nearly parallel- 
sided, about twice as long as wide at apex, finely longitudinally rugu- 
lose, and with a low median tubercle just before middle, behind 



442 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

which there is a poorly defined median longitudinal impressed area; 
median plate of second tergite 2^ times as broad on posterior margin 
as long medially, defined laterally by fine, sharply impressed, poste- 
riorly divergent grooves, the surface of the plate virtually smooth, 
with only a faint suggestion of sculpture; third and following tergites 
smooth and polished; ovipositor sheath at least as long as hind tarsus. 

Black; antennae, including scape, blackish; maxillary palpi pale 
except basally; tegulae pale yellow; wing bases piceous; wings hyaline, 
stigma and veins hyaline ; legs black, the anterior femora pale distally , 
the anterior and middle tibiae and tarsi brownish yellow, and the 
hind tibia yellowish brown on basal half. 

Male: Like the female but a little smaller and with the antennae 
a little longer than the body. 

Type: USNM 63068. 

Type locality: El Valle, Venezuela. 

Described from 14 females and 5 males reared by C. H. Ballou 
from larvae of a species of Stenoma, Sept. 30, 1941. 

Apanteles dentatus, new species 

Characterized especially by very prominent posterior lateral angles 
of the propodeum, sharply margined propodeal areas, a punctate 
scutellum, a median fovea on the first tergite, a straight posterior 
margin of the second tergite, and an unusually long ovipositor. 

Female: Length about 3.2 mm. Face closely punctate, sub- 
opaque, with an indication of a median keel; upper part of frons, 
vertex, and temples strongly punctate, in part confluently so; anten- 
nae about as long as body. 

Mesoscutum closely, strongly punctate, the sculpture becoming 
more or less longitudinally rugulose posteriorly as a result of confluence 
of punctures and extending to extreme posterior margin; prescutellar 
furrow deep and broad, foveolate; disc of scutellum with scattered 
but sharp and distinct punctures, shining; polished area on lateral 
face of scutellum subtriangular, extending at least halfway toward 
base of scutellum; propodeum rugose and dull; areola large, obovate, 
narrowed posteriorly, weakly closed anteriorly; costulae present; 
apical lateral areas rugose; apical lateral angles acute and strongly 
produced caudad; mesopleuron coarsely, confluently punctate and 
opaque on anterior half, mostly smooth and shining behind, the im- 
pression with fine, concentric striulae; metapleuron with a small 
anterior section impunctate and polished, the larger posterior portion 
coarsely rugulose; posterior coxa largely smooth and subopaque, 
with a flattened punctate area on outer upper edge at base; inner 
calcarium of hind tibia about half as long as metatarsus; metacarpus 
conspicuously longer than stigma; first abscissa of radius much longer 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 443 

than width of stigma or than intercubitus ; nervellus strongly curved 
toward base of wing. 

Abdomen about as long as thorax; plate of first tergite broadening 
imperceptibly caudad, at least 1% times as long as broad at apex, 
apical half rugulose and with a large median longitudinal fovea ; plate 
of second tergite mostly smooth and shining but with a few weak 
punctures along the practically straight posterior margin, the plate 
four times as broad as long and half as long as third tergite; third 
and following tergites smooth and shining ; ovipostor sheath uniformly 
slender, considerably longer than hind tarsus. 

Black; labrum brownish; palpi pale; scape pale brown at base; 
tegulae and wing bases yellow; costa yellow toward base, darkening 
toward stigma; wings clear hyaline; stigma dark brown; all coxae 
entirely black, anterior and middle legs entirely testaceous beyond 
coxae; posterior trochanter and femur deep testaceous, the latter 
blackish at apex; posterior tibia yellowish white on basal fourth, 
testaceous beyond except for a broad blackish apical band; metatarsus 
pale yellow at base, remainder of tarsus blackish. 

Cocoon: Solitary; pure white; not cylindrical, but with four or 
five rather flat surfaces, the posterior end extended nipple-like. 

Type: USNM 63069. 

Type locality: Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 

Described from 6 female specimens, all from the type locality, the 
type and 1 paratype reared from Platynota rostrana (Wlkr.) by H. F. G. 
Sauer on Aug. 8, 1937, 2 paratypes reared from an unknown lepidop- 
terous larva by E. J. Hambleton in April 1936, 1 paratype from Para- 
ptila sp., reared by Mr. Hambleton on Jan. 5, 1937, and 1 paratype 
from a lepidopterous larva on citrus reared by Mr. Hambleton on 
Mar. 6, 1939. 

Apanteles hedyleptae, new species 

Very similar to Apanteles parallelis (Ashmead) , which is known only 
from the unique type from St. Vincent in the British Museum, but 
distinguished from that species by its sculptured first tergite, yellow 
tegulae, and darker hind femora. 

Female: Length about 2.8 mm. Head smooth and shining; face 
with some very weak and minute punctures; malar space not quite as 
long as clypeus; face narrowing slightly below, at narrowest point not 
quite as broad as eye height; antennae almost as long as body; temples 
convex, not strongly receding. 

Mesoscutum shining, with extremely shallow, separated punctures; 
disc of scutellum flat, smooth and shining, polished area on lateral 
face of scutellum semicircular, not large; propodeum convex, smooth 
and shining, with only scattered punctures on dorsal surface and a 



444 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

little rugosity in apical lateral angles; mesopleuron entirely smooth 
and polished; radius arising from be3 T ond middle of stigma, not longer 
than intercubitus ; nervellus very oblique but straight; hind coxa very 
large, smooth and shining, and with a conspicuous, flattened, weakly 
punctate area on outer upper edge basally; inner calcarium of hind 
tibia slightly longer than outer but much less than half as long as 
hind metatarsus. 

Abdomen much narrower than thorax; first tergite parallel-sided, 
smooth and polished on basal half, very finely roughened and subopaque 
apically, with a very shallow, poorly defined, median longitudinal 
impressed area on caudal half immediately in front of which is a low 
polished tubercle; plate of second tergite very transverse, four times 
as wide as long, defined laterally by fine oblique grooves, its posterior 
margin a little curved, so that plate is longer medially than laterally, 
its surface largely smooth but sometimes with delicate longitudinal 
roughening; remaining tergites smooth and polished; ovipositor sheath 
at least as long as hind tibia. 

Black; palpi pale; antennae entirely black; tegulae and wing bases 
yellow; wings hyaline, stigma dark brown; legs brownish yellow, with 
all coxae black, and hind femora on upper and lower edges, hind 
tibiae apically, and hind tarsi more or less infuscated. 

Male: Unknown. 

Type: USNM 63070. 

Type locality: Barceloneta, Puerto Rico. 

Described from 17 females reared from Hedylepta indicata Lederer 
in beans and 5 females reared from Maruca testulalis Geyer, also in 
beans. All the specimens are from the type locality and were reared 
in February 1950 by H. K. Plank. 

Apanteles conformis, new species 

This new species is exceedingly like Apanteles talidicida Wilkinson, 
which was reared from the hesperiid Talides sergestus Cramer in British 
Guiana, but it may be distinguished from that species by its blackish 
tegulae, nonangulate nervellus, and more extensively blackish hind 
femora of the female. From A. disputabilis (Ashmead), which was 
described from the island of St. Vincent and which it also closely 
resembles, it differs most conspicuous^ in its dark tegulae and stigma 
and in having the nervellus strongly curved behind, toward base of 
wing. In all three species the malar space is rather long and is covered 
with a pale yellow blotch. 

Female: Length about 3.7 mm. Head smooth and shining, not 
distinctly punctate, covered with fine and rather dense pubescence; 
malar space longer than clypeus and about one-third as long as width 
of face; antennae as long as bod}^. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 445 

Mesoscutum shining, very finely punctate, the punctures separated 
and posteriorly becoming sparse and very weak; prescutellar furrow 
with eight or ten foveae; disc of scutellum a little longer than broad, 
smooth and polished, impunctate; polished area each side of disc 
fairly large and subtriangular but not extending nearly to base of 
lateral face; propodeum rugose, completely areolated, the separating 
carina very prominent, the areola very large, broadly oval, closed at 
base by the caudal margin of the small basal median area ; mesopleuron 
smooth and shining, weakly punctate anteriorly, and with a long hair 
arising from each puncture; metapleuron coarsely rugose except for a 
small polished space at base; radius directed outward, considerably 
longer than intercubitus which it joins in a sharp angle; hind coxae 
smooth and polished; inner calcarium of hind tibia much longer than 
outer and half as long as metatarsus 

First tergite nearly parallel-sided, smooth basally, finely rugulose 
on posterior half where there is a median longitudinal, slightly impressed 
area that is sharply margined anteriorly but indefinitely delimited 
behind ; second tergite more than half as long as third, three times as 
broad as long, its posterior margin straight; second and following 
tergites polished; ovipositor sheath rather slender, slightly longer than 
hind metatarsus. 

Black; malar space covered by a large, pale yellow spot; labrum 
and palpi light brown; antennae entirely black; tegulae black, wing 
bases brown; wings hyaline basally, a little clouded apically; costa, 
stigma, and veins dark brown; all coxae black and the trochanters 
largely so; hind femur blackish on apical half; hind tibia at extreme 
apex and hind tarsus, except metatarsus basally, piceous to black. 

Male: The single available male has the hind femora black only 
at the apices; otherwise it is similar to the females. 

Type: USNM 63071. 

Type locality: El Valle, Venezuela. 

Described from 17 females and 1 male reared Mar. 8, 1939, by V. 
Obregon from an unknown hesperiid larva on Carina indica. 

Apanteles megastidis, new species 

Very similar to Apanteles thurberiae Muesebeck but distinguished 
b} r its reddish yellow hind femora and its strongly developed propodeal 
costulae. 

Female: Length about 4 mm. Head uniformly closely and finely 
punctate and more or less mat; temples receding; clypeus punctate 
like face; malar space longer than clypeus; antennae a little shorter 
than body. 

Mesoscutum closely, in part confluently, punctate and dull; prescu- 
tellar furrow very fine, comprised of about ten small foveae; disc of 



446 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

scutellum longer than broad, flat, smooth, and polished; a large, tri- 
angular, polished area each side of disc covering nearly all of lateral 
face of scutellum; propodeum finely rugose dorsally, with a large, ovate 
areola that is open at base, and with strong costulae that set off large, 
shining, lateral apical areas which are traversed by a few strong, 
irregular rugae; mesopleuron shining, closely punctate anteriorly, the 
punctation becoming more sparse behind and vanishing before poster- 
ior margin; no longitudinal impression below on mesopleuron; meta- 
pleuron posteriorly confluently punctate and dull; radius much longer 
than intercubitus, the latter only weakly oblique; nervellus very 
slightly curved; hind coxa smooth and polished outwardly, closely 
punctate above toward base ; inner calcarium of hind tibia much longer 
than outer and very nearly or quite half as long as hind metatarsus. 

First tergite parallel-sided except for the short portion before 
spiracles which narrows somewhat to the base, nearly l l / 2 times as 
long as broad at apex, the surface smooth and polished basally but 
weakly punctate rugulose on posterior half, and there with a poorly 
defined median longitudinal area that is rugulose; second tergite 
three times as wide as long at the middle, about two-thirds as long as 
third, and, like all the following tergites, smooth and shining; ovi- 
positor sheath a little longer than abdomen or hind tarsus; ovipositor 
decurved at apex. 

Black; palpi pale; antennae entirely black; tegulae and wing bases 
transparent, pale yellowish; costa yellow; stigma hyaline, weakly 
margined with brown; metacarpus brown; all coxae black; remainder 
of legs reddish yellow, with hind trochanters basally, apices of hind 
femora and of hind tibiae, and the hind tarsi blackish. 

Male : Essentially like the female. 

Cocoon: Single, pure white, about 6 or 7 mm. long. 

Type: USNM 63072. 

Type locality: St. Augustine, Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Described from 6 females and 7 males reared from larvae of an 
unidentified species of the pyraustid genus Megastes, in February 1943, 
by A. M. Adamson. 

Apanteles paradoxus, new species 

Figure 2,d 

This new species is remarkable for having a distinctly areolated 
propodeum and at the same time a subexserted ovipositor and a very 
large, rectangular, coarsely sculptured second tergite. It somewhat 
resembles Apanteles aletiae Riley, a parasite of Alabama argillacea 
(Hbn.) and Gonodonta nutrix (Cram.) in the West Indies and south- 
eastern United States, but may be immediately distinguished from 
that species by its unusually prominent propodeal carinae and by its 
very large, posteriorly broadening, and closely rugulose first tergite. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MTJESEBECK 447 

Female: Length about 2.3 mm. Face smooth and shining, with 
only indistinct punctation; malar space much longer than clypeus; 
vertex smooth and shining; temple with an impunctate and polished 
band directly behind eye, shallowly punctate and subopaque behind 
this ; antennae longer than the body. 

Thorax stout, about as high as broad; mesoscutum dull and with 
large, closely placed but clean-cut punctures that are not confluent; 
furrow at base of scutellum deep, strongly foveolate; disc of scutellum 
a little convex, polished, impunctate or with a few very shallow 
punctures ; polished area on lateral face of scutellum semicircular, the 
large area in front of it longitudinally rugose; propodeum areolated, 
the areas defined by prominent carinae, the two basal areas smooth 
at base, the broad pentagonal areola and the two large apical areas 
rugose; mesopleuron smooth and polished except anteriorly where it is 
closely, strongly punctate and dull, posterior groove very finely 
foveolate; metapleuron polished on anterior half, rugulose and dull on 
posterior half; posterior coxa mostly smooth and shining but with 
some scattered distinct punctures and with an elongate, flattened, 
punctate area on outer upper edge at base; inner calcarium of hind 
tibia longer than outer and about half as long as basitarsus; meta- 
carpus longer than stigma; first abscissa of radius slightly longer 
than intercubitus, a little curved and not strongly angled at the point 
of junction with it. 

Abdomen short and broad; first tergite very large, broadening 
steadily toward apex, as broad at apex as long, strongly rugulose, and 
with a narrow median longitudinal fovea beyond the middle; second 
tergite about as long as third, about three times as broad as long and 
completely, strongly, longitudinally rugulose; second suture sharp 
and straight; third and following tergites combined about as long as 
first, impunctate, polished; hypopygium not projecting beyond apex 
of last tergite; ovipositor sheath barely exserted. 

Black; palpi pale; labrum and mandibles dark brown; scape 
yellowish brown beneath, otherwise antenna brownish black; tegulae 
and wing bases yellowish brown; wings hyaline, stigma and veins light 
brown ; anterior and middle legs entirely yellowish except for the black 
coxae and slightly dusky tarsi; hind coxae black; hind trochanters 
light brown; hind femora mostly piceous; hind tibiae blackish on 
distal two-thirds, pale on the basal third; hind tarsi dark brown. 

Male: Like the female in all significant particulars. 

Cocoons: Pure white, and gregarious but not embedded in a mass 
of silk. 

Type: USNM 63073. 

Type locality: Paso Ancho, San Sebastian, Costa Rica. 

Described from 28 females and 2 males reared by C. H. Ballou in 
November and December 1936 at the type locality from a larva of a 



448 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

notodontid, apparently a species of Hemiceras, on Inga roussoviana, 
and 60 females and 16 males reared from Hemiceras sp. "on Inga 
coffee tree," at Santa Tecla, El Salvador, by Paul A. Berry. 

Apanteles schini, new species 

Figure 4,d 

This new species is exceedingly like the Nearctic Apanteles palea- 
critae Riley, a parasite of the cankerworms, but differs in having the 
punctures of the mesoscutum definitely sharper and even anteriorly 
not contiguous, in the more coarsely sculptured propodeum and first 
tergite, and in the nearly straight nervellus. 

Female: Length about 2.3 mm. Frons and vertex smooth and 
shining; face about as wide as eye height, indistinctly punctate and 
subopaque ; malar space considerably longer than clypeus ; antennae 
about as long as the body. 

Mesoscutum uniformly covered with distinct, separated punctures, 
shining; prescutellar furrow foveolate laterally, not distinctly so 
medially; disc of scutellum smooth and shining but with a few 
scattered punctures; propodeum more declivous than in A. pale- 
acritae, finely rugulose except in the large lateral apical areas which 
are smooth and shining; apical lateral angles of propodeum not 
projecting at all caudad; mesopleuron smooth and polished except 
anteriorly where it is weakly punctate and subopaque; metapleuron 
smooth and shining ; radius much longer than intercubitus ; nervellus 
oblique but virtually straight and not curved behind toward base 
of wing as in A. paleacritae; hind coxae very large, twice as long as 
propodeum, smooth and shining, and with a conspicuous elongate, 
flattened, punctate area on outer upper edge toward base; inner 
calcarium of middle tibia a little longer than middle metatarsus ; inner 
calcarium of hind tibia much longer than outer and much more than 
half as long as hind metatarsus. 

Abdomen not more than half as wide as thorax and conspicuously 
compressed apically; first tergite broadening very slightly caudad, 
nearly twice as long as broad at apex, closely and finely rugulose; 
second tergite with its median plate set off laterally by deep, poste- 
riorly divergent furrows, almost as long as broad at base, distinctly 
broader at apex than long, the surface finely rugulose laterally and 
behind, smooth medially and toward base, sometimes largely smooth 
and shining; third and following tergites entirely smooth and polished, 
with no suggestion of punctation or other sculpture even on third; 
ovipositor sheath barely exserted. 

Black; labrum reddish yellow; paJpi pale yellow; antennae more or 
less brownish beneath toward bases; tegulae and wing bases yellow; 
wings hyaline, stigma and veins brown; anterior and middle coxae 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 449 

blackish basally; hind coxae black; remainder of legs reddish yellow 
except for apex of hind femur, apical half of hind tibia and the hind 
tarsus, which are black. 

Male : Like the female in all essentials. 

Type: USNM 63074. 

Type locality: Guaratuba, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 

Described from 39 females and 5 males reared in March 1954 by 
N. L. H. Krauss from larvae of an unidentified species of the butterfly 
family Riodinidae feeding on the Brazilian pepper tree, or Christmas- 
berry tree, Schinus terebinthifolius. 

Apanteles kraussi, new species 

This new species resembles Apanteles lunatus (Packard) but is 
larger and more coarsely sculptured. It differs further in having the 
second tergite about as long as the third and in having the hind 
femora black or blackish. 

Female: Length about 3 mm. Head shining, covered with very 
shallow, minute, setigerous punctures ; malar space longer than clypeus 
or basal width of mandible; face narrower than eye height; antennae 
a little shorter than body. 

Mesoscutum strongly convex, contiguously, and in part confluently, 
punctate, mat; prescutellar suture with nine or ten foveae; disc of 
scutellum large, convex, sculptured like mesoscutum; propodeum 
rugose, with a median longitudinal carina; mesopleuron closely, 
shallowly punctate anteriorly and below, polished in front of the 
posterior foveolate furrow; longitudinal impression on lower part of 
mesopleuron with a short, finely foveolate groove ; radius much longer 
than intercubitus and not sharply angled with it; nervellus strongly 
oblique but not curved toward base of wing; hind coxa punctate 
rugulose, and dull; inner calcarium of hind tibia barely longer than 
outer and less than half as long as hind metatarsus. 

First tergite broadening gradually caudad, about as broad on 
posterior margin as propodeum is long, entirely finely rugulose and 
dull; second tergite rectangular, twice as broad as long and about as 
long as third, sculptured like the first; third and following tergites 
smooth and shining except for a suggestion of weak roughening bas- 
ally on third; ovipositor sheath barely exserted. 

Black; palpi pale yellow; tegulae honey yellow; wing bases blackish; 
wings hyaline, stigma brown; fore and middle coxae piceous, hind 
coxae black; remainder of legs reddish brown, with apical segment 
of hind trochanter, hind femur, apex of hind tibia, and the hind tarsus 
more or less blackish. 

Male: Like the female in all essential respects. 

Cocoon: Single, buff in color. 



450 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Type: USNM 63075. 

Type locality: Cuernavaca, Mexico. 

Described from 12 females and 17 males reared by N. L. H. Krauss 
in June 1945 from Morpheis ehrenbergi Geyer. I take pleasure in 
naming this species for Mr. Krauss, who has contributed extensively 
to our knowledge of the habits and host relations of Braconidae. 

Genus Gnaptodon Haliday 

Gnaptodon minutus (Ashmead), new combination 

Liophron [sic] minutus Ashmead, Journ. Linn. Soc. London, Zool., vol. 25, p. 132, 
1894. 

The type, from St. Vincent, which I saw some years ago in the 
British Museum, is a Gnaptodon which has lost the second intercu- 
bitus. I have observed, from material in the U. S. National Museum, 
that in very small specimens of this genus the second intercubitus 
sometimes drops out. 

Genus Opius Wesmael 
Opius capsicola, new species 

Figures l,h; 3,e 

This species belongs in the cereus group. Structurally it is virtually 
identical with Opius cereus Gahan, but it even more closely resembles 
0. fluminensis Costa Lima, agreeing with that species and differing 
from 0. cereus in its definitely infuscated wings and piceous posterior 
legs. It may be distinguished from 0. fluminensis by the more or 
less extensive blackish markings of vertex, frons, and face, by the con- 
spicuously yellow apex of stigma, and by the absence of black markings 
on the apical abdominal segments of the female. 

Female: Length about 5 mm. Head as broad as thorax; temple 
not receding; malar space distinctly longer than basal width of man- 
dible or median length of clypeus; face smooth except for scattered 
weak punctures each side of middle line; lower margin of clypeus 
bisinuate; a distinct opening between clypeus and mandibles; ocel- 
locular line nearly three times as long as diameter of an ocellus; an- 
tennae a little longer than body, usually 48- to 55-segmented. 

Thorax stout; notaulices strongly impressed, smooth; middle lobe 
of mesoscutum prominent; scutellar sulcus deep and long, and 
divided by a median, longitudinal keel; propodeum areolated, the 
carinae strong, as in 0. cereus and 0. fluminensis) mesopleuron 
without a furrow; first abscissa of radius shorter than greatest width 
of stigma; second abscissa about as long as first intercubitus; radial 
cell not attaining extreme apex of wing; recurrent vein usually inter- 
stitial with first intercubitus; nervulus very slightly postfurcal ; radiella 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 451 

wanting; mediella much longer than lower abscissa of basella; post- 
nervellus distinct; second segment of posterior tarsus not longer than 
fifth. 

Abdomen stout, smooth, and polished; first tergite with a large, 
nearly parallel-sided, embossed area which is margined by prominent 
keels that are obsolescent apically; ovipositor sheath much longer 
than the abdomen. 

Honey yellow; vertex, frons, and middle of face more or less exten- 
sively piceous; antennae entirely black; apices of mandibles black; 
palpi pale yellow; wings rather strongly infumated; hind legs piceous, 
coxa above and more or less of apical half of femur testaceous. 

Male: Like female except in having head more extensively black 
and apical tergite black. 

Type: USNM 63076. 

Type locality. El Cermeno, Panama. 

Described from 61 specimens reared by James Zetek on Nov. 21, 
1939, from puparia of a species of Anastrepha in seed capsules of 
Manihot esculenta under Zetek No. 4618. Presumably the hosts were 
either Anastrepha pickeli Costa Lima or A. montei Costa Lima, or both. 

Opius toxotrypanae, new species 

Figures 1,/; 2,h 

Structurally, this new species is very similar to Opius crawfordi 
Viereck, but it is readily distinguished from that species by its black 
thorax. 

Female: Length about 7.5 mm. Face much broader than long, 
distinctly, finely punctate, and with a short and broad median keel 
just below antennae; clypeus weakly punctate, its anterior margin 
acutely toothed at the middle; a distinct opening between clypeus and 
mandibles; malar space at least as long as median length of clypeus 
and longer than basal width of mandible; temple fully two-thirds as 
wide as eye and not receding; ocellocular line not distinctly three times 
as long as diameter of an ocellus; antennae longer than body, 56- 
segmented in the type. 

Mesoscutum polished; notaulices sharply impressed anteriorly, 
obliterated behind; middle lobe of mesoscutum with two shallow im- 
pressions at anterior margin; prescutellar sulcus a large semicircular 
pit that is divided into two parts by a low median longitudinal septum; 
propodeum polished, with a median area, only the posterior part of 
which is defined by carinae; mesopleuron polished and without a 
longitudinal impression; metapleuron polished; radius arising from 
middle of stigma; radial cell not quite attaining wing apex; second 
abscissa of radius and first intercubitus subequal; recurrent vein 



452 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

interstitial; mediella as long as lower abscissa of basella and on a 
straight line with it. 

Abdomen smooth and polished; first tergite with two prominent 
dorsal longitudinal keels setting off a large, nearly parallel-sided, 
elevated, median area and extending nearly to posterior margin of the 
tergite; ovipositor sheath longer than the body. 

Head black, extreme apex of malar space brownish yellow, tips of 
mandibles red, a small brownish yellow spot on each side of frons 
next to the eye; antennae completely black; thorax piceous black, 
varied with brownish, especially on rnesoscutum and propodeum; 
propodeum sometimes entirely brown, or even yellowish; legs black, 
each leg with the apex of the second segment of trochanter and the 
extreme base of femur yellowish or reddish; anterior and middle 
tarsi pale except the apical segments; wings deeply infumated, stigma 
reddish brown except at base, its extreme base and veins of basal 
part of wing blackish; abdomen entirely yellow; ovipositor sheath 
black. 

Male: Differs in no significant respects from the female. 

Type: USNM 63077. 

Type locality: Santa Engracia, Tamaulipas, Mexico. 

Host : Toxotrypana curvicauda Gerstaecker. 

Described from 14 female and 7 male specimens reared from the 
above host at the type locality by M. McPhail in 1936. 

Opius aldrichi, new species 

Figures l,a; 3,/ 

This new species is distinguished particularly by the conspicuous 
transverse areas of contrastingly pale color before and behind the 
third, fourth, and fifth abdominal sutures and by the unusually slender 
legs. 

Female: Length about 2.5 mm. Head a little wider than thorax, 
entirely smooth and polished; face a little wider than long; anterior 
margin of clypeus recurved, very gently arched; a very narrow, incon- 
picuous opening between clypeus and mandibles; malar space barely 
as long as median length of clypeus and a little shorter than basal 
width of mandible; temple gradually receding, about half as wide as 
eye; vertex slightly convex; ocellocular line at least three times the 
diameter of an ocellus; antennae very slender and much longer than 
the body, 40-segmented in the type; basal segment of flagellum much 
longer than the second and more than three times as long as thick; all 
flagellar segments longer than broad. 

Thorax a little higher than wide; notaulices impressed for a very 
short distance, completely wanting behind the anterior third of rneso- 
scutum; rnesoscutum without a posterior discal fovea, completely 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 453 

polished; scutellar furrow with eight or ten small pits; scutellum 
polished and rather flat; propodeum closely rugulose over its entire 
surface; mesopleuron with a small, shallow, nonfoveolate impression 
below; metapleuron polished; legs very slender; fourth segment of 
posterior tarsus nearly twice as long as broad; inner calcarium of pos- 
terior tibia more than one-third as long as metatarsus; radius arising 
from before middle of stigma, its first abscissa only one-fourth as long 
as first intercubitus, the second gradually thinner toward apex and 
much longer than first intercubitus, the third slightly arched and going 
to extreme wing apex; last two abscissae of cubitus subequal; recurrent 
vein interstitial ; nervulus postf ureal by nearly its own length ; second 
discoidal cell closed; mediella a little shorter than basal abscissa of 
basella and at least three times as long as nervellus. 

Abdomen as long as head and thorax combined; first tergite about 
twice as broad at apex as at base, with two low subparallel dorsal 
ridges bounding a long median area that narrows gradually on apical 
third; surface of tergite mostly smooth with a little longitudinal 
roughening adjacent to dorsal ridges on apical half; remaining tergites 
smooth and polished; the apical margins of the third to the sixth 
tergites and the basal margins of the fourth to the sixth apparently 
more weakly sclerotized, these areas usually broadened medially and 
greatly narrowed at the lateral margins of the tergites ; seventh tergite 
entirely weakly sclerotized ; ovipositor sheath about half the length of 
abdomen, shorter than posterior tibia. 

Head black; malar space, clypeus, mandibles except apices, and 
scape yellow; some rufous shadings around margins of eyes and about 
antennal foramina ; antennal flegellum brownish yellow on basal three- 
fifths with the apical margins of the segments blackish, black on apical 
two-fifths; thorax black, prosternum pale brown; tegulae pale yellow; 
wings Iryaline, veins and stigma pale brown; legs entirely yellow except 
base of posterior tibia and the posterior tarsus, which are dusky; dor- 
sum of abdomen black except on the more weakly sclerotized parts 
adjoining the third, fourth, and fifth sutures, which are yellowish 
white; venter of abdomen yellowish white with a row of conspicuous 
black spots on each side; ovipositor sheath black. 

Male: Like the female in all essential characters. 

Type: USNM 63078. 

Type locality: Antigua, Guatemala. 

Described from three specimens of each sex collected May 1 and 
May 2, 1926, by J. M. Aldrich. 

Opius auripennis, new species 

This new species very closely resembles Opius cereus Gahan, but it 
differs in the color of the wings. These are definitely yellow except 

433891—58 4 



454 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

for the narrow apices of the anterior pair, which are contrastingly 
infuscated. 

Female: Length about 5 mm. Face nearly twice as broad as long, 
weakly punctate, malar space much longer than clypeus or basal width 
of mandible; clypeus smooth, its anterior margin bisinuate; a distinct 
transverse opening between clypeus and mandibles; ocellocular line 
about three times the diameter of an ocellus; temples about half the 
eye width, not receding; antennae noticeably longer than body, about 
60-segmented in the type. 

Thorax short and compact; notaulices smooth, complete, meeting 
in a broad polished impression; middle lobe of mesoscutum noticeably 
elevated; scutellar sulcus deep, divided into two large pits by a median 
septum; propodeum areolated, with a short median basal carina fol- 
lowed by an elongate median area which narrows posteriorly; meso- 
pleuron polished, with a short, shallow, smooth, longitudinal impres- 
sion; stigma emitting radius from slightly beyond its middle; first in- 
tercubitus a little longer than second abscissa of radius and about 
three times as long as the first abscissa of radius; recurrent vein inter- 
stitial; radial cell not attaining extreme apex of wing; last abscissa 
of radius more than twice as long as first and second abscissae com- 
bined; mediella fully as long as basal abscissa of basella; postnervellus 
weak but distinct. 

First abdominal tergite polished, with a large median elevated area 
defined by two prominent longitudinal keels that extend nearly to the 
apex of the tergite; remainder of abdomen smooth and shining; ovi- 
positor sheath nearly as long as the body; hypopygium prominent. 

Honey yellow; antenna completely black, including scape and pedi- 
cel; posterior tibia blackish on apical third; posterior tarsus a little 
infuscated; wings yellow, apex of anterior wing fuscous; stigma and 
veins yellow; ovipositor sheath blackish. 

Male : Essentially like the female. 

Type: USNM 63079. 

Type locality: La Campana, Panama. 

Described from two females and three males. The two females and 
two of the males were reared from Anastrepha serpentina (Wiedemann) 
in Calocarpum mammosum in August 1936 by James Zetek, under his 
No. 3714; the remaining male was reared from the same host at Rio 
Abajo near Panama City in April 1935, under Zetek No. 3475. 

Opius zeteki, new species 

This new species closely resembles Opius auripennis, which is de- 
scribed above; however, it is immediately distinguished by its mostly 
black head and its blackish femora. It is also very similar to 0. 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 455 

crawjordi Viereck, but it may be at once separated from that species 
by the color of its wings. 

Female: Length about 5.5 mm. Face about twice as broad as 
long with minute scattered punctures; malar space slightly longer than 
basal width of mandible; clypeus sub triangular, its apical margin 
bisinuate; a rather large opening between clypeus and mandibles; 
temple very slightly receding, about half as wide as eye; ocellocular 
line at least three times diameter of an ocellus; antennae a little longer 
than the body, tapering slightly to apex, 59-segmented in the type. 

Notaulices smooth, complete, meeting in a broad shallow depression; 
scutellar furrow divided into two large pits b}^ a median longitudinal 
septum; propodeum areola ted, with a short basal median longitudinal 
carina which is followed by a long narrow area extending to posterior 
margin; lateral longitudinal carinae complete, very prominent, and 
strongly bowed outwardly on posterior half of propodeum; a short 
basal transverse carina extending from base of the median area on each 
side to the lateral carina; mesopleuron with a very weak, smooth, 
longitudinal impression; radius arising from middle of stigma; second 
abscissa of radius not longer than intercubitus; recurrent vein inter- 
stitial; mediella slightly longer than basal abscissa of basella; post- 
nervellus distinct. 

Abdomen narrow at base, broadening to apex of third tergite, 
polished; first tergite with two prominent dorsal longitudinal keels 
that nearly attain posterior margin and set off a large parallel-sided 
area; ovipositor sheath very nearly or quite as long as the body. 

Honey yellow; head black with the part below the lower level of the 
e}'es constrastingly yellowish white; tips of mandibles black; antennae 
black, brownish black basaUy; anterior and middle coxae and tro- 
chanters, also their tibiae and tarsi, pale yellow; anterior and middle 
femora except at the extremities brownish black; posterior leg brownish 
black, second segment of trochanter mostly pale yellow, basal two- 
thirds of tibia concolorous with the body, tarsus weakly infuscated; 
wings j^ellow including veins and stigma, apex of anterior wing con- 
trastingly infumated; ovipositor sheath brown to blackish. 

Male: Like the female except in having the dark color of the 
anterior and middle femora a little less extensive. 

Type: USNM 63080. 

Type locality: La Campana, Panama. 

Described from 14 females and 4 males reared by James Zetek from 
Anastrepha j rater 'cuius (Wiedemann) in Psidium guajava, and a series 
of 7 females and 2 males labeled "ex Anastrepha striata and Jraterculus, 
La Sabanas, Panama City, J. Zetek Coll." I take pleasure in naming 
this interesting and attractive species in honor of Mr. Zetek, who has 



456 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

reared many species of Opius and has contributed much valuable 
material in this genus to the U. S. National Museum. 

Opius divergens, new species 

Figures 1,6; 3,6 

This new species is structurally almost identical with Opius vierecki 
Gahan. It is readily distinguished from that species, however, by its 
largely black thorax and darker legs. 

Female. Length 4.5 mm. Head a little narrower than thorax, 
strongly transverse, the temples narrow and receding; face smooth and 
shining, only a little broader at insertion of antennae than long; eyes 
very large, diverging below; clypeus only half as long as basal width of 
mandible and about as long as malar space, its anterior margin not 
sinuate or toothed; a large opening between clypeus and mandibles; 
cello cular line not distinctly twice as long as the diameter of an 
ocellus; antennae longer than the body, 55-segmented in the type. 

Thorax stout; mesoscutum polished; notaulices sharply impressed 
but extending only one-third the distance to posterior margin of 
mesoscutum; a conspicuous, somewhat elongate, median, dimple-like 
impression on mesoscutum posteriorly; prescutellar sulcus usually 
divided into four distinct pits; scutellum broader at base than long, 
completely polished; propodeum more or less areolated, with a rather 
conspicuous, somewhat irregular, arched, basal transverse carina, a 
median area broadening caudad and a large lateral area each side of 
this; mesopleuron polished with a well defined oblique foveolate im- 
pression anteriorly; radius arising from before middle of stigma; 
second abscissa of radius more than three times as long as first and 
considerably longer than first intercubitus ; third abscissa of radius 
sinuate, ending in extreme apex of wing; recurrent vein joining second 
cubital cell; nervulus interstitial; mediella definitely shorter than 
basal abscissa of basella; postnervellus absent. 

Abdomen smooth and polished; first tergite about as broad at apex 
as long, with two prominent dorsal keels, originating at base, con- 
verging gradually as far as middle and then parallel for a short distance, 
obliterated before apex of tergite; two weaker carinae, one originat- 
ing on the inner side of each of those keels at the middle of the tergite, 
converging posteriorly, and sometimes uniting to form a short median 
keel; ovipositor sheath straight, about as long as the second and fol- 
lowing tergites combined. 

Head black; malar space, clypeus, and the mandibles except tips 
yellowish brown; antennae entirely black; thorax blackish with the 
pronotum anteriorly, scutellum, propodeum, and metapleura brownish 
to yellowish, the propodeum and metapleura being the palest; wings 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS MUESEBECK 457 

strongly inf umated ; stigma and veins dark brown; legs including the 
coxae brownish black; abdomen yellow, a fuscous mark on first ter- 
gite between the apical third of the dorsal keels; ovipositor sheath 
black, brownish toward apex. 

Male : Like the female in all important details but with the coxae 
more conspicuously yellow at bases. 

Type: USNM 63081. 

Type locality: Tamaulipas, Mexico. 

Host: A dipterous larva in persimmon. 

Described from 9 females and 11 males reared in May 1936 by M. 
McPhail. 

Genus Phaenocarpa Foerster 

Phaenocarpa anastrephae, new species 

Figures l,e; 3,c 

This species differs conspicuously from other species of Phaenocarpa 
known to me by its incomplete notaulices, by its relatively large eyes, 
by the absence of nervellus, and by having the first brachial cell very 
weakly defined posteriorly and distally. 

Female : Length about 3 mm. Head a little broader than thorax, 
smooth and shining; face more than twice as wide as long; mandibles 
broadening apically, the median tooth acute, the lateral teeth broadly 
rounded off; eyes large, nearly circular in outline, more than twice as 
wide as the temples; antennae more than \% times as long as the body, 
very slender, 39-segmented in the type, the first flagellar segment a 
little thickened basally and about half as long as the second, which is 
much the longest segment; ocellocular line not more than half the 
diameter of an eye; postocellar line not distinctly as long as diameter 
of an ocellus. 

Thorax compact; notaulices distinct anteriorly, obsolescent poster- 
iorly; a median dimple-like impression on mesoscutum posteriorly; 
mesopleural furrow curved, foveolate; propodeum largely smooth and 
shining and with a short basal median carina followed by a narrow, 
carinately margined, median, longitudinal area; propodeal spiracles 
small; legs slender, posterior femur weakly thickened toward apex, 
posterior tibia somewhat curved; radius arising from beyond middle 
of the rather narrow stigma and going to extreme apex of wing; first 
abscissa of radius very short, second about twice as long as first inter- 
cubitus; cubitus nearly attaining wing margin; second abscissa of 
cubitus more than half as long as recurrent; subdiscoideus interstitial; 
hind wing very narrow, radiella incomplete, nervellus wanting. 

Abdomen somewhat narrower than thorax, more or less compressed ; 
first tergite longitudinally aciculate, with two nearly complete, poste- 
riorly convergent keels; remainder of abdomen smooth and shining; 



458 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

hypopygium large but barely extending as far posteriorly as apex of 
last tergite ; ovipositor sheath very slender, a little shorter than thorax 
and abdomen combined. 

Yellow; stemmaticum black, and a fine median longitudinal line 
extending from stemmaticum across vertex and occiput to the neck 
also black; scape, pedicel, and base of first flagellar segment yellow; 
remainder of antenna dark brown except for a subapical yellowish 
white annulus covering six to eight segments; posterior tibia and tarsus 
more or less brownish black; wings hyaline; stigma and veins brown. 

Male: Differs in no essential detail from the female, although the 
apex of the abdomen is blackish, and the antenna! annulus is narrower 
or even wanting. 

Type: USNM 63082. 

Type locality: La Campana, Panama. 

Described from 36 females and 42 males reared at the type locality 
"from Anastrepha in Spondias nigrescent ' by J. Zetek in 1937, and 16 
females and 10 males, reared from Anastrepha mombinpraeoptans 
Sein, Taboga Island, Panama, by Mr. Zetek in October 1938. 

Leurinionf new genus 

Distinguished from the known genera of Hormiini by the absence 
of any trace of an occipital carina; and from Hormius Nees, which it 
most closely resembles, it differs further in having the prepectus im- 
margined and the subdiscoideus arising from about the middle of the 
outer end of the first brachial cell. 

Head transverse; eyes large, protruding, bare; temples very nar- 
row, receding strongly; a distinct circuliform cavity between clypeus 
and mandibles; occiput gently convex, immargined. Prepectus im- 
margined; prescutellar furrow wide, propodeum with a complete 
median longitudinal carina; forewing with three cubital cells; radial 
cell large, extending to apex of wing; first brachial cell closed, emitting 
subdiscoideus from about the middle of its outer end; radiella wanting. 
First tergite widening caudad, with two large, slightly depressed 
areas of weaker sclerotization occupying most of the posterior half 
and divided by a median longitudinal keel; the following tergites 
largely membranous, as in Hormius and Parahormius ; ovipositor 
short. 

Type : The following new species. 

Leurinion primum, new species 

Figures l,g; 2,c; 3,g,h 

Female : Length about 2 mm. Head wider than thorax, smooth and 
polished; malar space a little longer than basal width of mandible; 

* From the Greek leuros, smooth, and inion, occiput. 



N'EW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBE'CK 459 

ocelli minute and close together, o cellar triangle barely wider than 
length of ocellocular line; antennae a little longer than body, usually 
20- to 22-segmented, very slender, even the segments of apical third 
more than twice as long as wide. 

Mesoscutum rather flat, covered with minute, very shallow, 
closely placed punctures; notaulices sharply impressed anteriorly but 
vanishing before middle of mesoscutum; furrow at base of scutellum 
broad and deep, not foveolate; scutellum rather flat, smooth and 
polished; mesopleuron polished, without a longitudinal furrow below; 
propodeum smooth and polished but with a strong, median longitudinal 
carina; legs very slender; shorter spur of hind tibia very short and not 
easily seen, longer spur barely as long as apical width of tibia; second 
abscissa of radius a little longer than first and nearly or quite as long 
as first intercubitus; recurrent interstitial or barely entering second 
cubital cell; nervulus interstitial or slightly postfurcal; nervellus very 
short; postnervellus wanting or faintly indicated by a short back- 
wardly directed stub. 

Abdomen at widest point about as wide as thorax; ovipositor sheath 
about half as long as hind femur. 

Yellow with antennae and mesoscutum more or less piceous; wings 
clear hyaline, stigma hyaline, veins pale; legs pale yellow. 

Male : Essentially like the female. 

Type: USNM 63083. 

Type locality: Piura, Peru. 

Described from 35 females and 10 males reared by P. A. Berry on 
Aug. 25, 1945, from cotton buds. 

Genus Oncophanes Foerster 
Oncophanes mexicanus, new species 

This new species resembles Oncophanes nigriventris Muesebeck in 
having the abdominal segments beyond the third retracted and 
the second and third tergites forming a solid carapace. It differs 
from 0. nigriventris in having the abdomen reddish yellow and com- 
pletely, strongly striate. 

Female: Length about 3 mm. Head as wide as thorax, smooth 
and shining; face as wide as eye height; malar space longer than 
clypeus or basal width of mandible; antennae very slender, a little 
shorter than body, usually 24-segmented, first flagellar segment 
considerably longer than second. 

Mesoscutum smooth and shining; notaulices complete, very fine, 
meeting in a small, roughened area; disc of scutellum smooth and 
polished; prescutellar sulcus deep and more than half as long as disc 
of scutellum, divided into two large foveae by a median longitudinal 
septum; propodeum completely areolated, the areas smooth and 



460 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

shining with only occasional weak and short rugae, the areola pentag- 
onal; mesopleuron with a rugulose area in upper anterior angle, 
beneath tegula, otherwise smooth and polished except for a short 
longitudinal foveolate furrow below; metapleuron rugulose; radius 
issuing from middle of stigma; first abscissa of radius about half as 
long as the second abscissa, which is slightly longer than first inter- 
cubitus; recurrent vein interstitial with first intercubitus; nervulus 
postf ureal by about its length; radiella represented by a short spur. 

Abdomen in widest part as broad as thorax; first tergite broadening 
gradually caudad, about as broad at apex as long, striate on a granular 
surface, spiracles prominent; second and third tergites fused, the 
suture wanting or indicated only laterally, entirely striate on a granular 
surface; fourth and following segments completely retracted; ovi- 
positor sheath very slender, about as long as hind femur. 

Head and thorax black; clypeus and mandibles reddish brown; 
antennae brownish black with scape and pedicel more or less reddish 
yellow; tegulae and wing bases yellow; wings hyaline, stigma and 
veins brown; legs including all coxae yellow, the apices of the hind 
tibiae and the hind tarsi infuscated. 

Male: A little smaller and more slender; otherwise like the female. 

Type:USNMNo. 63084. 

Type locality: Cuernavaca, Mexico. 

Described from 15 females and 1 male reared from a lepidopterous 
larva on Eupatorium adenoptorum by N. L. H. Krauss in January 1945. 

Genus Percnobracon Kieffer 

Percnobracon secundus, new species 

Figures l t d; 4,a,6 

I have not seen the genotype and only described species of 
Percnobracon Kieffer, which appears to belong in the Hecabolini, but 
the present species is apparently congeneric although it differs from 
the original description of P. stenopterus Kieffer in several significant 
respects and is clearly a different species. The antennae are 16- to 
18-segmented instead of 21 -segmented as in the genotype; the anterior 
margin of the mesoscutum is not rounded but rather truncate and 
subangulate laterally, while the complete median furrow of the 
mesoscutum ascribed to P. stenopterus is lacking in this new species; 
and the propodeum is not gradually declivous as it is said to be in 
P. stenopterus but has a nearly horizontal dorsal face which is separated 
from the abrupt vertical face by a straight carina. 

Female: Length about 2.5 mm. Head transverse but at least 
half as long as wide as seen from above, completely carinately mar- 
gined behind; eyes slightly divergent below; malar space as long as 



NEW NEOTROPICAL WASPS — MUESEBECK 461 

antennal scape; face, frons, and vertex finely rugulose striate, the 
striae transverse; occiput transversely striate; temples and cheeks 
finely aciculate; opening between clypeus and mandibles small, 
circular; antenna much shorter than the body, slender, filiform, 16- 
to 18-segmented, the first and second flagellar segments the longest 
and subequal. 

Thorax short and compact; prepectus margined by a strong carina; 
mesoscutum finely alutaceous and with a few longitudinal ridges 
medially on posterior half; notaulices absent except for weak indica- 
tions just behind the lateral angles of the anterior margin of the 
mesoscutum; furrow at base of scutellum broad and deep and provided 
with several longitudinal septa; disc of scutellum subtuberculate, 
small; dorsal face of propodeum rectangular, defined laterally and 
posteriorly by low carinae, very delicately irregularly sculptured; 
abrupt posterior face of propodeum smooth and shining; mesopleuron 
delicately alutaceous and with a sharply impressed longitudinal 
furrow below; metapleuron smooth and polished; hind coxa not 
angulate at base below; calcaria of posterior tibia very short; venation 
of forewing as illustrated; the first discoidal cell with numerous long 
bristles; hind wing lacking radiella, cubitella, and nervellus; sub- 
costella incomplete. 

Abdomen petiolate; first segment strongly arched, about half as wide 
at base as at apex, its apical width less than half its length, its surface 
weakly longitudinally wrinkled posteriorly, the spiracles prominent 
and situated at about the middle of the segment; confluent second and 
third tergites broadening caudad, at apex broader than thorax, finely 
longitudinally aciculate each side of the middle, the aciculations ex- 
tending beyond the middle; remainder of abdomen smooth and 
polished; ovipositor sheath very slender, about as long as propodeum 
and abdomen combined. 

Dark brown to piceous, antenna yellowish on basal half; abdomen 
black toward apex; anterior wing fuscous with two complete transverse 
hyaline bands, a broad one basad of first discoidal cell and a narrower 
one across base of stigma and base of first cubital cell; narrow outer 
margin and also base of the wing behind medius hyaline; hind wing 
entirely clear hyaline. 

Male : Agrees with female in all significant respects. 

Type: USNM 63085 

Type locality: Piura, Peru. 

Described from 8 females and 6 males reared by Paul A. Berry from 
an unknown host, thought to be either lepidopterous or bruchid, in 
pods of a species of Caesalpina. 



U. S. 60VERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1957 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



issued f fj$*(Vj^ U?||l fa ^ e 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Vol. 107 Washington : 1958 No. 3390 

NORTH AMERICAN COPEPODS 
OF THE FAMILY NOTODELPHYIDAE 



By Paul L. Illg 1 



Introduction 



The notodelphyid copepods are almost universally inhabitants of 
the body cavities of ascidians. Correlated with this specialized mode of 
existence is the elaborate series of structural modifications displayed 
by these organisms. Preservation of fundamental characteristics, in 
spite of a high degree of adaptive radiation, renders the group a well- 
defined natural unit. The members of this family are poorly known, 
however, over the greatest extent of their occurrence and information 
concerning North American representatives is particularly meager. 
Despite their interesting biological features, these ascidicoles have 
been neglected by the taxonomist and ecologist alike. 

To the specialist on copepods the principal limitation on availability 
of notodelphyids is the obvious fact that their occurrence is dependent 
upon that of the host organisms. The methods of obtaining and 
working over ascidians do not form a usual part of the operations of 
workers on the copepods. Considering the significant biological 
implications of the ascidicoles, they have received little notice from 
the specialists on ascidians. It is rare to chance upon a note in the 

i Department of Zoology, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash. 

463 



464 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

literature on ascidians that even mentions these almost constantly 
present associates. 

The record of these organisms, from the standpoint of world 
distribution, is equally scanty. The only outstanding faunistic 
records are provided by the excellent knowledge available of occurrence 
of ascidicoles on the coasts of the Scandinavian countries and on the 
Mediterranean shores of Europe. 

As a result of the lack of distributional knowledge and ignorance of 
the majority of extant forms, the systematics of this group is in a 
very undeveloped state. The scattered references to the group have 
never been brought together on a large scale. The neglect of the 
ascidicoles is undoubtedly at least partially due to the fact that both 
they and their hosts have distinctly minor practical or economic 
importance. The worker on the copepods thus is confronted first 
with the problem of obtaining host material, and then with the even 
greater difficulty of obtaining valid determinations of the host species. 

No large-scale work has been published on the North American 
notodelphyids. The records available from this area, including 
Greenland, are from the reports of Blake (1933), Gray (1938), Hansen 
(1923), Henderson (1931), Herdman (1898), Huntsman (1912), 
Pearse (1947, 1952), Stephensen (1913), and Wilson (1920, 1932, 
1935a, 1935b). 

The present material has been available from the most diverse 
situations in North America. Although the primary aim has been 
the establishment of the North American representation of the family 
Notodelphyidae, a thorough study along these lines has required 
careful perusal of the records of world distribution. Since this is the 
first time a compilation of such extent has been available, the 
opportunity is taken of presenting a bibliography of the notodelphyids 
and synonymies of the species. Keferences compiled in the bibliog- 
raphy are all those which were thought significantly to affect taxo- 
nomic evaluation or provide definite information as to distribution. 
Incidental references to various of the genera or species are scattered 
throughout the whole of the literature on copepods and complete 
coverage of such items was not attempted. In the listing of hosts, 
all the different names used by authors are presented, although it is 
presumed some are synonymous. Further, these are quoted as found 
in the literature, with such attribution of authority as provided in 
the reference concerned only. The task of bringing the usages in- 
volved and the identifications of hosts into accordance with the modern 
classification of ascidians must devolve upon a specialist in that field. 
There is still the need for similar treatment of the remaining families 
of ascidicolous copepods. It is hoped that the present attempt will 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 465 

demonstrate that the project is a rewarding one in terms of the array 
of biological information disclosed. 

In the genera not actually studied in the present work the taxonomy 
of the earlier workers is accepted and the scheme of G. Sars (1921) is 
used, supplemented, where it is incomplete, from Schellenberg (1922). 
However, the necessity of proposing new genera to recognize the 
new information concerning the anatomy of the group brought forth 
from the study has led to the formation of six new combinations 
as nomenclatural concepts. Most of the reallocations of species 
have involved those originally proposed in the genus Doropygus, 
which, by combining the work of Sars in 1921 and the present study, 
has been finally subdivided into four genera. The present study 
has produced records in 11 genera of 23 species, of which 14 are 
described as new to science. 

New findings of zoogeographic interest include the rediscovery 
of a typical arctic species, unreported since its original description, 
now found in collections ranging from Point Barrow, Alaska, to the 
Gulf of Maine, and to the north coast of Siberia. Still another instance 
is the establishment of the occurrence of a long-known Mediterranean 
species in considerable numbers along the Gulf Coast of Florida. 
A large number of species seems to be entirely restricted to North 
America, but such findings as the above leave reason to assume that 
some of these species will be found to have wide distributions. The 
almost cosmopolitan species, Doropygus pulex Thorell, has been 
found only on the east coast of North America. Only six typically 
European species have so far been found in the American fauna. 

Acknowledgments 

The present study has been made possible by the encouragement 
and considerable contribution of a large group of colleagues and 
associates and the authorities of a number of institutions. It is a 
pleasure to record my indebtedness as a partial expression of my 
gratitude. The use of facilities and materials was made possible 
by the kind offices of the authorities of the United States National 
Museum; the American Museum of Natural History; the Friday 
Harbor Laboratories, University of Washington; the Arctic Kesearch 
Laboratory ; and the Oceanographic Institute, Florida State University. 

Curator Dr. Karl Lang, of the Naturhistoriska Riksmuseet, 
Stockholm; Dr. C. Delamare Deboutteville, of the Laboratoire Arago, 
Banyuls, France; and Mr. J. H. Stock, of the Amsterdam Museum, 
have furnished me valuable information and literature and have 
provided important specimens. 

Encouragement, assistance in collecting and identifying materials, 
and aid in the task of preparing this report have been most freely given 



466 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

by Dr. Waldo L. Schmitt, Miss Lucile McCain, Dr. Fenner A. Chace, 
Frederick M. Bayer, Dr. R. E. Blackwelder, Mrs. Thomas Burch, 
Professor and Mrs. G. E. MacGinitie, Dr. Harold Humm, Dr. William 
Sutcliffe, Jr., Dr. John L. Mohr, Dr. J. E. Lynch, Dr. Robert Fernald, 
Dr. Emery F. Swan, Dr. Donald P. Abbott, and Dr. Cadet Hand. 

Methods 

The problems of collection of notodelphyids is in the main that of 
obtaining quantities of ascidians, the host organisms. Ascidians are 
entirely marine, very few tolerating even an approach to brackish 
conditions. Availability of free-flowing currents of water is a prime 
requisite for abundance of ascidians, which are notable and con- 
spicuous members in the aggregations of animals encrusting piers 
and floats. However, personal experience in the accumulation of 
the present series indicates that the most favorable site for obtaining 
infested ascidians would be bottom-dwelling beds, usually those 
well below the level of tidal fluctuation. Dredging is therefore the 
recommended procedure for collecting the hosts. 

Relatively few notodelphyids inhabit compound ascidians. The 
few that so occur are most readily obtained by observation of the 
living host. There ususally is a high degree of transparency, or at 
least transiucence, of the compound tunicate, which favors detection 
of the dissimilar texture, and often color, of the infesting copepod, 
particularly under illumination for microscopic examination. Teas- 
ing out of zooids is necessary for the capture of the forms inhabiting 
the branchial cavities. Teasing of the matrix or systematic slicing 
of the colony may produce favorable results in the search for the 
species that live in the common channels or lie independently in 
matrical cavities. 

The majority of forms live within the bodies of simple, or solitary, 
ascidians. These may be tumbled out by wholesale slicing of quan- 
tities of ascidians. It is preferable, however, to obtain the ascidicoles 
by dissection of the host, which procedure assures the preservation 
of an ascidian specimen for taxonomic identification and yields 
the optimum in details of biological relationships of host and com- 
mensal or parasite. 

For dissection it is necessary to orient the ascidian. If the siphons 
are obvious, the tunic may be slit well away from them and peeled 
like a rind from the enclosed body. If there is no surface landmark 
for orientation, the best procedure is cautious peeling to expose the 
body and establish the location of the siphons. The specimen then 
should be sectioned just to one side of the median plane, preferably 
by a cut of deeply inserted scissors. The median plane is established 
as the line passing through the siphons and the cut is arranged to 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 467 

start at one siphon and end at the other, leaving the resultant halves 
united by the intersiphonal portion of the body. In individuals 
with thin tests this procedure can be accomplished by cutting directly 
through test and all. The body, after sectioning, may be spread 
open and pinned down, preferably under fluid. Exposed to view 
will be the inner wall of the pharynx with the mid-dorsal line running 
down the center. A number of commensals live in the pharynx and 
may be observed with the naked eye or relatively low powers of 
magnification. The plications of the pharynx of species of ascidians 
thus complicated in structure should be lifted and all the recesses 
exposed. To expedite search in the atrium, or peribranchial cavity, 
the pharynx should be separated from the mantle, preferably under 
a dissecting microscope, by lifting it at the edges and severing the 
many small vascular strands that connect it to the mantle lying below. 
Since the number and arrangement of the principal vessels making 
up the pharynx wall are of systematic importance, care should be 
taken to prevent damage to them. The gut and gonads will be 
among the organs exposed in the atrial cavity. Damage to these 
should likewise be avoided. The wall of the stomach should be 
slit and the cavity investigated as a further likely harbor for copepods. 

Preservation of the ascidicolous copepods is equally well achieved 
in formalin or alcohol. Sometimes the standard fixatives, such as 
Bouin's or Gilson's fluids, yield particularly well-preserved specimens. 
Many species can be narcotized to a state of relaxation that favors 
fixation by prior immersion in a small quantity of sea water upon the 
surface of which are floated a few drops of oil of cloves. Satisfactor}^ 
results are obtained by bulk preservation of ascidians as they are 
collected, in standard strengths of alcohol or formalin, with subsequent 
exploration for the ascidicoles. Museum specimens of ascidians nearly 
one hundred years old have yielded copepods suitable for taxonomic 
identification. 

For systematic determination it was found necessary to prepare 
microscopic dissections of the copepods. The specimens were all 
brought into alcohol for permanent storage. Staining was accom- 
plished in 95 percent alcohol, first tinged distinctly yellowish with 
picric acid, then colored deep transparent green by the addition of a 
few drops of Fast Green, saturated solution in 95 percent alcohol. 
Staining was progressive and carried on until the setae and similar 
elements of ornamentation were distinctly but lightly colored. The 
specimens were rapidly passed through a rinse to Euparal, in which 
medium they were dissected with finely pointed small needles. Ap- 
pendages were serially removed and each pair independently mounted 
under a 9X9 mm. coverslip on one 1X3 inch slide, so that the whole 
individual was represented on the finished single mount. 



468 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Modes of existence 

The notodelphyids are most frequently restricted to the branchial 
cavities of the tunicates they inhabit. The members of this group 
show the least modification of appendages, and probably implications 
with regard to feeding habits might be drawn. Very evidently the 
food supply of the tunicate is directly shared, although there is no 
actual record available of the food of the notodelphyids. Kepresenta- 
tives with most degenerated appendages come from more specialized 
habitats. One genus has been taken from the common cloaca of the 
systems of zooids of a compound ascidian. The mouthparts are so 
reduced in this genus that it is doubtful if the animal could ingest 
particulate matter. Other genera occupy such specialized sites as 
cyst-like cavities in the matrix of compound tunicates, cysts under 
the tunic of solitary ascidians, or with only the head encysted in the 
mesenchymal tissue of the host. The ultimate location in this line 
of parasitic adaptation is in cysts enveloped within the ventral blood 
vessel of representatives of two genera of solitary tunicates. The 
question of the mode of penetration of these specialized symbionts to 
their sites within the hosts is still unanswered. In fact, the sequence 
of developmental events and possible metamorphoses in the life his- 
tories of these ascidicoles is almost entirely unknown. It is obvious 
that much of the development in most species takes place away from 
association with the definitive hosts. In Notodelphys species several 
subadult stadia are passed in the body of the tunicate but this does 
not seem to be the case in most other genera. In many genera the 
males have not been found and it seems plausible to assume that they 
are preponderantly free-swimming. However, an additional factor 
must be considered before applying this conclusion. The collection 
and examination of the host, and the resulting unnatural and untoward 
conditions, may well bring about the departure of some of the as- 
sociated copepods. Stock (1951) reports that slight staleness of the 
water in which tunicates are kept may stimulate even heavily ovigerous 
females of Notodelphys to swim forth. It may then be that males 
and young of most species are simply too nimble to be taken by usual 
means of capture in their accustomed habitat. 

Of further biological interest in the existence of ascidicolous cope- 
pods is their relationship with other symbiotic organisms of the host 
tunicates. Delia Valle has described how Doroixys has been taken 
in the branchial cavity of the zooid of a compound ascidian in which 
the posterior body mass of the same zooid housed an enterocolid 
copepod. Four or more genera of notodelphyids may actually be 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 469 

represented in the symbiont assemblage in the body of a single individ- 
ual solitary tunicate. In addition to notodelphyids, other copepod 
groups may be represented. All of the ascidicolids, buprorids, en- 
terocolids, enteropsids, and botryllophilids are also ascidicoles. Some 
species of the genus Lichornolgus are restricted in habitat to certain 
tunicates. Specimens of a variety of asterocherids and of harpacti- 
coids may occur as occasional or accidental guests of ascidians. 

A notable subordinate association, frequently encountered, is the 
epizootic attachment of ciliate protozoans on notodelphyids. The 
setae of the appendages seem especially favored sites of attachment 
and one may often find the details of anatomy obscured by the burden 
of attached protozoans. 

Amphipods are as commonly symbiotic with tunicates as are the 
ascidicolous copepods. Somewhat less commonly encountered inside 
tunicates, but with an actually high degree of symbiotic occurrence, 
are sporozoan protozoans, hydroids, flatworms, nemerteans, nema- 
todes, polychaetes, and pinnotherid crabs. In a representative lot of 
tunicates assembled for the present study, a series of 20 specimens of 
one species was taken in a single dredge haul. Three hundred odd 
specimens of a species of Doropygus were removed from the branchial 
cavities. Twent}'-eight amphipods (Leucothoe sp.) were obtained, 
the great majority in the atrial chambers. There were five specimens 
of a polychaete, both from atria and branchial baskets; and two male 
pinnotherids from branchial cavities completed the roster of more 
obvious associated animals. 

The complexity of interrelationships among the ascidicolous 
organisms forms a most challenging ecological problem. There is 
virtually no record in the literature on this subject, and the possibilities 
from both the strictly observational and the experimental standpoints 
must be manifold. As a preliminary offering, here is recorded the first 
instance of direct impact of one of the symbiont categories upon 
another, for the detection of which I am indebted to Dr. Cadet Hand. 
A specimen of a solitary tunicate collected in Washington Sound, 
Washington, was found to house a number of notodelphyid copepods 
and a thriving colony of a hydroid, Entocrypta huntsmani. In one of 
the polyps of the hydroid was found the completely ingested body of 
an ovigerous female notodelphyid of very considerable bulk. Others 
of the same species were still thriving in the branchial chamber. What 
the regular food of the hydroid is no one so far has recorded, but the 
possibilities of complex cycles of nutritive relationships form one of 
the more obvious ecological corollaries of the biotic complex of 
ascidicolous organisms. 



470 PROCEEDINGS OF THE; NATIONAL MUBEUM vol. iot 

Family Notodelphyidae 

Type genus: Notodelphys Allman, 1847a. 

Description and morphological considerations: The family 
Notodelphyidae, as here considered, is defined by application of two 
major restrictive criteria: the development of a brood sack enclosed 
within the body and the occurrence of a prehensilely modified 
articulated hook as the terminal member of the antenna. The estab- 
lishment of the homologies involved in the parasitic degradation of 
the various appendages in the most highly modified representatives 
is impossible from the meager information available. Generalities 
as to features of the appendages are here presented as a bare summary 
since species treated in extended descriptions in the succeeding part 
of this paper cover the full range of occurrence within the family. 

The rostrum is a constant feature among the diverse array of 
notodelphyids. In its basic form it is an inflated cone, with little or 
no tendency to ornamentation. 

The antennule varies from the generalized, many-segmented type 
like that of the most primitive cyclopoids to the bimerous or monom- 
erous stumps of the parasites. The antenna is uniramous, a basic- 
ally trimerous appendage, with relatively sparse ornamentation. The 
terminal armature is invariably a stout clawed articulated hook. 

The development of a labrum is an almost unexceptional feature 
of the group. Sufficiently representative occurrences are known of 
the presence of paragnaths to conclude that these structures, also, 
are fundamentally present in notodelphyids. 

Great conformity of the mouthparts is found throughout the group, 
except that in the parasitically degenerated extremes the homologies 
of these appendages are obscured. The typical mandible consists 
of a medially expanded basal segment and a variously ornamented 
palp. The maxillule consists of a masticatory basal portion with a 
biramous palp. The maxilla is basically pentamerous and uniramous. 
A very distinctive armature of medially inserted setae constitutes 
its principal functional component. The maxilliped is reduced, 
varying from trimerous to rnonomerous, with relatively few elements 
of armature differentiated. 

The four pairs of swimming legs are variations upon a fundamentally 
cyclopoid type, bearing out the probable derivation of the group 
from such a free-swimming assemblage. The basic pattern consists 
of bimerous protopodites yoked together by an intercoxal lamella and 
bearing trimerous rami, the exopodite, and the endopodite. The 
armature consists of variously differentiated setae and spines. In the 
advanced parasites, the legs may be reduced to un ornamented stumps. 

The fifth legs are vestigial, as is typical of all the cyclopoids. The 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 471 

appendage is basically a uniramous, Dimerous one. The ornamenta- 
tion consists at most of one to few weakly developed setae or spines. 
In many lines of descent within the group the fifth legs are obsolete 
to lacking. 

Reference to the body regions of a [notodelphyid as head, thorax, 
and abdomen is useful but throughout necessitates careful quali- 
fication. The tagmosis of the copepods presents a thorny problem 
and much discussion of it has appeared in print. There is a major 
dichotomy in the group as to the arrangement of the principal body 
regions. Realization of this fact plus an attempt to reconcile copepod 
structure with that of other major crustacean and arthropod groups 
has produced great ambiguity in terms of reference, and the number 
of schools of thought on the arrangement of the copepod body almost 
approaches the number of authorities who have expressed themselves. 
The basic disposition of the somites in copepods forms two major 
body regions with one additional, readily determined subdivision. 
There is an articulation between an anterior major mass, bearing 
the head structures and swimming legs, and a posterior sector with 
appendages insignificant to lacking. The alternatives of arrange- 
ment of this articulation delimit two principal sections of the copepods, 
the Gymnoplea, in which no limbs are borne on the posterior sector, 
and the Podoplea, which have a posterior sector bearing a pair or 
two of rudimentary limbs. The posterior sector, the importance 
of which is thus readily apparent, has been called abdomen, urosome, 
hind-body, and similar names, preference being shown to noncommit- 
tal expressions. The reasons for any equivocation are good ones. 
First, the articulation is one which does not have an exact counterpart 
in other major crustacean groups. 

Second, the hind-body in the copepods undoubtedly has two major 
anatomical components. In the podopleans the first two somites are 
pedigerous. The second of these, further, is characterized by posses- 
sion of the reproductive apertures. The conformity of these somites 
to the posterior thoracic segments of the majority of crustaceans is 
apparent. In the gymnopleans the body articulation occurs one 
segment posterior to the position found in podopleans. The first 
segment of the gymnoplean hind-body, although not pedigerous, 
includes the genital apertures. A thoracic series plus an abdominal 
series of somites thus would be seen to characterize the copepod 
hind-body. In females throughout the Copepoda a further compli- 
cation occurs. The segment of the genital orifices usually fuses with 
the succeeding somite to form a compound metamere, usually ex- 
hibiting some expansion and often other elaboration. The participant 
elements in this complex then would seem to be one anatomically 
thoracic somite and one anatomically abdominal somite. As we shall 



472 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

see below, however, the formation of this compound somite is not a 
characteristic feature throughout the notodelphyids. 

In addition to the subdivision of the copepod body provided by the 
principal articulation, the tagmosis is further modified by the fusion 
of anterior segments into a cephalothoracic region, leaving several 
free thoracic segments anterior to the body hinge. 

Finally, in Botachus, Pachypygus, and Notopterophorus especially, 
the insertion of the caudal rami is upon a complicated structure which 
tends to become ensheathed by the preceding abdominal segment. 
This reduced structure seems to be a perianal ring, and has been 
designated, since Giesbrecht, as the terminal abdominal segment. 
(In usual anatomic reference among Crustacea, the perianal ring is not 
considered to be a true somite.) 

The fundamental plan of segmentation of the body in the Notodel- 
phyidae is exhibited in the male of Notodelphys spp. The major body 
articulation is podoplean in character. The main mass of the trunk 
is cephalothoracic-thoracic and it bears most of the appendages, 
through the fourth swimming legs. This metasomal assembly is 
basically 5-segmented, with the segments diverse. Nearly half the 
metasomal mass is the fused cephalothoracic element which supports 
all the head appendages and the maxillipeds. The succeeding four 
much-less-extensive segments each support the appropriate pair of 
thoracic swimming legs. The urosome, posterior to the major hinge of 
the body, comprises two thoracic segments and four abdominal seg- 
ments (to include the telson, or perianal segment). The first urosomal 
segment is the fifth free thoracic segment, or the sixth limb-bearing 
segment attributable to the thoracic series. It supports the relatively 
well-developed fifth legs. The second urosomal segment, attributed 
by convention to the thorax, is characterized by possession of the 
paired reproductive apertures. These, and the segment itself, are 
complicated in structure by the presence of elaborate anatomical 
features connected with the formation of the characteristic sperma- 
tophoral capsules. The posterior ventral margin of this segment is 
produced into paired prominences which support two to three setae. 
These protrusions throughout the cyclopoid series have been long- 
accepted as the vestiges of sixth legs (or seventh thoracic appendages). 

In the males of some other genera there is also a complication of 
urosomal segmentation involved. This seems to be related to an 
extension of the structures related to the spermatophores to 
occupy both the thoracic somites of the urosome. The result is a 
more or less complete fusion of the sixth and seventh thoracic somites, 
with the spermatophoral capsules extending the length of the resultant 
segment. The sixth legs, as is usual, are prolongations of the posterior 
ventral margin of the structure. The fifth legs lie in rather close 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 473 

apposition to the ventral surface, usually at a level about midway on 
the longitudinal extent. There may or may not be an obvious line 
of articulation in the integument of the segment at the level of the 
fifth legs (e. g., species of Doropygus, Doropygopsis, and Doropygella). 

In the males of species of Notodelphys the segment of the fifth legs 
is a well-developed, freely articulated one but is intruded considerably 
by the spermatophoral capsules. 

The majority of notodelphyid males (where they are known) con- 
form to the above generalized plan of metasomal tagmosis. The 
females of the genera in which parasitic degeneration does not obscure 
the basic features of segmentation, in the main conform to this plan, 
but there are notable exceptions. The females of Notodelphys and, 
most strikingly, Lonchidiopsis are organized in a pattern seemingly 
conforming to the gymnoplean arrangement of the calanoid copepods. 
In Lonchidiopsis, an extremely aberrant notodelphyid, the bulk of 
the body is an expanded segment which, besides accommodating the 
incubatorium, supports the fourth and fifth legs; the urosome has no 
thoracic appendages. This tendency is also clearly seen in Noto- 
delphys. 

In Notodelphys monoseta, the last metasomal segment is the ex- 
panded incubatory complex. At its anterior articulation are borne 
the fourth legs; the fifth legs are set at the posterior edge and pro- 
trude posteriorly just to reach the anterior margin of the first urosomal 
somite. In specimens of N. allmani from Oban, Scotland, I find the 
fifth legs borne on the ventral surface of the incubatory segment, and 
they lie very far removed anteriorly from the hind margin of this 
segment. 

Still further complicating the issue is the fact that the organization 
of the metasome in Botachus is very similar to that in Notodelphys, as 
was clearly shown by Kerschner in 1879. The closest affinities of 
Botachus are not readily evident but would seem to be somewhat 
closer to the Pachypygus-Notopterophorus group of forms than to 
Notodelphys. But the body is a depressed one and this very likely 
is the critical factor in the tagmosis. The mechanics of the articula- 
tion of the hind-body are obviously profoundly affected by the 
compact, depressed mass which the metasome forms. 

In Notodelphys females there are five urosomal segments, including 
the so-called "segment" supporting the caudal rami; none are pedig- 
erous. The four posterior-most are abdominal. The first, which 
bears the oviducal apertures, is accordingly here considered to be the 
seventh "thoracic" somite; it affords a most exceptional instance 
among copepods of this thoracic segment being free of the usual fusion 
with the first abdominal somite. In the species of Doropygus I have 
examined this condition also seems to exist, so that the urosome here 



474 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

actually has six segments including that of the fifth legs. Other genera 
allied to Doropygus in the feature of having podoplean segmentation 
return to the 5-segmented urosome by accomplishing the fusion of last 
thoracic and first abdominal somites. This is true of Doropygopsis as 
a salient example. 

The urosomal segmentation in Notodelphys then corresponds to the 
most generalized structure in the Calanoida (Gymnoplea). That in 
the males is of the most generalized podoplean or cyclopoid type. 
The mechanics of the major body articulation are complicated by the 
combination of effects produced by inflation of the body, with, in addi- 
tion, either compression or depression markedly developed. As a re- 
sult, the tagmosis in representatives of the family presents a graduated 
series of arrangements that spans the major subdivision in this feature, 
which has held as a differentiating characteristic in dichotomous ar- 
rangement of the copepods. There are both ' 'podoplean" and "gym- 
noplean" notodelphyoids. 

Although he did not describe the situation aptly, G. Sars (1921) 
was aware of a major difference in tagmosis of the female notodelphy- 
ids. He accordingly restricted the family Notodelphyidae to include 
Notodelphys (and Agnathaner) with "tail composed in both sexes of five 
segments not very different in size." He further accepted the family 
Doropygidae, as proposed by Brady (1878), to include 10 genera more 
or less closely resembling Doropygus, and defined, in part, by Sars as 
with "tail cylindrical in shape, and in most cases only composed of four 
distinctly defined segments." Thus, upon closer analysis, we have 
seen that the actual facts of the tagmosis are almost contrary to what 
Sars considered them. 

Undue emphasis doubtless has also been placed upon the possible 
significance of compression and depression as major diagnostic char- 
acters in notodelphyids. A newly found species among the present 
material is compressed in habitus, although in all details of anatomy 
of the appendages it conforms to a genus in which all previously known 
representatives are depressed. Schellenberg (1922) was led to include 
in the genus Doropygus by their compressed habitus three species 
which are clearly much more closely allied to Notodelphys when the 
features of their appendages are taken into account. 

As to the alternative possibilities of fusion of the segment of the 
first swimming legs with the head or persistence as a separate unit, as 
will be shown below, the records have not been consistently reliable 
in the past. Further, both conditions seemingly may occur in a single 
genus. Accordingly the bearing of this question on the higher levels 
of classification, in the present state of knowledge, is not clear. 

The various trends of modification in the degenerated parasitic 
lineages within the group have further significance in the problem of 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 475 

the tagmosis of the notodelphyids. A major tendency, quite obviously 
independently initiated in more than one of the related assemblages 
within the group, is the encroachment of the brood sack upon suc- 
cessively more of the thoracic somites until all those bearing swim- 
ming legs come to be incorporated in the incubatory structure. A 
second important trait is the coalescence of segments as parasitic 
modification advances. 

The internal anatomy of the notodelphyids for the most part re- 
mains to be described. In keeping with many copepods, the members 
of this family lack respiratory and circulatory structures. There is 
no full description of the musculature of any representative available. 
Features of the excretory organs and of the digestive and nervous 
systems are known only as isolated details scattered through the 
references to the group. 

The reproductive system was extensively studied in Notopterophorus 
by Giesbrecht (1882a), and Canu (1892) added many details from his 
studies on a number of forms. The typical female reproductive 
system of notodelphyids conforms to the general pattern found 
among copepods. There is a single medial ovarian mass located 
dorsally in the metasome. Paired oviducts traverse the body from 
the level of the ovary to the seventh thoracic segment, which is in- 
variably located on the urosome as the first or second segment. The 
oviducts open dorsolaterally as rather elaborately developed genital 
atria, these frequently being shielded at the orifices by modified tegu- 
mentary structures. A seminal apparatus is also a feature of this 
genital somite. There is a median pore on the ventral surface, which 
serves as a site of attachment for the spermatophores transferred from 
the male in copulation. From the pore a short canal proceeds later- 
ally on either side to the paired seminal receptacles which lie in close 
relation to the genital atria. From the seminal receptacles the sperm 
passes to the eggs in the genital atrium as they are being extruded into 
the brood sack. The arrangement of paired seminal reservoirs has 
been suggested as a possible diagnostic character of the family Noto- 
delphyidae. It is certainly in contrast to the condition found in the 
genus Cyclops in which typically a large single median seminal recep- 
tacle is developed. However, the discernment of this anatomical 
feature is difficult and the condition in the majority of the Cyclop- 
inidae, for which information would be most significant, has not so 
far been recorded. 

The male reproductive system is less well known than the female. 
Canu (1892, pis. 6, 8) provided detailed illustration of this tract in 
two genera, and these features conform well to the generalized 
cyclopoid condition. 



476 PROCEEDINGS! OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

A large single testis occupies the dorsal median portion of the first 
three thoracic segments. It may protrude anteriorly into the hinder 
portion of head. A deferent duct takes its origin rather far forward 
on the testicular mass on either side. The duct first is arranged as a 
highly convoluted section, which lies opposite the anterior third of the 
testis, then courses directly posteriorly to the seventh thoracic somite, 
which is the genital segment, located in the urosome. Most of the 
duct seems to be highly glandular, and considerable enlargement is de- 
veloped posterior to the convoluted portion. Each duct terminates 
in a large seminal vesicle, in which the spermatophoral capsule is elabo- 
rated. The seminal vesicles occupy most of the ventral portion of the 
genital segment. Each may intrude considerably into the next ante- 
rior segment of the fifth legs. The large apertures of the seminal vesi- 
cles are overlain by the protective integumentary flaps, usually bearing 
two setae, which are considered to be the sixth legs. The spermato- 
phores are somehow removed from these orifices and cemented to the 
mid ventral seminal aperture of the female in the act of copulation. 

Canu (1892) made an outstanding contribution in the description of 
developmental stadia for five species encountered by him. Unfor- 
tunately his treatment of the later stages was not recorded in terms of 
the criteria of modern usage and these remain to be reappraised. No 
subsequent life history study adding greatly to this basic information 
has been found in the literature search made for the present paper. 

K. Lang (1949) described a new family of copepods, the Archinoto- 
delphyidae, to include some very primitively constructed ascidicolous 
copepods. These would, basically, require only the anatomical modi- 
fications of provision of an internal brood sack and some slight altera- 
tions in some of the appendages to apply to a familial definition which 
would accommodate the series of genera herein assigned to the Noto- 
delphyidae. They thus possess points of structure which strongly 
indicate that they may be a remnant of the archetypical stock which 
gave rise to the notodelphyids. Further, the inclusion of the archino- 
todelphyids within the family Cyclopinidae, a long-known group of 
free-living cyclopoids, would be consequent upon fairly simple trans- 
formations of a few appendages. 

This demonstration of the cyclopinid-notodeiphyid plrylogenetic 
series has led to the abandonment of the traditional usage, introduced 
by G. Sars (1921), which considers the majority of ascidicolous cope- 
pods as a suborder, the Notodelphyoida. The Notodelphyidae, Lang 
shows, are directly assignable to the cyclopinid stock within the 
Cyclopoida. Other ascidicolous families also show c} r clopinid affini- 
ties, but not so obviously. One family among them Lang has con- 
sidered to have affinity with a somewhat more remotely related cyclo- 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 477 

poid series, the poecilostomes, so that the suborder of former usage is 
held by him to have been polyphyletic. 

The classification of the notodelphyid ascidicoles then has resolved 
as a problem in practicalit} 7 . There are good grounds for joining to- 
gether the families Cyclopinidae, Archinotodelphyidae, and Notodel- 
phyidae, since the distinctions between each two adjacent families are 
so minor, as pointed out above. If this combination were adopted, 
the problem of naming the assemblage would present difficulties. The 
name Notodelphyidae was used so early as a familial concept that it 
ought to deserve a weighty claim on grounds of mere priority. How- 
ever, the disadvantage of applying the name is that the very phylo- 
genetic trend which conve} r s biological significance to the grouping is 
thereby obscured. To preserve the phylogenetic considerations it 
would further be advisable to retain the separate categories at sub- 
familial level. This outcome, it seems obvious, offers so little gain 
over the treatment of the groups as separate families, that this latter 
alternative is here accepted. 

A further consideration in the arrangement of the genera concerned 
is the proposition by Chatton and Bremen t (1915b) of a family Ophio- 
seididae to include Ophioseides , Bremeniia, Ooneides. A grouping of the 
notodelphyoicl genera which exhibit loss of one or more mouthparts 
would extend this series to include also Scolecodes, Scolecimorpha, 
Pholeterides, and Dysgenopsyllus. All of these exhibit extreme modifi- 
cations toward parasitic degeneration. However, the great reduction 
of the appendages makes it impossible to determine whether the same 
mouthpart has been lost in each. This issue is the crux of the problem 
of establishing the series as monophyletic, and, thereby, its validity 
as a taxonomic unit. Accordingly, it is here considered that the most 
practical treatment could not recognize the ophioseidids as a family. 

The existence of the ophioseidid genera in the notodelphyid series 
possessing incubatoria offers a possible objection to Lang's considera- 
tion of the enterocolids as poecilostomes. By the loss of mouthparts, 
the ophioseidids might be considered to qualify as poecilostomes, but 
the derivation of these genera seems so obviously demonstrable from 
the notodelphyid stock that other assignment would be purely arbi- 
trary. Since the outstanding character of the poecilostomes is this 
more or less negative feature and the existence of a convergent parallel 
is available, the question arises whether the poecilostomes are not in 
fact an artificial, polyphyletic grouping. There are grounds in the 
definitions of some of the families to offer support to this suspicion. 
It seems entirely possible that further discoveries among the ascidico- 
lous copepods may yet provide the links that can connect the enteroco- 
lids to the parental gnathostome stock. The question, it would seem, 
should remain an open one until further facts are available. 



478 PROCEEDINGS OF THE: NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 
Key to genera of Notodelphyidae, based upon females 2 

la. All mouthparts represented 2 

16. One or more pairs of mouthparts absent 21 

2a. Second to fourth exopodites reduced, segmentation obsolete 3 

26. Second to fourth exopodites distinctly segmented 4 

3a. Fifth legs absent Prophioseides (p. 480) 

36. Fifth legs present as reduced scales Campopera (p. 480) 

4a. Brood sack involves second to fourth thoracic segments 5 

46. Brood sack involves principally fourth thoracic segment 6 

5a. Fifth legs absent Gnenotophorus (p. 621) 

56. Fifth legs present Bonnierilla (p. 480) 

6a. Maxilliped consists of 3 setiferous segments 7 

66. Maxilliped monomerous to trimerous, at most two segments setiferous . 10 

la. Body depressed Notodelphys (p. 488) 

76. Body compressed 8 

8a. Endopodites 2 to 4 bimerous Notopterophorus (p. 481) 

86. Endopodites 2 to 4 trimerous 9 

9a. Antennule 9- or 10-segmented Doropygopsis (p. 591) 

96. Antennule of less than 9 segments Pachypygus (p. 608) 

10a. Armature of caudal rami variously developed setae 11 

106. Armature of caudal rami variously developed clawlike spines 18 

11a. Basal segment of antenna with one or more well-developed plumose 

setae 12 

116. Setation of basal segment of antenna much reduced or absent 14 

12a. Urosome 4-segmented Notodelphyopsis (p. 511) 

126. Urosome 5-segmented 13 

13a. Maxilliped trimerous, or bimerous with three terminal setae. 

Paranotodelphys (p. 484) 

136. Maxilliped bimerous with two terminal setae .... Pygodelphys (p. 598) 

14a. Fifth leg reduced to an unarticulated scalelike structure 15 

146. Fifth leg articulated, well-developed 16 

15a. Fifth leg rudiment setiferous Doroixys (p. 484) 

156. Fifth leg rudiment unornamented Pomphopygus (p. 616) 

16a. Body depressed Lonchidiopsis (p. 485) 

166. Body compressed 17 

17a. Endopodite of maxillule with 6 or more setae .... Doropygella (p. 590) 

176. Endopodite of maxillule with less than 6 setae . . . . Doropygus (p. 518) 

18a. Body depressed Botachus (p. 485) 

186. Body compressed 19 

19a. Endopodites 2 to 4 trimerous Goniodelphys (p. 486) 

196. Endopodites 2 to 4 bimerous 20 

20a. Antennule 8-segmented Ustina (p. 486) 

206. Antennule 7-segmented Notopterophoroides (p. 486) 



> Agnathaner Canu, based upon males only, is omitted from this key. The resemblance of the antenna 
to that of Notodelphys, with the unique degree of reduction of the mouthparts, furnish characters for the 
separation of this genus from all others. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 479 

21a. Body an inflated ovoid Ooneides (p. 487) 

216. Body more elongate, vermiform 22 

22a. No thoracic appendages Ophioseides (p. 487) 

226. One or more pairs of reduced swimming legs 23 

23a. One pair of reduced swimming legs present . . Dysgenopsyllus (p. 487) 

236. Four pairs of reduced swimming legs present 24 

24a. Swimming legs long, tapered, unsegmented processes lacking well-developed 

armature 25 

246. Swimming legs short, compact, armed with short, stout spines .... 26 

25a. Mouth appendages grouped at the midline Brementia (p. 487) 

256. Mouth appendages displaced far laterally .... Pholeterides (p. 637) 
26a. Brood sack occupies body region posterior to second legs. 

Scolecimorpha (p. 488) 
266. Brood sack occupies body region posterior to fourth swimming legs. 

Scolecodes (p. 632) 

Species Incerta Sedis 

Doropygus cylindriformis (p. 586). 

Indeterminable Genera 

Salpicola (p. 640). 
Ophioseidus (p. 640). 

Genera not known from North America 

Genus Agnathaner Canu 

Agnathaner Canu. 1891, p. 474 (type species, by original designation, Agnathaner 
typicus Canu, 1891); 1892, pp. 210-211.— T. Scott, 1907, p. 363.— Smith, 
1909, p. 66.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 38-39.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 224.— Wilson, 
1924, p. 17; 1932, p. 598. 

Agnathener LeigirSharpe, 1934, p. 6. 

Agnathaner typicus Canu 

Agnathaner typicus Canu, 1891, p. 474 (type locality, Wimereux, France, in Cynthia 
rustica); 1892, pp. 211-212, pi. 17, figs. 1-10.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 39-40, pi. 
19.— Sewell, 1949, p. 188. 

Distribution: Northern coast of France, Norway. 
Hosts: Cynthia rustica, Styelopsis grossularia van Beneden. 

Agnathaner minutus Canu 

Agnathaner minutus Canu, 1891, p. 474 (type locality, Wimereux, France, in 
Circinalium concrescens) ; 1892, pp. 212-213, pi. 17, figs. 11-26. — Hartmeyer, 
1911, p. 1736.— Sewell, 1949, p. 188. 

Distribution: Northern coast of France. 

Host: Sidnyum turbinatum (?= Circinalium concrescens Giard). 



422202—58- 



480 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Genus Prophioseides Chatton and Brement 

Ophioseides Chatton and BrSment, 1911, p. 30 (part). 

Prophioseides Chatton and Brement, 1915c, p. 155 (type species, by monotypy, 
Ophioseides abdominalis Chatton and Brement, 1911). 

Prophioseides abdominalis (Chatton and Brement) 

Ophioseides abdominalis Chatton and Brement, 1911, pp. 30-33, fig. 1 (type 
locality, Banyuls-sur-Mer, France, in Amaroucium densum G.); 1915b, p. 
134.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 261.— Harant, 1931, p. 372.— Sewell, 1949, p. 
183. 

Distribution: Banyuls, France. 
Host: Amaroucium densum G. 

Genus Campopera Schellenberg 

Campopera Schellenberg, 1922, p. 259 (type species, by monotypy, C. michaelseni 
Schellenberg, 1922).— Wilson, 1932, p. 602. 

Campopera michaelseni Schellenberg 

Campopera michaelseni Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 259-261, figs. 41-43 (type locality, 
Port Stanley, Falkland Islands, in Paramolgula gigantea (Clin.)). 

Distribution: Falkland Islands. 
Host: Paramolgula gigantea. 

Genus Bonnierilla Canu 

Paryphes Kerschner, 1879, pp. 179-182 (not Paryphes Burmeister, 1835) (type 
species, by monotypy, P. longipes Kerschner, 1879). — von Martens, 1879, 
p. 44.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 325, 326.— Carus, 1885, p. 344. 

Bonnierilla Canu, 1891, pp. 470, 473, 475 (type species, by monotypy, Paryphes 
longipes Kerschner, 1879); 1892, pp. 196-197.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 
249-250.— Wilson, 1924, p. 18; 1932, p. 599. 

Bonneriella Vosseler, 1894, p. 357. — Norman, 1905, p. 36. 

Bonnierella Gurney, 1927, p. 480 (not Bonnierella Chevreux, 1900). 

Bonierilla Sewell, 1949, pp. 164, 174. 

Bonnierilla acollaris Schellenberg 

Bonnierilla acollaris Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 250-251, 266, fig. 29.— Sewell, 1949, 
p. 170 (type localities: Australia, Suez; in Ascidia malaca Traust., A. glabra 
Hartmr., Ascidiella aspersa (Mull.), Pyura gangelion (Sav.), Styela canopus 
(Sav.)). 

Bonnierella acollaris Gurney, 1927, p. 480. 

Bonnierilla acollaris Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

? Bonnierilla scolaris Sewell, 1949, p. 179. 

Distribution: Australia; Gulf of Suez. 

Hosts: Ascidia glabra Hartmr., Ascidia malaca Traust., Ascidiella 
aspersa (Mull.), Pyura gangelion (Savigny), Styela canopus (Savigny). 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 481 

Bonnierilla arcuata Brement 

Bonnierilla arcuata BrSment, 1909, pp. 64-69, figs. 1-14 (type locality, Banyuls, 
France, in Diplosoma spongiforme Giard). — Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1736. — 
Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 250, 266— Harant, 1931, p. 370. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Diplosoma spongiforme Giard. 

Bonnierilla armata Schellenberg 

Bonnierilla armata Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 252-253, 266, fig. 32 (type localities, 
Australia; West Africa; in Molgula reducta Hartmr., and Poly car pa gortensis 
Mchlsn) . 

B. [onierilla] armata Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

Distribution: Australia; West Africa. 

Hosts: Molgula reducta Hartmr., Polycarpa goreensis (Mchlsn.). 

Bonnierilla brevipes Schellenberg 

Bonnierilla brevipes Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 251-252, 266, figs. 30-31 (type 

locality, Malay Archipelago, in Polycarpa papillata (Sluit.)). 
Bonierilla brevipes Sewell, 1949, p. 163. 

Distribution: Malay Archipelago. 
Host: Polycarpa papillata (Sluit.). 

Bonnierilla longipes (Kerschner) 

Paryphes longipes Kerschner, 1879, pp. 179-182, pi. 3, fig. 10, pi. 4, figs. 1-10 
(type locality, Bay of Muggia, Trieste, in Cynthia spp.). — Gourret, 1888, 
p. 1.— Graeffe, 1902, p. 40.— Sewell, 1949, p. 183. 

Bonnierilla longipes Canu, 1891, p. 473; 1892, pp. 77-78, 197-198, pi. 9, figs. 
4-13, pi. 10, figs. 1-8.— Norman, 1905, p. 36.— Hartmeyer, 1911, pp. 1734- 
1735.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 250, 266.— Harant, 1931, p. 370.— Sewell, 
1949, p. 182. 

Bonnierella longipes Gurney, 1933, p. 304. 

Distribution: Mediterranean; Atlantic coast of France. 
Hosts: Clavelina lepadiformis, Cynthia lurida Thor., Cynthia sp., 
Pyura lurida, Pyura sp. 

Genus Notopterophorus Leuckart 

Notopterophorus Costa, 1840, p. 7 (nomen nudum). — Hope, 1851, p. 38 
(nomen nudum). — Leuckart, 1859, pp. 241-247 (type species, N. veranyi 
Leuckart, 1859).— Thorell, 1859a, p. 6; 1859b, p. 336; 1860, p. 115.— M. 
Sars, 1861, p. 136.— Claus, 1864, p. 381.— Buchholz, 1869, pp. 125-126.— 
Caiman, 1909, p. 103.— G. O. Sars, 1921, pp. 52-53.— Brehm, 1927, p. 490 
(part).— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 254 (part) .—Wilson, 1932, p. 602. 

Notopteropherus Claus, 1875, p. 350. 

Doropygus (Notopterophorus) Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 316-325 (part). 

Doropygus Thorell, 1859a, pp. 43-46 (part) .— Aurivillius, 1882a, p. 46. 



482 PROCEEDINGS! OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Notopterophorus auritus (Thorell) 

Doropygus auritus Thorell, 1859a, pp. 50-52, pi. 7, pi. 8, fig. 10 (type locality, 
Sweden, in Ascidia canina Mull.); 1859b, pp. 339, 343; 1860, pp. 119, 123.— 
Hesse, 1866, pp. 54, 64.— Norman, 1869, p. 299.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, 
pp. 777, 801, pi. 11, figs. 12-22.— Brady, 1878, pp. 135-136, pi. 29, figs. 
1-11.— Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 55-56, pi. 6, fig. 13; 1882b, pp. 61, 112, pi. 
13, fig. 12, pi. 15, figs. 1, 2; 1883, pp. 25-26, 57, 108, pi. 2, fig. 13, pi. 4, fig. 12, 
pi. 6, figs. 1, 2.— Norman, 1905, p. 36.— Norman and Scott, 1906, p. 202 — 
T. Scott, 1907, p. 364.— Vanhoffen, 1917, p. 224. 

Doropygus (Notopterophorus) elongatus var. auritus Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 317, 
328.— Carus, 1885, p. 343.— Pesta, 1909, p. 259. 

Notopterophorus auritus Koehler, 1890, p. 138. — G. Sars, 1921, pp. 53-54, pi. 26.— 
van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 120, fig. 72. — Lang, 
1948, p. 3.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 188, 191. 

Notopterophorus elongatus var. auritus Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 254, 266. 

Distribution: Sweden, Norway; British Isles. 
Hosts: Ascidia canina Muller, A. mentula, Phallusia mentula, P. 
obliqua, P. venosa. 

Notopterophorus micropterus G. Sars 

Notopterophorus micropterus G. Sars, 1921, p. 56, pi. 28, fig. 1 (type locality, Nor- 
way). — van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 121, fig. 
74.— Sewell, 1949, p. 191. 

Distribution: Norway. 
Host: Ascidia mentula. 

Notopterophorus papilio Hesse 

Notopterophorus papilio Hesse, 1864, pp. 338-343, pi. 11, figs. 1-13 (type locality, 
France, in Phallusia canina); 1865, pp. 220-223.— Norman, 1869, p. 300; 
1905, p. 36.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801.— Brady, 1878, pp. 142- 
144, pi. 31, figs. 3-12.— Richiardi, 1880, p. 147.— Koehler, 1890, pp. 131-134, 
138, figs. 1, 4-8.— Schimkewitsch, 1893, pp. 200, 202; 1896, p. 339, pi. 14, 
figs. 30-32, pi. 16, figs. 56, 61.— Thompson, 1893, pp. 190-191, pi. 18, figs. 
5, 6.— T. Scott, 1897, p. 148; 1901, p. 351; 1907, pp. 365-366; 1908, pp. 212- 
216.— Norman and Scott, 1906, p. 202.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735 — 
G. Sars, 1921, p. 55, pi. 27.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 254, 267.— Harant, 1931, 
p. 372. — Marine Biological Association, 1931, p. 173. — Leigh-Sharpe, 1935, 
p. 48. — van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, pp. 120-121, 
fig. 73.— Sewell, 1949, p. 188. 

Doropygus (Notopterophorus) papilio Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 316, 327. — Carus, 
1885, p. 341.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1.— Pesta, 1909, p. 259. 

Notopterophorus pupilio Hesse, 1869, p. 298. 

Doropygus (Notopterophorus) papilio var. massiliensis Gourret, 1887, pp. 185-186; 
1888, pp. 36-52, pi. 2, fig. 10, pi. 3, figs. 1, 2, 5, pi. 4, figs. 3, 4.— Sewell, 1949, 
p. 182. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway; British Isles. 
Hosts: Ascidia canina, A. mentula, Ciona canina, Phallusia 
mentula. P. oblique, P. venosa. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 483 

Notopterophorus elongatus Buchholz 

Notopterophorus elongatus Costa, 1840, p. 7 (nomen nudum). — Hope, 1851, p. 38 
(nomen nudum). — Claus, 1864, pp. 381-382 (nomen nudum). — Buchholz, 
1869, pp. 127-136, pi. 8, fig. 6, pi. 9, fig. 6.— Brady, 1878, p. 144.— Kerschner, 
1879, pp. 187-189, pi. 1, figs. 8, 9, pi. 3, fig. 3, pi. 5, figs. 13-17, pi. 6, figs. 1, 
2.— Richiardi, 1880, p. 147.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 370-371, pi. 23, figs. 2-4, 
11, pi. 24, fig. 7; 1892, p. 815.— Koehler, 1890, p. 132, figs. 2, 3, p. 138.— 
Graeffe, 1902, p. 39.— Norman, 1905, p. 36.— Brian, 1906, p. 144— Schellen- 
berg, 1922, pp. 254, 266-267. — van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 
1936, p. 121.— Sewell, ]949, pp. 182, 188. 

Notopterophorus elongatus var. elongatus Schellenberg, 1922, p. 254. 

Notopterophorus elatus Costa, 1840, p. 7 (nomen nudum). — Hope, 1851, p. 38 
(nomen nudum). — Claus, 1864, pp. 381-382 (nomen nudum). — Giesbrecht, 
1882a, pp. 370-372, pi. 22, fig. 1, pi. 23, figs. 12-14, pi. 24, figs. 8, 10-15, 
18-21; 1892, p. 815.— Norman, 1905, p. 36.— Brian, 1906, p. 144.— Harant, 
1931, p. 372. 

Notopterophorus veranyi Leuckart, 1859, pp. 241-247, pi. 6, figs. 2-8 (type locality, 
Nizza, in Phallusia mammillaris) . — Thorell, 1859a, p. 6. — Hesse, 1864, p. 
338.— Heller, 1866, p. 750.— Stossich, 1881, pp. 270-271.— Hartmeyer, 1911, 
p. 1735. 

Doropygus auritus var. elongatus Aurivillius, 1882b, pp. 61-70, 112, pi. 15, fig. 3; 
1883, pp. 57-66, 108, pi. 6, fig. 3. 

Doropygus {Notopterophorus) elongatus Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 316, 327. — Carus, 
1885, p. 343.— Canu, 1892, pp. 190-191.— Pesta, 1909, p. 259. 

Doropygus {Notopterophorus) elongatus var. elongatus Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 316, 
328.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1.— Pesta, 1909, p. 259. 

Doropygus {Notopterophorus) elongatus var. elatus Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 316, 
327.— Carus, 1885, p. 343.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1.— Canu, 1892, p. 191. — 
Pesta, 1909, p. 259. 

[Doropygus] {Notopterophorus) elatus Canu, 1891, p. 472. 

Notopterophorus elongatus var. elatus Koehler, 1890, p. 138. — Schellenberg, 1922, 
pp. 254, 266. 

Doropygus {Notopterophorus) elongatus var. maculatus Gourret, 1887, p. 186; 
1888, pp. 52-59, pi. 2, figs. 11-13; pi. 3, fig. 4; pi. 4, fig. 5. 

? Notopterophorus elongatus var. massiliensis Sewell, 1949, p. 182. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Sweden. 

Hosts: Ascidia mentula, A. mammillata, Ascidiella aspersa, Clavel- 
lina lepadifor mis , Phallusia mamillata, P. mammillaris, P. mentula, 
P. gelatinosa, Phallusiopsis mammillata. 

Notopterophorus sp. Schimkewitsch 

Notopterophorus sp. Schimkewitsch, 1898, p. 342, pi. 15, figs. 43, 44-46. 

Distribution: Roscoff, France. 

Hosts: Ascidia sanguinolenta, dona intestinalis . 

Indeterminable Species 
Notopterophorus bombyx Hesse 

Notopterophorus bombyx Hesse, 1865, pp. 223-226 (type locality, coast of France, 
in Ciona intestinalis). — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801. — Hartmeyer, 
1911, p. 1735. 



484 PROCEEDINGS OP THEi NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Genus Paranotodelphys Schellenberg 

Paranotodelphys Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 232-233 (type, hereby designated, P. 

scutiformis Schellenberg, 1922 [first species]). — Gurney, 1927, p. 480. — 

Wilson, 1932, pp. 598, 599. 
Pseudonoiodelphys Gurney, 1927, p. 480 (type species, by monotypy, P. phallusiae 

Gurney, 1927).— Wilson, 1932, p. 590.— Lang, 1948, p. 6. 
INotodelphys Lang, 1948, p. 6 (part). 

Paranotodelphys scutiformis Schellenberg 

Paranotodelphys scutiformis Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 233-235, figs. 9-11 (type 
localities: Freemantle, Australia, Sharks Bay, Australia, Pajunga Islands; 
in Ascidia malaca Traust., Ascidiella aspersa (Mull.), Ascidiella latesiphonica 
Hartmr., Ascidia gemmata Sluit.). — Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

Distribution: Australia, Pajunga Islands. 

Hosts: Ascidia malaca Traust., Ascidiella aspersa (Mull.), As- 
cidiella latesiphonica Hartmr., Ascidia gemmata Sluit. 

Paranotodelphys gracilis Schellenberg 

Paranotodelphys gracilis Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 235-236, figs. 12-14 (type lo- 
cality, Gulf of Suez, in Rhodosoma verecundum Ehrbg.). — Gurney, 1927, p. 
480.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 

Host: Rhodosoma verecundum Ehrbg. 

Paranotodelphys longicauda Schellenberg 

Paranotodelphys longicauda Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 236-237, figs. 15, 16 (type 
locality Gauss-Station, Deutsche Tiefsee Expedition, Antarktis [sic]). — 
Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

Distribution: Antarctic. 

Paranotodelphys phallusiae (Gurney), new combination 

Pseudonotodelphys phallusiae Gurney, 1927, pp. 480-482, fig. 120,a-m (type lo- 
cality, Gulf of Suez, from collections in which Phallusia nigra was common). — 
Sewell, 1949, pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 
Host: Not certainly known. 

Genus Doroixys Kerschner 

Doroixys Kerschner, 1879, pp. 176-179 (type species, by monotypy, D. uncinata 

Kerschner, 1879).— T. Scott, 1907, p. 366.— Wilson, 1932, p. 601. 
Doroyxes Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 325, 326. 

Doroixys uncinata Kerschner 

Doroixys uncinata Kerschner, 1879, pp. 176-179, pi. 4, figs. 11-13, pi. 5, figs. 1-12 
(type locality, Trieste, in Amaroecium spp.). — Delia Valle, 1883, pp. 242-245, 
pi. [1], figs. 1, 2.— Carus, 1885, p. 343.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1— CaDu, 1891, 
p. 472; 1892, pp. 83-88, 202-203, pi. 14, figs. 1-14, pi. 15, figs. 1-11 — 
Graeffe, 1902, p. 40.— Norman, 1905, p. 36— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1734 — 
Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 254, 266.— Harant, 1931, p. 370.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 
183, 184, 188. 



NOTODELPHTID COPEPODS — ILLG 485 

Distribution: Mediterranean; northern coast of France. 

Hosts: Amaroecium spp., Aplidium cristallinum, Aplidium gib- 
bulosum, Fragarium areolatum, Diazona violacea, Perophora listeri, 
Botrylloides spp., Botryllus violatinctus , Glossqforum luteum, Amarou- 
cium gibbulosum, Amaroucium mediterraneum, Parascidia areolata, 
Sidnyum turbinatum, Morchellium argus, Polyclinum aurantium, 
Amaroucium punctum, Amaroucium areolatum. 

Genus Lonchidiopsis Vanhoffen 

Lonchidiopsis Vanhoffen, 1917, pp. 224-229 (type species, by monotypy, L. 
hartmeyeri Vanhoffen, 1917).— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 259.— Wilson, 1932, 
p. 599. 

Lonchidiopsis hartmeyeri Vanhoffen 

Lonchidiopsis hartmeyeri Vanhoffen, 1917, pp. 224-229, pi. [1], text figs. 1-7 (type 
locality, Sharks Bay, Australia, in Ascidia sydneiensis Stimpson). — Schellen- 
berg, 1922, pp. 259, 268. 

Distribution: Australia. 

Host: Ascidia sydneiensis Stimpson. 

Genus Botachus Thorell 

Botachus Thorell, 1859a, pp. 54-55 (type species, by monotypy, B. cylindratus 
Thorell, 1859a).— Claus, 1875, p. 350.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 325, 326 — 
Brehm, 1927, p. 490.— Wilson, 1932, p. 598. 

Botachus cylindratus Thorell 

Botachus cylindratus Thoreil, 1859a, pp. 55-56, pi. 9, fig. 12 (type locality, Sweden) ; 
1859b, pp. 339, 342, 343; 1860, pp. 119, 121, 123.— Norman, 1869, pp. 299- 
300; 1905, p. 36.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801.— Brady, 1878, 
pp. 140-141, pi. 33, figs. 1-13.— Kerschner, 1879, pp. 189-190, pi. 2, figs. 
1, 2, pi. 3, fig. 1.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 296, 297.— Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 
63-65, pi. 5, figs. 14-16; 1882b, p. 112; 1883, pp. 33-36, 108, pi. 1, figs. 14-16.— 
Delia VaUe, 1883, p. 244.— Cams, 1885, p. 343.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1 .— Herdmann, 
1889, pp. 248, 249.— Koehler, 1890, p. 137.— Thompson, 1889, p. 187; 1893, 
p. 190, pi. 18, figs. 3, 3a.— T. Scott, 1897, p. 148; 1901, p. 351; 1907, pp. 
366-367.— Graeffe, 1902, p. 40.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— Sars, 1921, 
pp. 59-60, pi. 29.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 267.— H?rant, 1931, p. 370.— van 
Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 121, fig. 76. — Lang, 

1948, p. 3.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 183, 188, 191. 

Botachus fusiformis Buchholz, 1869, pp. 122-125, pi. 7, fig. 5, pi. 8, fig. 5. — Cams, 
1885, p. 344.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 777, 
804.— Koehler, 1890, p. 137, fig. 9.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— Sewell, 

1949, p. 183. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Sweden and Norway; British 
Isles. 

Hosts: Ascidians, Ascidia canina, A. intestinalis, A. mentula, A. 
plebeia, Ciona intestinalis, Phallusia mentula, P. obliqua, P. mamillata, 
P. monacha, P. sp. 



486 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Indeterminable Species 
Botachus fulvus Hesse 

Botachus fulvus Hesse, 1869, p. 298 (type locality, coast of France, in Ascidia 
canina). — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 777, 801. 

Botachus macroone Hesse 

Botachus macroone Hesse, 1869, pp. 297-298 (type locality, coast of France, in 
Ascidia canina). — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 777, 801. — Hartmeyer, 1911, 
p. 1735. 

Genus Goniodelphys Buchholz 

Goniodelphys Buchholz, 1869, pp. 136-137 (type species, by monotypy, G. trigona 
Buchholz, 1869).— Claus, 1875, p. 350.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, p. 325.— Canu, 
1891, p. 475.— Wilson, 1932, p. 599. 

Goniodelphys trigona Buchholz 

Goniodelphys trigonus Buchholz, 1869, pp. 137-144, pi. 9, fig. 7, pi. 10, fig. 7 
{G. trigona) (type locality, Naples, Italy). — Carus, 1885, p. 344. — Gerstaecker, 
1870-1871, pp. 775, 804— Grebnitskil, 1873-1874, p. 247.— Hartmeyer, 1911, 
p. 1735.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 254— Sewell, 1949, p. 183. 

Distribution: Italy,? Black Sea. 

Genus Ustina Illg 

Ustina Illg, 1951, pp. 30-34 (type species, Ustina clarki Illg, 1951). 

Ustina clarki Illg 

Ustina clarki Illg, 1951, pp. 30-34, fig. 1 (type locality, Sagami Bay, Japan, in 
unidentified ascidian). 

Distribution: Japan. 
Host: Unidentified ascidian. 

Genus Notopterophoroides Schellenberg 

Notopterophoroides Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 254-255 (type species, by subsequent 
designation, Lang, 1948, p. 7, N. armadillo Schellenberg). — Gurney, 1927, 
p. 480.— Wilson, 1932, p. 601.— Lang, 1948, p. 7.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 170, 
174.— Illg, 1951, p. 34. 

Notopterophoroides armadillo Schellenberg 

Notopterophoroides armadillo Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 255-256, figs. 33-35 (type 
localities: southwestern Australia, Pajunga Islands; in Ascidia latesiphonica 
Hartmr., A. gemmata Sluit.). — Lang, 1948, p. 7. — Sewell, 1949, p. 174. — Illg, 
1951, p. 34. 

Distribution : Australia, Pajunga Islands. 

Hosts: Ascidia latesiphonica Hartmr., Ascidia gemmata Sluit. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 487 

Notopterophoroides malacodermatus Schellenberg 

Notopterophoroides malacodermatus Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 256-257, figs. 36-37 
(type locality, Gulf of Suez, in Ascidia canciata Cok.). — Gurney, 1927, 
p. 480.— Lang, 1948, p. 7.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 170, 179.— Illg, 1951, p. 34. 

Distribution: Suez. 
Host: Ascidia canelata Cok. 

Genus Ophioseicles Giard 

Ophioseides Giard, 1873, pp. 498-499 (type species, by monotypy, 0. apoda 
Giard, p. 498) . 

Ophioseides apoda Giard 

Ophioseides apoda Giard, 1873, pp. 498-499, 514, pi. 19, figs. 2, 3 (type locality, 
Roscoff, France, in Astellium perspicuum). — Chatton, 1909a, p. 19. — Hartmeyer, 
1911, p. 1736.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 261. 

Ophios des apoda Giard, 1873, p. 514. 

Distribution: Koscoff, France. 
Host: Astellium perspicuum. 

Genus Ooneides Chatton and Bremen t 

Ooneides Chatton and Brement, 1915b, pp. 136-137 (type species, by monotypy, 
0. amela, Chatton and Brement, 1915b). — Wilson, 1932, p. 603. 

Ooneides amela Chatton and Brement 

Ooneides amela Chatton and Brement, 1915b, pp. 137-143, figs. 1-4 (type locality, 
Banyuls-sur-Mer, France, in Leptoclinum dentatum Delia Valle). — Harant, 
1931, p. 372.— Sewell, 1949, p. 183. 

Distribution: Mediterranean coast of France. 
Host: Didemnum dentatum (= Leptoclinum, dentatum). 

Genus Dysgenopsyllus Nichoils 

Dysgenopsyllus Nichoils, 1944, pp. 59-60 (type species, by monotypy, D. reeves- 
byensis Nichoils, 1944). 

Dysgenopsyllus reevesbyensis Nichoils 

Dysgenopsyllus reevesbyensis Nichoils, 1944, pp. 59-60, fig. 27 (type locality, 
Reevesby Island, South Australia; type in South Australian Museum). — 
Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

Distribution: South Australia. 

Genus Brementia Chatton and Brement 

Brementia, Chatton and Brement, 1915a, pp. 129-130 (type species, by monotypy. 
B. balneolensis Chatton and Brement, 1915a). — Wilson 1932, p. 601. 

Brementia balneolensis Chatton and Brement 

Brementia balneolensis Chatton and Brement, 1915a, pp. 130-134, figs. 1, 2 (type 
locality, Banyuls-sur-Mer, France, in Leptoclinum commune Delia Valle). — 
Harant ; 1931, p. 370.— Sewell, 1949, p. 183. 



488 PROCEEDINGS OF THEi NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Distribution: Mediterranean coast of France. 
Host : Didemnum julgens (= Leptoclinum commune) . 

Genus Scolecimorpha G. Sars 

Ophioseides Chatton, 1909a, p. 12 (type species, by original designation, 0. joubini 

Chatton, 1909a) —Schellenberg, 1922, p. 261. 
Scolecimorpha G. Sars, 1928, pp. 1, 3 (type species, by monotypy, S. insignis G. 

Sars, 1926).— Henderson, 1931, p. 217 (part) .—Wilson, 1932, p. 601. 

Remarks : The species of Sars and of Chatton, as readily established 
by reference to the figures published with each description, are 
obviously congeneric, if not conspecific. Accordingly they are here 
united in Sars' genus, since the tangled nomenclatural history of the 
name Ophioseides could not possibly warrant its retention for these 
forms. 

Scolecimorpha joubini (Chatton), new combination 

Ophioseides joubini Chatton, 1909a, pp. 14-18, figs. 1-8 (type locality, Banyuls- 
sur-Mer, France in Microcosmus sabattieri Roule) ; 1909b, pp. 482-484, fig. 
[1].— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1734.— Chatton and BrSment, 1915b, p. 134; 1915c, 
pp. 150-152, figs. 3, 4.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 261, 268.— Harant, 1931, 
p. 372— Sewell, 1949, p. 183. 

Distribution: France, New Zealand. 

Hosts: Microcosmus sulcatus (=M. sabattieri), Cnemidocarpa cerea 
Sluiter, Pyura trita Sluiter. 

ScGleciniGrpha insignis G. Sars 

Scolecimorpha insignis G. Sars, 1926, pp. 1-12, pis. 1, 2 (type locality, Trondhjem 
Fjord, Norway, in Polycarpa pomaria). — Henderson, 1931, p. 224. — van 
Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 125, fig. 86. 

Distribution: Trondhjem Fjord, Norway. 
Host: Polycarpa pomaria. 

Genera with North American Representatives 

Genus Notodelphys Allman 

Notodelphys Allman, 1847a, p. 2 (type, by monotypy, N. ascidicola Allman, 
1847 [indeterminable species]). — Dana, 1853, p. 1443. — Leuckart, 1859, 
p. 247.— Thorell, 1859a, pp. 26-30.— Gerstaecker, 1863, p. 404.— Glaus, 
1875, p. 350.— Richiardi, 1880, p. 147.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 325, 326 — 
Caiman, 1909, p. 103.— Smith, 1909, p 66.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 30-31.— Schel- 
lenberg, 1922, pp. 225-227.— Brehm, 1927, p. 490.— Lang, 1948, pp. 4-6. 

Notodelphis Carus, 1885, p. 341. 

This genus embraces the forms least modified in the direction of 
endoparasitism. The body is slender and readily mobile. The head is 
broader than long, with a long rostrum triangular in outline. The 
metasome is dorsoventrally depressed. The thoracic segment of the 
first swimming legs is free in most well known species. The segment is 
markedly narrower than that succeeding. The second thoracic 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 489 

segment is broader than the third. The brood pouch arises from the 
fourth segment, and incorporates the segment of the fifth legs. The 
furca bears terminally four long plumose setae and also a short 
unornamented seta on each of the outer and inner margins. The 
usual ranked length relation of the terminal setae is: outermost, 
innermost, outer of the two media] setae, inner of the two medial setae. 

The antennule is strongly developed, somewhat shorter than the 
head. In the female it is usually 15-segmented. In the North Ameri- 
can species coalescence of segments reduces the number to twelve and 
ten. The 10- and 12-segmented antennae of the male are bilaterally 
modified into weakly prehensile appendages with elongate terminal 
segments. The joint is usually between the ninth and tenth segments. 
The second antenna is basically trimerous; usually there is a high 
degree of coalescence of the two proximal segments. First segment 
bears two plumose setae, exceptionally one. The terminal segment 
bears on the inner side three bent setae, of which the most lateral 
arises on a sensory prominence. The surface of this segment is 
ornamented with a row of denticles. On the inner side and behind 
the terminal hook are inserted five to six setae, three of which are 
curved terminally and unornamented. 

The coxopodite of the mandible is expanded medially as the mastica- 
tory lamella, this with characteristically sculptured medial margin. 
The basipodite usually bears one seta, laterally inserted. The endopo- 
dite is bimerous, the basal segment primitively with four marginal 
setae, the distal segment with ten. The exopodite exhibits varyingly 
preserved indications of pentamerism, and usually supports five setae. 
The terminal seta of the expopodite is usually much stouter than the 
others. 

The coxopodite of the maxillule bears two endites. Nine or ten 
masticatory setae are borne on the first, a single seta on the second. 
The basipodite has two to three inner setae. The endopodite is 
somewhat slenderer than, but about as long as, the exopodite. On the 
endopodite arise five to six setae. The exopodite bears four setae. 

The maxilla is characterized by a very stout process in the form 
of a sickle-hook on the second segment. It is longer than the ac- 
companying setae. 

The maxilliped is trimerous, spatulate in outline. The basal segment 
is, in some instances, divided again by a transverse furrow. The 
second segment is somewhat slenderer and much shorter than the 
first and mostly longer than wide. It bears on the inner side a stout 
seta, somewhat hooklike. The third segment is truncate, triangular 
and small. From it arises also a strong hook-spine and one to two 
less stout plumose setae. 

The swimming legs are well developed. The rami are trimerous 
and of approximately equal length. The representative ornamentation 



490 PROCEEDINGS OF TEE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

of the four pairs of swimining legs would be approximated in the 
following generalized formulation, but certain species may depart from 
it in particulars. In the first legs, the intercoxal plate is well developed 
and the coxopodite bears a sizable medial seta; the basipodite bears a 
lateral seta and distal medial stout spine. The first two segments of 
the exopodite bear each a lateral spine and medial seta. The distal 
segment bears three lateral spines, a terminal spine and seta, and 
three medial setae. The two basal segments of the endopodite each 
bear a medial seta. The terminal segment bears four medial setae, an 
apical seta, and a lateral seta. In the second and third legs there is 
added one medial seta on the terminal segment of the exopodite and 
one medial seta on the second segment of the endopodite. The third 
legs are like the second. In the fourth legs the condition of the second 
legs is altered by the removal of one lateral spine from the terminal 
segment of the exopodite and one medial seta from the terminal seg- 
ment of the endopodite. 

The fifth legs are bimerous. The basal segment is much expanded 
laterally to afford insertion for a short seta. The terminal segment 
bears a reduced spine and a seta, or a solitary seta. 

The caudal rami are sub cylindrical, with highly developed orna- 
mentation of long plumose setae. 

The genus Notodeiphys as here considered retains its classic descrip- 
tion with the most minor of emendations. Obvious coalescence of 
segments in two observable steps in the North American species 
provides for the characterization of the antennule as varying from 
10-segm.ented to 15-segmented. The armature of the distal segment 
of the fifth legs varies from one to two setae or a spine and seta. Lack 
of availability of suitable specimens of the subtly differentiated 
European species leads me to accept the results of the major workers 
on the genus — Thoreli, Aurivillius, G. Sars, and Schellenberg — and the 
diagnoses and key presented here are derived directly from their 
conclusions. 

Stock (1951) has made an important correction in the interpretation 
of the body segmentation. Most authors have stated that the 
thoracic segment of the first swimming legs is fused with the head. 
On the contrary, in N. rujescens, N. agilis, N. elegans and in N. weberi, 
Stock finds this to be a free segment. Material he has kindly provided 
for the U. S. National Museum of N. rujescens confirms this and I 
have further been able to verify the condition in European specimens 
of N. allmani, N. elegans, and N. prasina in the collections of the 
Museum. 

Notodeiphys is a neatly delimited natural group. All the species 
which have received adequate description show very close affinity. 
Some species have had to be considered species inquirendae, including 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 491 

the type of the genus. Examination of the recorded occurrence of 
the group presents some facts of zoogeographic interest and also 
emphasizes the great hiatus in knowledge of the ascidicolous copepods 
from the Pacific and Indo-Pacific regions. 

The majority of species are known from Europe, the distribution 
of most ranging from the waters off Scandinavia around into the 
Mediterranean. No species is known to occur in great abundance on 
both sides of the Atlantic. There is a West African and a South 
African species, and a species from Patagonia completes the Atlantic 
circle. All of these species share particularly consistent anatomical 
features, and specific differentiation of them is, in the main, on very 
refined characteristics. Equally closely affiliated are three species 
known only from the Gulf of Suez. By contrast, there exists a North 
American complement of two species, very well differentiated from 
this larger stock. However the American forms are equivalently 
subtly separated inter se, with a remarkable parallelism thus exhibited 
in specific differentiation in two major subdivisions of the genus. 

The North American forms are the only species that exhibit less 
than fifteen antennular segments and present an armature of the 
distal segment of the fifth leg reduced to a single seta. They ob- 
viously represent a distinctive genetic stock, and speculation on the 
zoogeographic aspects of the mechanisms of evolutionary differentia- 
tion is inviting. The necessity for increased knowledge of the distribu- 
tion of the ascidicoles is thus here demonstrated. The available record 
is most fragmentary for such a readily available group of organisms. 

Key to the species of Notodelphys, based upon females 

la. Terminal segment of fifth leg with a single seta 2 

16. Terminal segment of fifth leg with a seta and a spine 3 

2a. Antennule 10-segmented monoseta (p. 496) 

26. Antennule 12-segmented affinis (p. 503) 

3a. Contour of last abdominal segment triangular parva (p. 494) 

36. Contour of last abdominal segment rectangular 4 

4a. Furca markedly shorter than last abdominal segment . . prasina (p. 494) 

46. Furca as long as or longer than last abdominal segment 5 

oa. Furca as long as last abdominal segment 6 

56. Furca markedly longer than last abdominal segment 7 

6a. Last abdominal segment shorter than that preceding . sqiamifera (p. 495) 

66. Last abdominal segment longer than that preceding . . dentata (p. 493) 

7a. Furca twice as long as last abdominal segment 8 

76. Furca l}i to l}{ times as long as last abdominal segment 9 

8a. Lateral seta at middle of the furca agilis (p. 496) 

86. Distance of lateral seta from apex of the furca about equal to the width of 

the furca ciliata (p. 493) 



492 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

9a. Distance of lateral seta of furca from the nearest terminal seta less than 

half the length of the furca but greater than the width of the furca . . 10 
96. Distance of lateral seta of furca from the nearest terminal seta not greater 

than the width of the furca 14 

10a. Outer margin of first segment of first exopodite ornamented with con- 
spicuous spines or hairs 11 

106. Outer margin of first segment of first exopodite entire or inconspicuously 

ornamented 13 

11a. Ornamentation of outer border of first segment of first exopodite consisting 

of long hairs patagonica (p. 494) 

lib. Ornamentation of outer border of first segment of first exopodite consisting 

of dense denticulation 12 

12a. Posterolateral corners of cephalic segment much produced . weberi (p. 495) 
126. Posterolateral corners of cephalic segment not much produced. 

allmani (p. 492) 
13a. Claw of the second antenna one-half as long as the concave side of the 

third segment rufescens (p. 495) 

136. Claw of second antenna one-third as long as the concave side of the third 

segment caerulea (p. 493) 

14a. Third segment of second antenna about one-third as broad as greatest 

breadth of the second segment pachybrachia (p. 494) 

146. Third segment of second antenna one-half as broad as greatest breadth of 

the second segment 15 

15a. Greatest width of third segment of second antenna about two-thirds the 

length of the terminal claw tenera (p. 495) 

156. Greatest width of third segment of second antenna about equal to the 

length of the terminal claw elegans (p. 493) 

Species not known erom North America 
Notodelphys allmani Tiiorell 

Notodelphys ascidicola Allman, 1847, pp. 2-8, pi. 1, pi. 2, figs. 15-22 (part). 

Notodelphys allmanni Thorell, 1859a, pp. 31-35, pi. 1, fig. 1, pi. 2, fig. 1 (type 
locality, Sweden, in Ascidia canina Muller, A. mentula); 1859b, pp. 338, 342, 
343.— Claus, 1880, p. 553.— Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 58-59; 1882b, pp. 81-82, 
111; 1883, pp. 28-29, 77-78, 107.— T. Scott, 1888, p. 238.— Koehler, 1890, 
p. 138.— Canu, 1891, p. 472— Lang. 1948, p. 2; 1951, fig. 5, pi. 1, fig. 1. 

Notodelphys allmani Thorell, 1860, pp. 117, 121, 123.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, 
pp. 777, 801, pi. 11, figs. 1-1L— Grebnitskil, 1873-1874, pp. 218, 242-245.— 
Mobius, 1875, p. 275.— Brady, 1878, pp. 126-129, pi. 25, figs. 1-10— Ker- 
schner, 1879, pp. 182-183.— Richiardi, 1880, p. 147.— Herdman, 1889, p. 
248.— Canu, 1892, pp. 81-83, 188, pi. 13, figs. 1-6.— Thompson, 1889, p. 185; 
1893, p. 189.. pi. 17, fig. 7.— T. Scott, 1897, p. 148; 1900, p. 386; 1901, p. 351; 
1906, p. 362; 1907, pp. 361-362.— Graeffe, 1902, p. 39.— Norman, 1905, p. 
36.— Norman and Scott, 1906, p. 201— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— G. Sars, 
1921, pp. 31-33, pis. 15-16.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 227, 262.— Harant, 3931, 
p. 371. — Marine Biological Association, 1931, p. 172. — Gurney, 1933, p. 
304. — Leigh-Sharpe, 1935, p. 48. — van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans 
Stekhoven, 1936, p. 117, fig. 66.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 182, 184, 188, 190.— 
Stock, 1950, p. 42; 1951, p. 3. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 493 

Notodelphys mediterranea Buchholz, 1869, pp. 111-114, pi. 5, fig. 1, pi. 6, fig. 1 
(type locality, Naples, Italy). — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 804. — 
Kerschner, 1879, p. 184. 

Notodelphys mediterraneus Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735. 

Notodelphis allmani, Cams, 1885, p. 341. — Gourret, 1888, p. 1. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden; Black Sea; 
British Isles. 

Hosts: Ascidia affinis, A. canina, A. marn?nillata, A. mentula, A. 
sydneiensis Stps., A. virginea, A. venosa, Ascidiella aspersa (Muller), 
A. opalina, Ciona canina, C. intestinalis , C. papillosa, Phallusia 
cristata, P. conchilega, P. mammillata, P. jumigata Grube, P. in- 
testinalis, P. obliqua, P. virginea, Phallusia sp., large ascidians. 

Notodelphys caerulea Thorell 

Notodelphys caerulea Thorell, 1859a, pp. 37-39, pi. 3, pi. 4, fig. 4 (type locality, 
Sweden, in Ascidia venosa Muller); 1859b, pp. 338-339, 343; 1860, pp. 118, 
123.— Norman, 1869, p. 299; 1905, p. 36.— Aurivillius, 1883, pp. 30, 79-80, 
107, pi. 1, fig. 17.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 34-35, pi. 
17, fig. 2.— Shellenberg, 1922, p. 227.— Lang, 1948, p. 2.— Stock, 1951, p. 3. 

Notodelphys coerulea Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801. — Aurivillius, 1882a, 
p. 60; 1882b, pp. 83-84, 111.— Norman and Brady, 1909, p. 400.— van 
Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 117. — Sewell, 1949, 
p. 188. 

Notodelphys cerulaea Brady, 1878, p. 130, pi. 27, figs. 10-13. 

Distribution: Atlantic coast of Europe to Norway and Sweden; 
British Isles. 

Hosts: Ascidia parallelogramma, A. venosa Muller, A. virginea, 
Corella parallelogramma, Phallusia virginea. 

Notodelphys ciliata Schellenberg 

Notodelphys ciliata Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 228-229, fig. 2 (type locality, Gulf 
of Suez, in Phallusia nigra Sow.). — Gurney, 1927, p. 480. — Sewell, 1949, 
pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 
Host: Phallusia nigra Sow. 

Notodelphys dentata Schellenberg 

Notodelphys dentata Schellenberg, 1921, pp. 3-6, figs. 1-4 (type locality, Norway, 
in Rhopalaea nordgaardi Kartmr.). — Schellenberg, 1922, p. 227. 

Distribution: Norway. 

Host: Rhopalaea nordgaardi Hartmr. 

Notodelphys elegans Thorell 

Notodelphys elegans Thorell, 1859a, pp. 39-40, pi. 4, fig. 5 (type locality, Sweden, 
in Ascidia intestinalis (Muller)); 1859b, pp. 339, 343; 1860, pp. 118, 123 — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801.— Mobius, 1873, p. 116; 1875, pp. 
274-275.— Brady, 1878, p. 126.—? Kerschner, 1879, p. 184.— Richiardi, 1880, 



494 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

p. 147.— Aurivillius, 1882b, pp. 78-81, 111, pi. 15, figs. 14-18, pi. 16, figs. 
1-3; 1883, pp. 74-77, 107, pi. 6, figs. 14-18, pi. 7, figs. 1-3.— Cami, 1891, 
p. 472; 1892, p. 189.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— G. Sars, 1921, p. 37, pi. 18, 
fig. 2.— Sehellenberg, 1922, p. 227.— Harant, 1931, p. 371.— Klie, 1933, 
p. 16. — Pesta, 1934, pp. 10-11, fig. 7. — van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans 
Stekhoven, 1936, pp. 117-118.— Lang, 1948, p. 2.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 182, 
188, 190.— Stock, 1951, p. 1. 
Notodelphis elegans Cams, 1885, p. 341. — Gourret, 1888, p. 1. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden; British 
Isles. 

Hosts: Ascidia canina, Ciona intestinalis. 

Notodelphys pachybrachia Sehellenberg 

Notodelphys pachybrachia Sehellenberg, 1922, pp. 231, 262, figs. 5-6 (type locality, 
Gulf of Suez, in Ascidia canelata). — Gurney, 1927, p. 480. — Sewell, 1949, 
pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 
Host: Ascidia canelata (Sav. Ok.). 

Notodelphys parva Sehellenberg 

Notodelphys parva Sehellenberg, 1922, pp. 231-232, 263, figs. 7, 8 (type locality, 
Gulf of Suez, in Pyura momus, Polycarpa ehrenbergi) . — Gurney, 1927, p. 480. — 
Sewell, 1949, pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 

Hosts: Pyura momus Sow., Polycarpa ehrenbergi Hartmr. 

Notodelphys patagonica Sehellenberg 

Notodelphys patagonica Sehellenberg, 1922, pp. 228, 263, fig. 1 (type locality, 
Patagonia, in Ascidia tenera). — Lang, 1948, pp. 4-5. 

Distribution: Patagonia. 
Host: Ascidia tenera Herdm. 

Notodelphys prasina Thorell 

Notodelphys prasina Thorell, 1859a, pp. 41-42, pi. 5, fig. 7; 1859b, p. 339; 1860, 
pp. 118, 123.— Norman, 1869, p. 299.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776-777, 
801.— Brady, 1878, pp. 131-132, pi. 30, figs. 11-15.— Kerschner, 1879, pp. 
183-184, pi. 6, fig. 16.— Giesbreeht, 1882a, pp. 295-296.— Aurivillius, 1882b, 
pp. 84-87, 111, pi. 16, figs. 4-7; 1883, pp. 32-33, 80-91, 107, pi. 7, figs. 4-7.— 
T. Scott, 1897, p. 148; 1900, p. 386; 1901, p. 351.— Graeffe, 1902, p. 39.— 
Norman, 1905, p. 36.— Norman and Scott, 1906, p. 202.— T. Scott, 1907, 
p. 362— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 37-38, pi. 18, fig. 3.— 
Sehellenberg, 1922, pp. 227, 263.— Harant, 1931, p. 371.— Marine Biological 
Association, 1931, p. 173. — Leigh-Sharpe, 1935, p. 48. — van Oorde-de-Lint and 
Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 118, fig. 67. — Lang, 1948, p. 2. — Sewell, 
1949, pp. 182, 188, 190. 

Notodelphys pusilla Buchholz, 1869, pp. 115-116, pi. 6, fig. 2. — Gerstaecker, 1870- 
1871, pp. 775, 804.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735. 

Notodelphis prasina Carus, 1885, p. 341. — Gourret, 1888, p. 1. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 495 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden; British 
Isles. 

Hosts: Ascidia canina, A. mentula Muller, Ascidiella aspersa, Ciona 
intestinalis, Phallusia mammilata (Cuvier), P. mentula, Phallusia sp. 

Notodelphys rufescens Thorell 

Notodelphys rufescens Thorell, 1859a, pp. 35-36, pi. 2, fig. 2; 1859b, pp. 338, 343; 
1850, pp. 117-118, 123.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801.— Kerschner, 
1879, p. 183, pi. 1, figs. 1-3, pi. 2, figs. 7, 8, 10, pi. 3, fig. 4, pi. 6, figs. 13-15.— 
Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 56-60; 1882b, pp. 82-83, pi. 16, fig. 8; 1883, pp. 29-30, 
78-79, 107, pi. 7, fig. 8.— Graeffe, 1902, p. 39.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— 
G. Sars, 1921, pp. 33-34, pi. 17, fig. 1 .— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 227, 263.— 
Hansen, 1923, p. 22.— Stephensen, 1929, p. 6,— Harant, 1931, p. 372 — 
van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 117. — Stephensen, 
1940, p. 20.— Lang, 1948, p. 2.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 182, 190, 193.— Stock, 1951, 
pp. 1-3, figs. 1-7. 

Notodelphis rufescens Cams, 1885, p. 341. — Gourret, 1888, p. 1. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden; Faroes. 

Hosts: Ascidia aspersa Muller var.?, A. conchilega, A. cristata 
Heller, A. obliqua, Ascidiella aspersa, A. scahra, Phallusia conchilega, 
P. obliqua. 

Notodelphys squatnifera Schellenberg 

Notodelphys squamifera Schellenberg, 1922, p. 230, figs. 3, 4 (type locality, West 
Africa, in Microcosmus senegalensis Mchlsn.) 

Distribution: West Africa. 

Hosts: Microcosmus senegalensis Mchlsn. 

Notodelphys tenera Thorell 

Notodelphys tenera Thorell, 1859a, pp. 36-37, pi. 3, fig. 3; 1859b, pp. 338, 343; 
1860, pp. 118, 123.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 777, 801.— Richiardi, 1880, 
p. 147.— Aurivillius, 1882b, pp. 70-78, 111, pi. 15, figs. 4-13; 1883, pp. 66- 
74, 107, pi. 6, figs. 4-13.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— G. Sars, 1921, p. 36, pi. 
18, fig. 1.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 227, 263. — Harant, 1931, p. 372.— van 
Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 117. — Lang, 1948, p. 2. — 
Sewell, 1949, p. 182.— Lang, 1951, fig. 6. 

Notodelphis tenera, Carus, 1885, p. 341. — Gourret, 1888, p. 1. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden. 
Hosts: Ascidia canina Muller, A. mammillata Cuvier, A. mentula, 
A. obliqua, Ciona intestinalis, Phallusia mentula, P. obliqua. 

Notodelphys weberi Stock 

Notodelphys weberi Stock, 1950. pp. 37-42, figs. 1-3 (type locality, Knysna, South 
Africa, in Ascidia canaliculata Heller). 

Distribution: South Africa. 
Host: Ascidia canaliculata Heller. 

422202—58 3 



496 PROCEEDINGS OF THE, NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

North American Species 
Notodelphys agilis Thorell 

Notodelphys agilis Thorell, 1859a, pp. 40-41, pi. 4, pi. 5, figs. 5a-6 (type locality, 
Sweden, in Ascidia parallelogramma, A. mentula, A. canina, A. aspersa) ; 
1859b, pp. 338, 343; 1860, pp. 117, 123.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775- 
777, 801.— Mobius, 1875, p. 274.— Brady, 1878, pp. 130-131, pi. 26, figs. 
1-10.— Claus, 1880, p. 553.— Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 60-62; 1882b, p. Ill; 
1883, pp. 30-32, 107; 1885a, p. 230; 1885b, p. 282; 1886, p. 44.— Giesbrecht, 
1882b, p. 88.— Dalla Torre, 1889, p. 86.— Canu, 1891, p. 472; 1892, pp. 78- 
81, pi. 12, figs. 1-8.— Timm, 1894, p. 396.— T. Scott, 1888, p. 238; 1897, 
p. 148; 1901, p. 351; 1906, p. 362; 1907, p. 362.— Norman, 1905, p. 36 — 
Norman and Brady, 1909, p. 400.— Hartmeyer, 1911, pp. 1734-1735.— 
Wilson, 1920, p. 15.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 35-36, pi. 17, fig. 3.— Schellenberg, 
1922, pp. 227, 262.— Harant, 1931, p. 371.- Wilson, 1932, p. 387, fig. 238.— 
Gray, 1933, p. 519.— Gurney, 1933, p. 303.— Pesta, 1934, p. 10, fig. 6.— van 
Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 117. — Lang, 1946, p. 9, 
fig. 3; Lang, 1948, pp. 2, 20-22, fig. 16.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 157, 158, 184, 
188, 190.— Stock, 1951, p. 1. 

Notodelphis agilis Herdman, 1891, p. 207. 

Distribution: Mediterranean and Atlantic coasts of Europe, 
British Isles; ? North America, Atlantic coast. 

Hosts: Ascidia parallelogramma, A. mentula, A. canina, A. aspersa, 
A. virginea, A sordida, A. obliqua, Ascidiella aspersa, Ascidiella opalina, 
Ascidiella patula, Caesira socialis, Ciona intestinalis , Corella parallelo- 
gramma, Molgula ampulloides (Bened.), M. holiiana Herdman, M. 
socialis Alder, Phallusia mentula, P. obliqua, Polycarpa comata (Aid.), 
Poly car pa gracilis. 

Remarks: Published records assign this species to the North 
American fauna. Some of the reported occurrences have been checked 
and the specimens upon which they were based have been found to be 
representatives of other species, hence no authoritative material was 
available for the present study. The diagnostic features of the species 
were illustrated by G. Sars (1921, pi. 17, fig. 3). 

Notodelphys monoseta Pearse 

Figure 1 

Notodelphys monoseta Pearse, 1947, p. 7, figs. 36-40 (type locality, Beaufort, 
N. C., in Ascidia inierrupta Heller). 

Specimens examined: 

North Carolina 
From A. interrupt a: 

Beaufort, dredged, May 25, 1946, A. S. Pearse, holotypic female, allotypic 
male, 6 females, 3 males. 

Description: Female (fig. l,a-o): General features: The depressed 
body (fig. \,a) is 10-segmented. The metasome consists of a cephalic 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 497 

segment, three free segments bearing the first three pairs of swimming 
legs, and a much expanded incubatory segment which bears the fourth 
and fifth legs. The urosomal portion of the body consists of five seg- 
ments. The first of these bears the oviducal apertures and it is the 
shortest of the five. The succeeding four are subequal in length. 
The last bears the caudal rami which are about one and a third times 
as long as the fifth segment. 

The first free thoracic segment lacks epimera. The head complex 
and free segments 2 and 3 are much expanded laterally and some- 
what ventrally into well-developed epimera. 

The rostrum (fig. 1,6) is conspicuous, extending between the bases 
of the antennules as a posteriorly arching tapered beak. The apex 
is obtuse and the rostrum is considerably flattened. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. l,c) is composed of 10 seg- 
ments. All are well sclerotized although some traces are apparent of 
a fundamentally greater number of segments. The basal segments 
are much enlarged in diameter and the appendage tapers by some 
telescopic intervals and some gradual transitions to an extremely 
small subquadrate apical segment. The sixth segment is the longest 
and bears indentations of the integument indicating coalescence of 
probably three primary subdivisions. The basal diameter of the seg- 
ment is about two thirds the length and roughly three-fifths the 
diameter of the proximal segment of the appendage. Details of seta- 
tion are not readily determinable from the available specimens but 
there is indication of possession of markedly distinctive features. 

The segments of the trimerous antenna (fig. l,d) are all relatively 
short and stout. The two proximal segments are closely coalesced 
and at the point of union on the inner side of the right-angled flexure 
which the antenna usually presents there are inserted on the proximal 
segment two well-developed setae. The articulation of the two basal 
segments is diagonal so that the second segment has an inner margin 
(relative to the flexure) of about half the diameter of the segment. 
The outer margin slightly exceeds the diameter of the segment. 
A short distance subterminally on the outer margin there is inserted a 
reduced seta. The second segment is widest. The proximal segment 
tapers sharply toward the base. 

The length of the distal segment (fig. 1,6) is about two times its 
greatest width. The distal margin is widely truncate. The outer 
third of this margin participates in the complicated articulation of a 
terminal, stout, tapered, curved spine, the length of which somewhat 
exceeds the greatest diameter of the segment. Inserted in the region 
of articulation of the spine are three curved setae, graduated in length 
from the longest which about equals the spine. There are two addi- 
tional short setae inserted on the distal margin of the segment. 



498 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 




Figure 1. — Notodelphys monoseta Pearse. a-o, Female: a, habit, lateral view; b, rostrum; 
c, antennule; d, antenna; <?, terminal segment of antenna; /, mandible; g, maxillule; 
h, maxilla; i, maxilliped; /, first leg; k, second leg; /, third leg; m, fourth leg; n, fifth 
leg; o, caudal ramus, p, q, Male: p, antennule; q> maxilla. The scale, referring to a, 
represents 1.0 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — IX.LG 499 

About a third of the length of the segment proximal from the apex 
there are set on the surface a pair of well-developed setae. Slightly 
posterior to these and closer to the outer margin there is a single seta. 
Another single seta is inserted on the lateral margin distal about one- 
third the length of the segment from its articulation. There are two 
parallel rows of spinules curving over the surface of the segment near 
its inner margin. 

The incisor process of the mandible (fig. 1 ,/) is a medial prolongation 
of the coxopodite. It is a flat blade, expanded to an elongate serrate 
margin. At the top distal corner the blade is produced as a stout 
curved tooth. Below a considerable emargination the masticatory 
saw consists of three equispaced teeth of similar development ; a long, 
finely serrate bladelike region; and, at the bottom, two slender, seta- 
like projections. 

The basipodite is subquadrate in outline and bears on the medial 
margin a single well-developed seta. The endopodite consists of two 
subequal segments. The proximal segment bears a row of four gradu- 
ated setae, their bases set in a curve around the distal medial margin. 
The nine setae of the terminal segment are arranged in two groups. 
Three setae originate on a lateral distal prolongation of the segment. 
The remainder of the distal margin is occupied by the close-set bases of 
the six remaining graduated setae. 

The exopodite is relatively large, obscurely tetramerous. Four of the 
five setae are subequal; the apical seta is much enlarged, its length and 
thickness about double those of the next larger. The insertions of the 
three proximal setae seem to indicate distal limits of segments. The 
distal seta is accompanied by a seta placed just subapically and appar- 
ently sharing insertion on the terminal segment. 

The maxillule (fig. l,g) is characterized by massiveness of the basal 
portion. The protopodite seems to be 2-segmented. The proximal 
segment is extended distally as the prominent major endite, this ac- 
companied by a second minor endite, which is represented by a slender 
setiform structure borne on a prominence. The armature of the 
proximal endite consists of nine diversified setae, close-set to form a 
medial masticatory fringe. 

An epipodite is represented by a small prominence lateral on the 
basal segment, from which extends a long stout seta and a reduced 
auxiliary setule. The orientation of the second segment, which is 
probably the basipodite, is shifted so that the rami are directed almost 
laterally and the usually lateral setae are distal. There are two of 
these, subequal in dimensions. The endopodite is a small, somewhat 
conical plate ornamented with five setae. One of these is inserted at 
about the midpoint of the medial margin. The remainder are apical. 



500 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

The exopodite is a truncated curved structure. The medial margin 
is strongly convex, the lateral concave. The four large subequal setae 
are accommodated along the distal margin. 

The roughly triangular maxilla (fig. l,h) is pentamerous. The basal 
segment much exceeds the remainder and bears four variously de- 
veloped endites. The proximal endite bears three setae apically 
placed. The second endite is represented by a slight eminence bearing 
a single seta. The third endite bears two setae. The fourth endite 
is the largest. It bears two apical setae and a subterminally inserted 
accessory setule. 

The second segment is longer than wide and is produced medially 
and distally as a very stout, heavily sclerotized hooked spine. In- 
serted on the base of the spine are two unequal setae. 

The third and fourth segments bear each a single distal medial seta. 
The fifth segment bears two terminal setae, one reduced sub apical 
seta, and a vestige of a setule inserted medially near the base. 

The trimerous maxilliped (fig. 1 ,%) is a flattened rectilinear append- 
age with a setiferous inner margin. The basal segment is slightly 
more than twice as long as wide. Its nine setae are disposed in two 
groups. Each group has one seta displaced considerably laterally on 
the anterior surface of the segment. The remaining trio and quartet 
of setae are inserted, with close-spaced bases, on the medial margin. 

The nearly quadrate second segment is just slightly narrower than 
the first. Its ornamentation is a single very stout, long, curved 
seta inserted on the distal medial corner. 

The third segment is reduced to little more than a small process 
articulated on the distal lateral corner of the second segment. It 
is produced apically as a long stout seta which is disposed in a medi- 
ally directed curve. Inserted on the base of this principal seta is 
a minute accessory setule. 

Swimming legs: The first legs (fig. l,j) consist of bimerous proto- 
podites and trimerous rami. The coxopodites are yoked together 
by a heavily sclerotized intercoxal plate. Inserted on the distal 
medial corner of each coxa is a well-developed seta, thick at the 
base and finely tapering apically, extending to the tip of the endo- 
podite. The basipodite is characterized by an exceedingly short lat- 
eral margin. Inserted near the margin is a reduced lateral seta. 
The medial distal corner of the basis supports a rather weakly devel- 
oped spine which reaches to about the midpoint of the basal segment 
of the endopodite. Each of the two basal segments of the exopodite 
bears a lateral spine and a medial seta. The terminal segment bears 
three marginal lateral spines, two apical setae, and three medial 
marginal setae. The lateral terminal seta is heavily sclerotized at 
the base, suggesting that it replaces the spine usually inserted at this 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 501 

side. The two most distal spines and that of the basal segment are 
rather elongate and taper to slender tips invested in finely serrate 
marginal flanges. A prominent spinous prominence projects from 
each of the two basal segments just proximal to the insertion of its 
spine. The spines of the terminal segment have accompanying 
prominences of markedly feebler development. 

The basal segment of the endopodite much exceeds the combined 
mass of the distal segments. It bears one seta, inserted somewhat 
proximal to the distal medial corner. The second segment bears 
one medial seta. The distal lateral corner of the segment is produced 
as a short, stout, slightly curved, spinous projection. The terminal 
segment is nearly right triangular in outline due to the greatly reduced 
extent of the medial margin and the diagonally directed distal bound- 
ary. Across the distal margin is set a row of five close-spaced setae. 
The proximal four of these are subequal, the apical seta is reduced. 
At the proximal corner of the medial margin originates a sixth short 
slight seta. 

The second leg (fig. l,k) consists of a bimerous protopodite and 
trimerous rami. The coxopodites are yoked by a well-developed 
subquadrate intercoxal plate. Each coxa bears at the medial distal 
corner a fairly robust seta which extends to about the base of the distal 
segment of the endopodite. There is a reduced seta inserted near 
the lateral margin of the basipodite. The two basal segments of 
the exopodite are markedly contracted proximally and expanded 
distally. Each bears a lateral spine and a medial seta. Each spine 
is accompanied by a proximally placed stout spinous projection of 
the margin of the segment. The terminal podomere is somewhat 
less constricted basally. Its widest point is at the proximal fourth 
whence it tapers somewhat to the apex. There are three lateral 
marginal spines, two apical setae, and four medial setae. All the 
spines are so slender as to approach setiform dimensions, except for 
the reduced length. 

The segments of the endopodite are somewhat constricted basally. 
The proximal segment bears one medial seta. The second segment 
bears two medial setae. The ornamentation of the distal segment 
consists of three medial setae, two apical setae, and one seta set in 
an emargination at about the midpoint of the lateral margin. The 
insertions of the lateral apical seta and the lateral marginal seta and 
the distal lateral corners of the two proximal segments are orna- 
mented by stout spinous projections of the integument. 

The coxopodites of the third legs (fig. 1,/) are joined by a well- 
developed intercoxal plate. At the distal medial corner of each coxa 
there is inserted a well-developed seta extending to about the middle 
of the second segment of the endopodite. There is a somewhat 



502 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

reduced seta inserted near the lateral margin of the basipodite. The 
two proximal segments of the trimerous exopodite each bear a lateral 
spine and a medial seta. The ornamentation of the terminal segment 
consists of three lateral spines, a weak apical spine much modified 
to present a markedly setiform aspect, except for reduction in length, 
an apical seta, and four setae inserted on the medial margin. 

The armature of three segments of the endopodite consists of one 
medial seta on the basal segment, two medial setae on the second 
segment, three medial setae, two apical setae, and one lateral seta 
on the distal segment. 

The fourth leg (fig. l,m) consists of a bimerous protopodite and 
trimerous rami. The plate yoking the coxopodites is shorter than 
wide. At the distal medial corner of the coxa is inserted a seta 
which does not quite reach the distal corner of the somewhat produced 
medial margin of the basipodite. A seta is inserted near the lateral 
margin of the basipodite. 

The two proximal segments of the exopodite bear each a medial 
seta and a lateral spine. These spines and those of the distal segment 
are much reduced, pronouncedly modified in the direction of setiform 
structure. They are of about the diameter of the most basal seta of 
the ramus and thus slenderer than the remaining setae. They taper 
uniformly to extremely fine points, and actually offer no differenti- 
ating features from setae on a structural basis. The terminology is 
here preserved because they occupy the usual points of insertion of 
spines. The distal segment bears two short lateral spines, a somewhat 
longer apical spine and an apical seta, and four medial marginal setae. 

The proximal segment of the endopodite bears one medial seta. 
The second segment bears two medial setae. The distal segment bears 
two medial marginal setae, two apical setae, and one seta on the 
lateral margin. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The bimerous fifth legs (fig. \,n) 
are much reduced. The basal segment is produced distally at the 
lateral corner to form a considerable prominence on which is inserted 
a seta. This setiferous prominence is a stout truncated cone produced 
almost directly posteriorly. The second segment is small, exceeded 
considerably by the projection of the basal segment. There is a 
single short seta borne at the medial distal corner of the terminal 
segment. The remainder of the distal margin and the lateral margin 
of this segment form an uninterrupted extent which approaches a 
semicircular outline. 

The caudal rami (fig. l,o) are about five times as long as their 
greatest width, which is just distal to the constricted base. From 
the point of greatest width the rami taper slightly to the somewhat 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 503 

rounded truncate apex. The integument seems to be fairly heavily 
sclerotized and there is a characteristic ridge of the integument running 
near to and paralleling the medial margin. The margins of the rami 
are ciliated. Four setae form a fanlike array across the distal margin 
of the ramus. The central setae of the quartet are the longest. They 
are subequal and the length is about seven-eighths that of the ramus. 
The medialmost and outermost setae are similar, about three-fifths 
the length of the long setae. On the dorsal surface of the ramus there 
are inserted two reduced setae. One is just subapical and near the 
medial margin. The other is on the lateral margin and displaced 
from the end of the ramus by a distance about equal to the terminal 
width. 

Male (fig. l,p-g): A typical cyclopoid male, 10-segrnented with 
geniculate antennule (fig. l,p). The appendages conform well to 
those of the female, except that the maxilla (fig. l,q) is somewhat 
simplified and the swimming legs are more spinose. The usual sixth 
legs, consisting of setiferous flaps placed over the seminal vesicles, 
are present. 

Notodelphys ajfinis, new species 

Figure 2 
Doropygopsis longicauda Wilson, 1935a, p. 779, (part). 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92816 (type locality, off Iceberg 
Point, Lopez Island, Washington, from Ascidia paratropa (Hunts- 
man)); allotypic male, USNM 92817, same locality and host; para- 
types listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

Washington 

From A. paratropa: 

Lopez Island, off Iceberg Point, dredged, 30 meters, July 3, 1939, holotypic 

female, allotypic male. 
Lopez Island, off Upright Head, dredged, 15 fms., July 27, 1949, R. L. 

Fernald, 22 females. 
Off Lopez Island, opposite lower end Fisherman's Bay, dredged, July 13, 

1950, 1 female. 
East of Upright Channel, dredged, 25-35 fms., June 23, 1950, 2 females. 
Upright Channel, dredged, July 25, 1950, R. L. Fernald, 35 specimens. 
Near Friday Harbor, dredged, July, 1950, 8 females. 
Puget Sound, dredged, Aug. 18, 1949, R. L. Fernald, 10 females. 
From Ascidia callosa Stimpson: 

East of Upright Channel, dredged, 25-35 fms., June 23, 1950, 30 females. 
Upright Channel, dredged, July 19, 1950, 3 females. 

Off Dinner Island, dredged, 30 fms., Aug. 10, 1949, R. L. Fernald, 5 specimens. 
Brown's Island, San Juan Island, intertidal, July 14, 1950, 5 females. 
Turn Point, San Juan Island, intertidal, July 16, 1950, 17 specimens. 



504 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

From Corella willmeriana Herdman: 

Entrance to West Sound, Orcas Island, dredged, 30 fms., Aug. 10, 1949, 

R. L. Fernald, 55 females, 2 males, 3 juveniles. 
East of Upright Head, Lopez Island, dredged, June 23, 1950, 25 specimens. 
President Channel, San Juan Islands, dredged, 105 fms., July 8, 1950, 6 
specimens. 
California 

From Phallusia vermiformis Ritter: 

Off Santa Cruz Island, dredged, Feb. 6, 1889, U. S. Fish Comm. Steamer 
Albatross, 1 female. 

Description: Female (fig. 2,a-m): General features: The body 
(fig. 2,a) is neatly delimited into metasome and urosome. The 
anterior portion consists of the head, the three free thoracic somites 
corresponding to the first to third swimming legs, and the expanded 
brood sack which is a development of the fused somites of the fourth 
and fifth legs. The articulation of the metasome and urosome falls 
between the sixth thoracic segment, which bears the fifth legs, and the 
succeeding seventh thoracic segment. 

The urosome (fig. 2,6) is slender, subcylindrical, with only a slight 
taper posteriorly. There are five distinctly demarcated segments. 
The first is the shortest, and by the presence of the oviducal apertures 
and the structures connected with the seminal receptacles, it is estab- 
lished as the last thoracic somite. The succeeding four abdominal 
somites show no significant differentiation in size or proportions. 

The front margin of the head is prolonged ventrally as the stout 
blunt rostrum. This structure is short, about 1% times as long as 
its basal width, and tapers uniformly to the rounded apex, which is 
about half as wide as the base. 

Head appendages: The 12-segmented antennule (fig. 2,c) is stocky, 
not reaching to the posterior margin of the head. The taper of the 
appendage is gradual so that each segment is but slightly narrower 
than that next proximal. The posture of the antennule is a nearly 
right-angled flexure which results from the diagonal articulations of 
the second segment with the first and third. The effect of this 
arrangement is an approximately triangular outline of the second 
segment with its outer margin several times longer than the very short 
inner margin. The other articulations of the antennular segments are 
transverse to the main axis. The first two segments are much 
shorter than wide and roughly wedge-shaped. The length of the 
third segment approaches the sum of the lengths of segments 1 and 2. 
The fourth segment is roughly rectangular in outline, the length 
three-fourths the width. The fifth segment is smaller than the pre- 
ceding, of similar outline. The sixth segment, elongate and markedly 
tapered, preserves in the sculpturing of the integument evidence 
of its formation by coalescence of three of the segments usually 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 505 

occurring at this position in Notodelphys species. The succeeding 
six segments are subequal, short and quadrangular, and taper only 
very slightly to the apex. The ornamentation of the antennule is an 
array of numerous setae, mostly plumose, the arrangement of which 
does not offer any distinctively specific feature. 

The antenna (fig. 2,d) is distinctive for the unusually developed 
coalescence of the basic first and second segments of the usual three, 
so that functionally the appendage is bimerous. The right-angled 
flexure provides a reference of orientation to the appendage. Indica- 
tion of the fundamental segmentation is preserved in the diagonal, 
groove across the segment and the insertion of two long, subequal 
plumose setae on the inner margin at the point of intersection of the 
groove. Sub terminally on the outer margin is inserted a much shorter, 
slighter, reduced seta. The distal segment is smaller in extent than 
the basal unit, both narrower and shorter. Inserted near the lateral 
margin at intervals equal to about a fourth of the length of that margin 
are a proximal reduced seta, a second seta at about the midpoint, and 
a trio of setae at the distal fourth. Forming a complicated insertion 
on the distal margin of the segment is a stout, tapered, much-curved 
hook accompanied by four variously developed setae. Fairly heavy 
spinules form curving lines over the surface of the segment near the 
inner margin. 

The mandible consists of the bimerous protopodite and the usual 
rami. The medial expansion of the coxopodite (fig. 2e) forms a lamella 
which, along the masticatory margin, is differentiated as four widely- 
spaced toothlike projections, a short, finely serrate saw-edge, and two 
small setiform processes. The basipodite is a long segment (fig. 2,/) 
and bears a well-developed seta inserted at the distal third of the 
inner margin. The proximal segment of the biramous endopodite 
bears four setae arranged in a row around the distal medial margin. 
Occupying the distal margin of the second segment are nine setae 
disposed in two groups of three and six. 

The segmentation of the exopodite is suppressed so that the condi- 
tion is apparently bimerous. One seta is borne on the basal portion, 
four distally. The setae are graduated in length distally and the 
terminal seta is the longest with the basal third much expanded as 
well. 

The maxillule (fig. 2,g) consists of an obscurely bimerous proto- 
podite and the two monomerous rami. Laterally on the basal portion 
of the protopodite there is a vestigial epipodite represented by a long 
stout seta accompanied by a minute accessory setule. Two medial 
expansions of the basal part of the protopodite represent endites. 
The more proximal endite is a flaring expansion bearing a row of ten 
setae disposed along the medial margin. The second endite is repre- 



506 PROCEEDINGS OF THE! NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

sented by a reduced prominence from which extends a long tapering 
setiform structure. The endopodite bears five setae, one inserted 
just subapicaily on each of the medial and lateral margins and three 
borne along the distal extremity. The exopodite is widely truncate 
distally and four large setae are arranged along this margin in a 
loosely set row. 

The major bulk of the pentamerous maxilla (fig. 2,h) consists of 
the basal section. This bears four setiferous medial projections which 
represent endites. The most proximal projection bears three sub- 
equal setae. The ornamentation of the second endite is reduced to 
a solitary seta. The third endite bears two nearly equal setae. The 
fourth endite supports two well-developed, equal setae and a reduced 
setule which is inserted near the base of the more proximal seta. 
The second segment is about as wide as long in its main mass but is 
produced medially as a long, stout, falcate process on which the 
proximal margin is finely denticulate. Inserted basally on this 
process is an equally long but more slender seta and a much reduced 
seta. The third and fourth segments each bear a long slender seta 
inserted at the distal medial corner. The minute fifth segment bears 
four setae, three subequal ones forming an apical group, with a fourth, 
much-reduced, inserted proximally on the segment near the medial 
margin. 

The trimerous maxilliped (fig. 2,i) is stout and well developed. 
The basal segment constitutes about two-thirds of the total mass. 
Its ornamentation consists of nine setae arranged in two groups. 
The proximal group consists of three setae arranged in close-set forma- 
tion at about the midpoint of the medial margin. A fourth seta 
accompanies this group, its insertion displaced considerably laterally 
to the surface of the segment. Five setae are similarly arranged as a 
marginal quartet and solitary superficial seta, the group occupying 
the margin at a level marking the distal quarter of the segment. The 
mass of the second segment is slightly less than half that of the first. 
The outline is roughly trapezoidal. Inserted at about the midpoint 
of the medial margin is the single stout elongate seta. The armature 
of this member is distinctive, consisting of profuse ciliation basally 
and marginal denticulation distally. The terminal segment is minute, 
reduced to little more than a base for the insertion of the three term- 
inal setae. One of these is long and tapered, with plumose ciliation. 
The accompanying two setae are reduced to very slight proportions. 

Swimming legs: The first swimming legs (fig. 2,j) consist of bimerous 
protopodites and trimerous rami. The coxopodites are yoked by a 
well-developed intercoxal plate of subtriangular outline. Surface 
sculpturings of the plate convey a characteristic aspect featured by a 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 



507 




Figure 2. — Notodelphys affinis, new species, a-m, Female: a, habit, dorsal view; b, uro- 
some; c, antennule; d, antenna; e, masticatory lamella of mandible;/, palp of mandible; 
g, maxillule; k, maxilla; t, maxilliped; /, first leg; k, fourth leg; /, fifth leg; m, caudal 
ramus, n, Male: antennule. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



508 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

bilobed distal margin. Inserted on the distal medial corner of each 
coxopodite is a robust, long, tapered seta, reaching to the distal margin 
of the second segment of the endopodite. The outline of the basi- 
podite is distinctive. The lateral margin is reduced to a very short 
distance. Half the width of the segment is terminated by a diagonally 
directed border. From the midpoint of the distal margin to the 
distolateral corner the border is roughly squarely transverse to the 
axis of the limb. The medial margin is two-fifths the width of the 
segment. Inserted near the short lateral margin is a slender seta. 
A stout, tapering spine is set at the medial distal corner of the basi- 
podite. The spine extends to the level of the distal third of the basal 
segment of the endopodite. Each of the two basal segments of the 
exopodite bears a lateral spine and a medial seta. The terminal 
segment bears three marginal lateral spines, two apical setae, and 
three medial marginal setae. The two most distal spines and that of 
the basal segment are rather elongate and taper to slender tips. They 
all possess finely serrate marginal flanges. A spinous prominence 
projects from each of the two basal segments just proximal to the 
insertion of its spine. The spines of the terminal segment have 
accompanying prominences of feebler development. 

The basal segment of the endopodite much exceeds the combined 
mass of the distal segments. It bears one seta, inserted somewhat 
proximal to the distal medial corner. The second segment bears one 
medial seta. The distal lateral corner of the segment is produced as 
a short, stout, slightly curved, spinous projection. The terminal 
segment is nearly triangular in outline with the medial margin and 
the diagonally directed distal boundary inclining to a narrow apex. 
Across the distal and medial margins is set a row of five close-spaced 
setae. The proximal four of these are subequal, the apical seta is 
reduced. At the proximal corner of the medial margin originates a 
sixth short slight seta. 

The second legs consist of bimerous protopodites and trimerous 
rami. The coxopodites are yoked by a well-developed intercoxal 
plate. Each coxa bears at the medial distal corner a fairly robust 
seta which extends to about the base of the second segment of the 
endopodite. There is a reduced seta inserted near the lateral margin 
of the basipodite. The two basal segments of the exopodite are 
markedly contracted proximally and expanded distally. Each bears 
a slender, short, lateral spine and a medial seta. Each spine is 
accompanied by a proximally placed, stout, spinous projection of the 
margin of the segment. The terminal segment is somewhat less 
constricted basally. It bears three lateral marginal spines, two apical 
setae, and four medial setae. All the spines are so slender as to ap- 
proach setiform dimensions, except for their reduced length. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 509 

The segments of the endopodite are constricted basally. The 
proximal segment bears one medial seta and the second segment 
bears two medial setae. The ornamentation of the distal segment 
consists of three medial setae, two apical setae, and one seta set at 
about the midpoint of the lateral margin. The insertions of the lateral 
apical seta and the lateral marginal seta and the distal lateral corners 
of the two proximal segments are ornamented by stout spinous projec- 
tions of the integument. 

The coxopodites of the third legs are joined by a well-developed 
intercoxal plate. At the distal medial corner of each coxa there is 
inserted a well-developed seta extending to about the base of the second 
segment of the endopodite. There is a reduced seta inserted near 
the lateral margin of the basipodite. The two proximal segments 
of the trimerous exopodite each bear a short, slender, lateral spine 
and a medial seta. The ornamentation of the terminal segment con- 
sists of three lateral spines, a weak apical spine much modified to 
present a markedly setiform aspect, an apical seta, and four setae 
inserted on the medial margin. 

The armature of the three segments of the endopodite consists of 
one medial seta on the basal segment, two medial setae on the second 
segment, and three medial setae, two apical setae, and one lateral 
seta on the distal segment. 

The fourth legs (fig. 2,k) consist of bimerous protopodites and 
trimerous rami. The intercoxal plate is much shorter than wide. 
At the distal medial corner of the coxa is inserted a seta which extends 
to about the midpoint of the first segment of the endopodite. A 
minute seta is inserted near the lateral margin of the basipodite. 

The two proximal segments of the exopodite bear each a medial 
seta and a lateral spine. These spines and those of the distal segment 
are much reduced, pronouncedly modified in the direction of setiform 
structure. They taper uniformly to extremely fine points, and offer 
no differentiating features from setae on a structural basis. The 
distal segment bears two such short lateral spines, a somewhat longer 
apical spine and an apical seta, and four medial marginal setae. 

The proximal segment of the endopodite bears one medial seta. 
The second segment bears two medial setae. The distal segment 
bears two medial marginal setae, two apical setae, and one seta on the 
lateral margin. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The bimerous fifth legs (fig. 2,1) 
are much reduced. The basal segment is produced distally at the 
lateral corner to form a considerable rectangular prominence on which 
is inserted a seta. The short, bluntly conical second segment is 
small, exceeded considerably by the projection of the basal segment. 



510 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

There is a single short seta borne at the medial distal corner of the 
terminal segment. 

The caudal rami are about five times as long as their basal width. 
They taper slightly to the somewhat rounded truncate apex. The 
margins are heavily ciliated. Four setae form a fanlike array across 
the distal margin of the ramus. The central setae of the quartet are 
the longest. They are subequal and their length slightly exceeds 
that of the ramus. The medial and outermost setae are subequal, 
about half the length of the long setae. On the dorsal surface of the 
ramus there are inserted two reduced setae. One is just subapical, 
near the medial margin. The other is on the lateral margin and 
displaced from the end of the ramus by a distance slightly exceeding 
the terminal width. 

Male (fig. 2,n): The male is of the generalized notodelphyid type. 
The antennules (fig. 2,n) are modified as clasping structures. Other- 
wise the appendages conform well to those in the female, except for 
the presence of the small sixth legs absent in the female. 

Kemarks: In life this species is distinctively colored, with the body 
flesh to orange-brown and the egg masses dark green. In the trans- 
parent bodies of their hosts, some of these copepods may be detectable 
by superficial examination. The usual infestations are in considerable 
numbers, usually including juveniles as well as adults. A marked 
tolerance of the situation of the host is indicated, as specimens have 
been taken from tunicates ranging from intertidal occurrence to a 
collection obtained by dredging in 105 fathoms. 

Indeterminable Species 

Notodelphys ascidicola Allman 

Notodelphys ascidicola Allman, 1847a, pp. 2-6, pi. 1, figs. 1-14, pi. 2, figs. 16-20, 
22 (part, not figs. 12, 15, 21) (type locality, British Isles, in Ascidia com- 
munis); 1847, p. 74.— Baird, 1850, pp. 238-239.— Thorell, 1859a, pp. 5, 6, 
46, 59; 1859b, pp. 336-337; 1860, pp. 114, 115, 116.— Claus, 1860, pp. 
229-233, pi. 6, figs. 1-8.— van Beneden, 1861, p. 146.— Gerstaecker, 1863, 
p. 404.— Norman, 1869, p. 299.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801 — 
Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 227. 

Notodelphys antarctica Brady 

Notodelphys antarctica Brady, 1910, p. 568, figs. 1-8, text fig. 55 (type locality, 
Gauss-Station).— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 227.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 154, 174. 

Notodelphys matronalis Leigh- Sharpe 

Notodelphys matronalis Leigh-Sharpe, 1934, pp. 4-6, figs. 1, 2 (type localities, 
Salomakie, Gebe Island, in Ascidia rhabdophora Sluiter, Stytla asymm.etrica 
Sluiter).— Lang, 1949, p. 6— Sewell, 1949, p. 163. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS* — ILLG 511 

Genus Notodelphyopsis Schellenberg 

Notodelphyopsis SchelleDberg, 1922, p. 237 (type species, by monotypy, N. 

falciferus Schellenberg, 1922).— Gurney, 1927, p. 481.— Wilson, 1932, p. 

599.— Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 
Notodelphys Lang, 1948, p. 5 (part). 

The collection of a compressed notodelphyid exhibiting many of the 
characters of the genus Notodelphys in the features of the appendages 
brought forth a problem in generic assignment. The correspondence 
to the genera Paranotodelphys and Notodelphyopsis of Schellenberg 
was so close that it was concluded that, despite its habitus, it must 
be classified near these depressed examples of the group. The 
obtaining of a specimen which showed close correspondence to Noto- 
delphyopsis falciferus Schellenberg, except for very minor details, 
has made possible a closer comparison and it is felt a satisfactory 
grouping can be made. The profoundest difference between Para- 
notodelphys and Notodelphyopsis is in urosomal segmentation. In 
Paranotodelphys there are five segments, with no fusion of thoracic 
and abdominal elements. In Notodelphyopsis there are four urosomal 
segments, the first of which is a genital complex, probably formed by 
fusion of the most posterior thoracic and most anterior abdominal 
somites. 

Description: The body habit is variable, in the known forms 
ranging from compression to depression, with secondary inflation. 
The antennule may be of generalized type and 9-segmented, or highly 
modified and 7-segmented. The antenna is a modified trimerous 
structure, closely corresponding to that found in Notodelphys, with 
the same ornamentation of two plumose setae borne on the basal 
segment, and other conformity of details. The mandible is much like 
that of Notodelphys, with no important difference in the masticatory 
lamella, and with similar arrangement and setation of the palp. In 
the maxillule the exopodite bears four setae, the endopodite may have 
five or six setae. The maxilla is of generalized type. The second 
segment bears a conspicuously developed falcate hook-process. The 
maxilliped is trimerous, with only the first and third segments setif- 
erous. The distal segment bears two or three subequal plumose 
setae. This appendage is distinctive in this character. The swim- 
ming legs are only specifically modified, with some elaborate speciali- 
zations, but the basic pattern is generalized. The fifth legs are 
weakly developed bimerous appendages, much like those in Noto- 
delphys, or they may be lacking. 

The male is known only for the new species proposed below, so the 
range of generic variation can not be established. 

422202—58 4 



512 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Key to the species of Notodelphyopsis 

la. Body depressed, antennule 7-segmented, fifth legs absent. 

falciferus (p. 512) 
16. Body compressed, antennule 9-segmented, fifth legs present. 

perplexa (p. 512) 

Species not known from North America 

Notodelphyopsis falciferus Schellenberg 

Notodelphyopsis falciferus Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 237-239, figs. 17-20 (type 
locality, Sharks Bay, Australia, in Ascidia gemmata Sluit.). 

Distribution: Australia. 
Host: Ascidia gemmata Sluit. 

North American Species 
Notodelphyopsis perplexa, new species 

Figure 3 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92810 (type locality, off San 
Nicolas Island, Calif., from Ascidia clementea Ritter) ; allotypic male, 
USNM 92811, and paratypes from the same lot of specimens. 

Specimens examined: 

California 

From A. clementea: 

Off San Nicolas Island, Apr. 13, 1904, dredged, 1,084-1,110 fms., U. S. 
Fish Comm. Steamer Albatross, holotypic female, allotypic male, 12 
female and 6 male paratypes. 

Description: Female (fig. 3, a-p): General features: The markedly 
compressed body (fig. 3, a) is 9-segmented. The metasome consists 
of a head-segment bearing antennules, antennae, mouthparts and 
maxillipeds, three somites bearing the first three swimming legs, 
and an incubatory segment bearing fourth and fifth swimming legs. 

Articulated on this metasome is a 4-segmented urosome, including 
no pedigerous somite. The proximal segment is a genital segment, 
of marked cyclopoid aspect, almost as long as the combined remaining 
segments. There are three subequal posterior segments, including 
the telson. The caudal rami are one and a third times as long as the 
anal segment. 

The rostrum is narrow and elongate, tapering in the distal third 
to form a fairly acute apex. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 3,6) is 9-segmented, although 
there remain indications of subdivision of segments 3 and 4. The 
posture of the antennule is characteristic, forming a distinct angle 
of almost 90°. This is due to actual curvature of the second segment 
to form an elbow bend. With accompanying slightly diagonal 
articulations of the first and thud segments on the second, the near- 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 513 

right-angled flexure is achieved. The two basal segments are the 
greatest in diameter and exhibit a slight taper distally. The suc- 
ceeding three segments diminish in diameter distally in telescope 
fashion. The terminal three segments are aligned with a very slight 
uniform taper. 

The lengths of the proximal six segments are nearly subequal, the 
tapered diameters furnishing the considerable differentiation of the 
proportions. The first segment is wider than long, the second just 
slightly longer than wide. The sixth segment is nearly three times 
as long as wide. The distal segments are nearly equally long and, in 
each, the width is just slightly exceeded by the length. 

The setation of the antennule is profuse. The setae are slender 
and in the present specimen fall into graceful curves and spirals. 
The outer margin of curvature of the appendage is the setiferous 
margin. 

The antenna (fig. 3,c) is trimerous. The distal segment is the 
longest and is articulated by a very mobile elbow joint with the 
basal portion which forms an apparently firmy integrated member 
with a diagonal articulation which approaches actual fusion. The 
basal joint is longer than the second. The distal extremity of the 
first joint lies on the inside of the right-angled flexure in which the 
limb apparently normally falls. At this distal point originate two 
long, equal, profusely plumose setae. The second segment tapers 
somewhat to the elbow joint. The inner margin is convexly expanded. 
The outer margin is nearly linear to a level at about the distal third 
of its extent where there is a slight emargination. Here is set a short 
slender seta. 

The margins of the distal segment are sinuate and only roughly 
parallel, although in the main the aspect of the segment is linear. 
The terminal articulated hook is curved and slender. It is accompa- 
nied by a number of subequal setae inserted in a longitudinal row. 
There are two small setae borne on the end of the segment also. 
Midway on the segment there are borne two setae, mainly closely 
appressed to the surface of the segment. At the proximal quarter of 
the outer margin is inserted a short slender seta. The distal inner 
margin of the segment bears a row of spinules which continues diago- 
nally over the surface of the segment. 

The mandibles consist of a short coxal segment produced medially 
as a toothed masticatory plate (fig. S,d) and an expanded basis sup- 
porting the two rami (fig. 3 f e). The armature of the basis is a single 
seta inserted at about the distal third of the medial margin. The 
endopodite is basically 2-segmented, although the proximal line of 
articulation is approaching obsolescenece. The distal medial corner 
of the proximal segment bears three setae. The apical segment is 



514 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 




Figure 3. — Notodelphyopsis perplexa, new species, a-p, Female: a, habit, lateral view; 
b, antennule; c, antenna; d, masticatory lamella of mandible; e, palp of mandible; /, 
maxillule; g, maxilla; h, maxilliped; i, first leg; /, exopodite of second leg; k, endopodite 
of second leg; /, exopodite of third leg; m, endopodite of third leg; n, exopodite of fourth 
leg; o, endopodite of fourth leg, p, caudal ramus, q-r, Male: q, antennule; r, somites of 
fifth and sixth legs, left side. The scale, referring to a, represents 0.5 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 515 

about as broad as wide and exhibits a slight distal flare. The armature 
consists of nine setae arranged around the distal half of the segment. 

The exopodite is monomerous with the appearance of a short 
truncated cone. Three long setae orginate, with very closely spaced 
bases, on the apex. Two additional setae are spaced at subequal 
intervals along the medial (or distal) margin. 

The maxillule (fig. S,f) consists of an obscurely segmented proto- 
podite and two well-developed rami. The proximal portion of the 
protopodite bears medially an expanded setiferous endite. The 
seven setae comprise a very close-set group of six at the distal medial 
margin of the endite and a single seta considerably removed prox- 
imally and laterally from the group. There is a weakly developed 
seta-like medial member which seems to be a second endite. The 
epipodite is represented by a long seta. The terminal portion of the 
protopodite, probably basis, bears three markedly subequal setae on 
the medial margin. 

The endopodite is rather narrower than long and is ornamented 
with six setae. Four are set in a row along the whole of the somewhat 
diagonally truncate distal margin. A fifth is slightly subterminal 
and the sixth is inserted at about the midpoint of the medial margin. 

The four large, nearly equal setae of the exopodite are set in a 
close-spaced row along the distal margin of the single segment. 

The maxilla (fig. 8,g) is pentamerous with indications of subdivision 
of the protopodite. The medial margin of the protopodite is produced 
as four variously developed endites. The most proximal endite is a 
fairly conspicuous conical protuberance supporting three apically 
inserted setae. The second endite is represented by a single, nearly 
sessile seta. The third endite is less reduced; its ornamentation 
comprises two equal setae. The fourth endite is a rectangular process 
slightly longer than wide. Apically it supports two equal setae. 
There is a reduced accessory setule inserted just proximal to the 
insertion of the more basal seta. 

The second segment is produced medially into a heavily sclerotized 
falcate spine. Basally this exceeds any of the setae of the appendage 
but the distal three-fourths are as slender as the accompanying setae. 
The length of the spine is about an eighth less than that of the longest 
setae of the appendage. The tip of the spine is a clearly defined 
sclerotized point. Accompanying this spinous process is one long, 
very well-developed seta and a considerably slighter seta. The latter 
is about an eighth shorter than the spine and its thickness is about a 
fourth that of the major seta. 

The succeeding two segments are wider than long and each bears a 
medial distal seta. The terminal segment bears three setae apically 
inserted with their bases very close together. 



516 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

The maxilliped (fig. 3, h) is distinctly trimerous. The ornamenta- 
tion of the basal segment is arranged as two groups of members. Each 
group is comprised of setae and of one stout, tapered spine. The 
proximal group is three setae and a spine. The distal group consists 
of four setae and a spine. The second segment is a relatively large 
one, its width about two-thirds that of the basal segment. The 
length is about one-third again as great as the width. There is no 
seta or spine borne on this segment. The inner margin bears a fringe 
of fine ciliation. 

The terminal segment is small, of about one-third the extent of 
the second. The ornamentation consists of three terminally placed 
subequal setae. 

Swimming legs: The protopodites of the first swimming legs (fig. 
Sji) are connected by a well-developed intercoxal plate. Each coxa 
bears at the distal medial corner a long seta which extends about to 
the tip of the endopodite. The basipodite is roughly right-triangular, 
the hypotenuse represented by the distal margin. On this is set at 
a medial apex a long, stout spine, and the remainder of the extent 
mainly consists of the articulations of the rami. The spine reaches 
to just short of the midpoint of the terminal segment of the endo- 
podite. There is a reduced seta borne just medial to the short lateral 
margin of the basis. 

The three segments of the exopodite are more equivalent in size 
than those of the endopodite. The proximal segment is largest, 
the second is smallest. There are a lateral spine and medial seta 
borne on each of the two more proximal segments. The terminal 
segment bears three lateral marginal spines, a terminal spine and 
seta, and three medial marginal setae. The spine of the basal segment 
is the stoutest spine and its length about equals that of the apical 
spine. The shortest spine is that placed most proximally on the distal 
segment. 

The trimerous endopodite is armed only with setae: one on the 
basal segment, one on the second segment, six on the terminal segment. 
Of these six, four are lateral, one is apical, and one is inserted in an 
emargination of the lateral margin which is at about the distal third of 
the length of that margin. The basal segment of the endopodite is 
produced so that its extent nearly equals that of the two remaining 
segments combined. 

A well-developed intercoxal plate connects the protopodites of 
the second swimming legs. There is a well-developed seta at the 
distal medial corner of the coxa. There is a reduced, fine seta borne 
laterally on the basipodite. The rami are both trimerous, of roughly 
equal segments. 

The two proximal segments of the exopodite (fig. 3j) bear each a 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 517 

lateral spine and a medial seta. The terminal segment has three 
marginal lateral spines, a terminal spine and seta, and four setae 
arranged along the medial margin. 

The proximal segment of the endopodite (fig. 3,k) bears a single 
medial seta, the second segment two medial setae. Four setae are 
arranged along the medial margin of the terminal segment; one seta 
is apical; and one seta is set in an emargination slightly distal to the 
midpoint of the lateral margin of the segment. 

The protopodite of the third leg consists of two subequal segments, 
basipodite and coxopodite. The coxae are yoked by the well-developed 
intercoxal plate. A seta of slighter dimensions than those of the rami 
is inserted at the distal medial corner of each coxa. There is a re- 
duced seta inserted near the lateral margin on the basipodite. 

The exopodite (fig. 3,1) is trimerous. The proximal two segments 
each bear a lateral spine and medial seta. The terminal segment 
bears three lateral marginal spines, a terminal spine and seta, and 
four setae arranged along the medial margin. 

The proximal segment of the trimerous endopodite (fig. 3,ra) bears 
a single medial seta. The second segment bears two medial setae. 
The distal segment bears four setae arranged along the medial margin, 
an apical seta and one seta inserted in an emargination somewhat 
distal to the midpoint of the lateral margin. 

The coxopodites of the fourth legs are yoked by an intercoxal 
plate. At the distal medial corner of each coxa is inserted a seta 
which extends just beyond the midpoint of the second segment of 
the endopodite. There is a reduced seta inserted near the lateral 
margin of the basipodite. 

The proximal two segments of the trimerous exopodite (fig. 3, ft) 
each bear a lateral spine and medial seta. The terminal segment 
bears two spines on the lateral margin, an apical spine and seta, and 
four medial marginal setae. 

The endopodite (fig. 3,o) is trimerous. The basal segment bears 
one medial seta. The second segment bears two medial setae. The 
distal segment bears five setae, two on the medial margin, two apical, 
one inserted in an emargination somewhat distal to the midpoint of 
the lateral margin. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The bimerous fifth legs are very 
reduced. The basal segment is much produced at the lateral distal 
corner to form a prominence bearing a single seta. The small, some- 
what conical second segment bears a single apical seta. 

Each caudal ramus (fig. 3,p) is five times as long as its greatest 
width and the ornamentation consists of six well-developed setae. 
Three setae are apical; the innermost slightly exceeds the segment in 
length, the more lateral two are very long and apparently pliable. 



518 PROCEEDINGS OF THE; NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Somewhat subapically near the medial margin on the dorsal surface 
is inserted a short, slender seta. At about the same longitudinal 
level is set a distolateral seta, as stout as the inner apical seta and 
about as long as the ramus. Just proximal to the midpoint of each 
lateral margin, and clearly set on the dorsal surface, is an unusually 
well-developed seta, in length slightly exceeding that of the ramus. 
All the setae are plumose. The margins of the ramus are not ciliated. 

Male (fig. 3,£-r): In this species the male is of the generalized 
cyclopoid type. The size is much smaller than in the female due to 
the lack of inflation related to the brood sack. The antennule (fig. 
3,g) is geniculate with a coalescence of the terminal segments to par- 
ticipate in a movable hinge. Some of the more basal segments also 
are partially or entirely fused. The appendages otherwise conform 
well to the female pattern. 

The urosome is 6-segmented, a marked contrast to the tetramerous 
condition in the female. Here, further, the articulation of the urosome 
is between the somites of the fourth and fifth legs. The somites of 
the fifth and sixth legs are considerably fused into a distinctive com- 
pound structure (fig. 3,r). On the anterior portion of this region are 
borne the bimerous fifth legs. The proximal segment of the fifth leg 
is much reduced but exhibits a lateral rectangular protrusion. Api- 
cally on this process a short seta is inserted. The second segment is 
flattened with an expanded outline. The medial margin is nearly 
straight, the lateral edge is almost a semicircle. At the apex is set 
a short slender seta. 

The sixth legs are simple protrusions on the flaps covering the 
genital orifices. Each consists of two slight projections bearing 
subequal short setae. 

Nomen Nudum 

Notodelphyopsis variabilis Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

Genus Doropygus Thorell, emended 

Doropygus Thorell, 1859a, pp. 43-46 (part; type species, by later designation, 
G. Sars, 1921, D. pulex Thorell, 1859a).— Claus, 1875, p. 350 (part); 1880, 
p. 553 (part).— Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 324-326 (part).— Caiman, 1909, p. 
103 (part).— G. Sars, 1921, p. 42 (part) .— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 238-241 
(part).— Brehm, 1927, p. 490 (part). 

Description and discussion of taxonomic characters: The 
body form in the main is little modified, varying from a compact 
habit tending to be somewhat globose to an opposite considerable 
elongation. The metasome is 5-segmented, consisting of the head, 
three relatively unmodified thoracic somites, and the enlarged segment 
containing the brood sack. All the known representatives are more 
or less compressed. The urosome is basically 6-segmented, composed 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 519 

of two thoracic somites, including that of the fifth legs, and four free 
abdominal segments. The caudal rami are relatively simple, with 
reduced ornamentation. The rostrum is well developed. 

The antennule is typically 9-segmented, with moderate to reduced 
ornamentation. The antenna is trimerous, usually with very sparsely 
developed setation. 

The mandible is of very generalized type with no great tendency 
to specialization. The maxillule is moderately developed. The seta- 
tion of the rami consists of few members. The maxilla is typically 
pentamerous and not markedly modified. The armature of the sec- 
ond segment varies from the prominent hook process of many noto- 
delphyids to unaltered setae. The maxilliped is reduced, basically 
bimerous, the segmentation tending to obsolescence. The terminal 
segment bears two setae. 

The swimming legs are typically of generalized type with a few 
trends toward specialization. The armature tends to become uni- 
formly setiform in many species. The segmentation of the posterior 
endopodites is reduced from the trimerous to the bimerous condition 
in a large series of examples. The fifth legs are robust, bimerous ap- 
pendages, with feebly developed armature. 

Sexual dimorphism seems to occur in a transitional state in the 
genus Doropygus. In the species Z>. mohri a similarity to the consid- 
erable disparity of the sexes in Doropygopsis is seen. In the male, the 
antennule preserves traces of prehensile adaptation, as seen in the 
coalescence of terminal segments. The ornamentation and segmenta- 
tion of the swimming legs are most unlike in the two sexes. There is 
even a dimorphism in the almost vestigial fifth legs. In D. bayeri the 
opposite extreme is seen. Here there is practically no expression of 
dimorphism in appendages except in very minor and refined details of 
ornamentation. 

Among the representatives of Doropygus here studied two anti- 
thetical trends of specific differentiation were encountered. One of 
these has already been noted in the literature. Schellenberg (1922), 
in his examination of ascidicoles from all over the world, compiled an 
extended list of occurrences of D. pulex from many localities and from 
a long roster of hosts. He pointed out that many of these examples 
exhibited minor distinctive characteristics, but he did not consider 
the anatomical differentiation sufficient to warrant specific designa- 
tion. Lang (1948) was of the opinion that Schellenb erg's list was in 
reality a compilation of several distinct species. It seems indisputable, 
however, that the question will have to remain open until the influence 
of ecological factors upon the structures of these copepods can be 
appraised. Existence as commensals in different hosts can very well 
represent existence in extremely disparate milieus. It would be most 



520 PROCEEDINGS OF THE, NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

probable, accordingly, to encounter ecotypes in the population of an 
extremely eury topic species. 

A parallel instance was experienced in the present study of D. 
laticornis. Specimens were obtained over a geographic extent ranging 
from Massachusetts to the Gulf Coast of Florida and a very diverse 
array of hosts was represented. Almost every lot of copepods pre- 
sented distinctive features, yet, in the aggregate, the picture seemed 
to resolve as an instance of random variation of a number of plastic 
characteristics. The extremes of structural differentiation were 
encountered at the geographic extremes of this distribution. How- 
ever, additional host records and intervening localities provided transi- 
tional examples which made it seem unnecessary to attempt taxonomic 
distinctions among the assemblage. This problem, too, will await 
further details of ecological knowledge of the group. 

A contrary tendency was in evidence in the distribution of species 
in western North America. An extensive series of ascidians was 
assembled and each of several species was accompanied by a specifi- 
cally differentiated Doropygus. The existence of the case stated 
above leads to slight suspicion as to the taxonomic validity of the 
Western species. Here again the ecotypic problem remains to be 
examined. However, these forms all stand well apart in terms of 
the familiar criteria of specific distinction and their distribution over 
a generous sampling has remained constant. 

The interest of the possibilities of operation of ecological factors in 
this pattern among the Western American species of Doropygus is 
enormously heightened by the parallel distribution of representatives 
of the genus Pygodelphys among the identical ascidian hosts. In this 
case the structural differentiation has been considered here as below 
the level of specific significance. Hence a single species is recognized 
as occurring in eurytopic distribution in association with nine or 
more host species. 

Doropygus in Schellenberg's sense was obviously too inclusive. 
However, it is extremely difficult to subdivide the genus. A group 
of three of Schellenberg's species is separable with the excellent key 
character of the reduced fifth legs, which in their rudimentary con- 
struction, still retain an aspect strongly reminiscent of the structure 
in Notodelphys. The antennal ornamentation is consistent in these 
species and furnishes a second strongly differentiating character. 
Accordingly, Doropygus lamellipes, D. antarcticus, and D. novae 
seelandius of Schellenberg should be removed to this genus, Pygodel- 
phys. The state of the antennule, antenna, and the fifth leg in 
Pygodelphys would seem to indicate derivation from the notodelphyid 
stock prior to derivation of the remainder of the species assigned to 
Doropygus. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ULLG 521 

A further difficulty in assigning Schellenberg's species is allocation 
of his D. cylindriformis. From the description, this form cannot be 
accommodated in any known genus without alteration of the generic 
concept, and this step is inadvisable in the absence of specimens for 
study. Gurney (1927) considered D. cylindriformis very possibly 
referable to Pseudonotodelphys. Obstacles to this inclusion would be 
that there is a much more reduced antenna and a less reduced mandi- 
bular exopodite in D. cylindriformis, with a maxilliped that would seem 
derivable from a more primitive condition than that in Pseudonoto- 
delphys. I do not consider the compression of D. cylindriformis 
significant. The reduction to absence of fifth legs and the configura- 
tion of legs 1 to 4 are very readily derivable from the basic Notodelphys 
type. I would consider the species as best accommodated in the 
Notodelphys complex and probably deserving of generic rank. More 
specimens are needed for detailed study to permit final settlement of 
the situation, and, until further descriptive details and illustrations 
of the anatomical features become available, the form is here con- 
sidered as a species incerta sedis. 

Sars anticipated Schellenberg in recognizing the advisability of 
subdividing Doropygus. The assemblage remaining after exclusion of 
the Pygodelphys species and D. cylindriformis is sufficiently diverse 
that it is susceptible to further logical partition. The complex of 
species closely allied to D. pulex seems to form a fairly coherent group. 
Basic similarity in a corresponding degree of reduction of appendages 
would group together a series with a notably significant key character 
in the armature of the maxillular rami. The basic condition of four 
exopodite setae and three endopodite setae can be demonstrated in 
D. trisetosus and D. spinijerus and the process of modification is seen 
in the transitional phase in D. demissus, in the concept here adopted, 
where the exopodite setal number varies from four to three. A con- 
siderable series, Arctic and American, is characterized by three setae 
on each ramus: D. demissus, in the typical form, D. laticornis, D. 
curvatus, and the various new Western American species. In the 
inverse direction of modification, D. pulex and D. longimatrix exhibit 
the basic four exopodite setae, with reduction of the endopodite 
complement to two. 

The maxilliped structure is consistent throughout the whole series. 
The mandibular palp shows graduation from an exopodite with five 
setae to one with four. This group of species, since it contains D. 
pulex, the type, will constitute Doropygus, sensu stricto. The sub- 
division was anticipated by Schellenberg in his proposition of a 
"pulex-group" (as contrasted to a "longicauda-group") for the species 
he considered. Unfortunately, he selected a character which does not 
seem to exhibit fundamental phylogenetic significance for differenti- 



522 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

ating his groups. As a result, D. longimatrix, which has very profound 
affinities with D. pulex, was placed in the "longicauda-group" because 
of the relatively insignificant fact (in my opinion) that the terminal 
abdominal somite does not bear the caudal rami on divergent pro- 
longations, which condition would give the usual effect, as in D. pulex, 
of a cleft anal segment. 

The species remaining after exclusion of Doropygus, sensu stricto, 
present difficulty in definition as natural groups. One line of evidence 
uniting the species is the consistent presence in all of the basic four 
setae of the maxillular exopodite. In all, as well, the number of endo- 
podite setae is variable but progresses upward from a basic count of 
at least six. Since in some a distinct 2-segmented condition of the 
endopodite is present, the appendage in such a representative as D. 
longicauda exhibits the most primitive condition found among the 
notodelphyids, seemingly presenting a more basic arrangement than 
occurs in Notodelphys. (In D. longicauda the maxilliped is also more 
primitive than in Notodelphys in preserving a more basic number, 
four, of setae on the terminal segment. Pachypygus corresponds to 
D. longicauda in both these features. Both Pachypygus and Doro- 
pygopsis, however, possess more reduced or otherwise phylogeneti- 
cally advanced features in the antennules, antennae, and mandibles 
over the condition in Notodelphys.) 

All of the Doropygus series, excluding the species of Pygodelphys, 
probably could not be derived directly through D. longicauda as a 
stem, since in most species of Doropygus, sensu stricto, the mandib- 
ular exopodite retains a more primitive condition than that found in 
D. longicauda. The mandibular exopodite in D. longicauda is an 
unsegmented plate (as in Pachypygus and other genera). Various 
species of Doropygus preserve the segmented aspect of this ramus to 
varying degrees, a condition I would regard as more primitive. An 
antecedent form of D. longicauda would have had to furnish the com- 
mon ancestor of Doropygus, sensu stricto, and the present Doropy- 
gopsis assemblage. On this basis, D. longicauda represents one of the 
specialized species now existent in its group. A number of species 
are more primitive on the basis of segmentation of the mandibular 
exopod, but are consistent with D. longicauda on the basis of setation 
of the maxillule, and, further, furnish graduated series either with 
reference to ornamentation of the antenna or in arrangement of the 
maxilliped. 

D. thorelli and D. novemsetiferus are very closely allied with D. 
longicauda with reference to maxilliped structure. D. novemsetiferus 
is probably the species most closely allied with D. longicauda. D. 
thorelli shows a trend to suppression of the middle joint of the maxil- 
liped in an early stage. The segment is there, but without ornamenta- 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 523 

tion. In D. porcicauda and D. psylius the middle segment is sup- 
pressed, but the terminal setal complement of three, as in D. thorelli, 
is preserved. In D. normani, which in most features closely resembles 
D. psylius, reduction to two terminal setae produces a maxilliped 
anatomically identical with that in Doropygus, sensu stricto. This 
could justifiably be held to be a perfect example of convergence, and I 
can think of no logical argument against constructing the series as 
here presented, if the descriptive details available for D. normani are 
correct. Unfortunately, the original description is not sufficiently 
detailed, nor the illustrations sufficiently refined to satisfy modern 
demands in critical comparison of anatomical features, and specimens 
were not available for verification in the present study. 

However, a second most significant bit of evidence almost clinches 
the convergence theory. In Doropygus, sensu stricto, the urosome is a 
primitive one, like that of Notodelphys in including four free anatom- 
ically abdominal segments. Further, the thoracic segment of the fifth 
legs is free of the incubatorium in Doropygus; thus a 6-segmented 
urosome is present, with every anatomical segment distinct. 

In Doropygopsis and in the thorelli-normani line there is a cyclopoid 
"genital-segment" consisting of the fused last thoracic and first 
abdominal segments, so that here the urosome is 5-segmented, 
although still including the somite of the fifth leg. D. normani 
seemingly conforms in this anatomical feature. 

If Bars' generic subdivision is to be adhered to, Doropygopsis will 
accommodate the species D. longicauda and D. novemsetiferus. Do- 
ropygella would then include D. thorelli, D. psylius, D. normani, and 
D. porcicauda. 

Key to the species of Doropygus, based upon females 

la. Second segment of maxilla with stout, well-developed hook 2 

16. Second segment of maxilla with only setiform elements 4 

2a. Mandibular exopodite with 4 setae seclusus (p. 579) 

26. Mandibular exopodite with 5 setae 3 

3a. Distal segment of maxilliped distinct, well developed . . demissus (p. 537) 

36. Distal segment of maxilliped much reduced mohri (p. 562) 

4a. Maxillular exopodite with 4 setae 5 

46. Maxillular exopodite with 3 or fewer setae 9 

5a. Maxillular endopodite with 2 setae 6 

56. Maxillular endopodite with 3 setae 7 

6a. Mandibular exopodite with 5 subequal, well-developed setae. 

iongimatrix (p. 524) 

66. Mandibular exopodite with 4 setae, or with a fifth much reduced. 

pulex (p. 525) 

7a. Lateral armature of exopodites 2 to 4 spines spiniferus (p. 524) 

76. Lateral armature of exopodites 2 to 4 setae 8 



524 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

8a. Mandibular exopodite with 4 setae trisetosus (p. 524) 

86. Mandibular exopodite with 5 setae, 1 reduced. . . . kerguelensis (p. 524) 

9a. Endopodites 2 to 4 trimerous curvatus (p. 524) 

96. Endopodites 2 to 4 bimerous 10 

10a. Maxillular exopodite with 2 setae schellenbergi (p. 574) 

106. Maxillular exopodite with 3 setae 11 

11a. Basal segment of third exopodite lacking medial seta. . - . . bayeri (p. 544) 

116. Basal segment of third exopodite bearing medial seta 12 

12a. Basal segment of antenna lacking ornamentation hummi (p. 557) 

126. Basal segment of antenna bearing 2 subterminally inserted setae . . . . 13 

13a. Basal segment of fourth exopodite with medial seta . . . laticornis (p. 530) 

136. Basal segment of fourth exopodite lacking medial seta 14 

14a. Caudal rami lacking apical setae fernaldi (p. 551) 

146. Caudal rami set with 4 apical setae profundus (p. 569) 

Species not known from North America 

Doropygus longimatrix Schellenberg 

Doropygus longimatrix Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 245-246, figs. 24, 25 (type locality, 
Gulf of Suez, in Pyura momus Sav.). — Gurney, 1927, p. 480. — Sewell, 1949, 
pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 
Host: Pyura momus Sav. 

Doropygus spiniferus Schellenberg 

Doropygus spiniferus Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 248-249, 265 (type locality, south- 
western Australia, in Molgula nodosa Hartmr.). — Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

Distribution: Southwestern Australia. 
Host: Molgula nodosa Hartmr. 

Doropygus trisetosus Schellenberg 

Doropygus trisetosus Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 249, 265 (type locality, New Zealand, 
in Polycarpa pegasi Mchlsn.).— Stephensen, 1927, pp. 379-381, fig. 33. — 
Sewell, 1949, p. 163. 

Distribution: New Zealand. 
Host: Polycarpa pegasi Mchlsn. 

Doropygus kerguelensis Schellenberg 

Doropygus trisetosus var. kerguelensis Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 249, 266, fig. 28 

(type locality, Kerguelen Island, in Molgula sp.). 
Doropygus kerguelensis Sewell, 1949, p. 174. 

Distribution: Kerguelen Island. 
Host: Molgula sp. 

North American Species 

Doropygus curvatus Gray 

Doropygus curvatus Gray, 1938, pp. 261-269, figs. 1-10 (type locality, Woods 
Hole, Mass., in Styela partita (Stimpson). — Lang, 1948, p. 6. — Sewell, 1949, 
p. 157. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS< — ILLG 525 

Distribution: Massachusetts. 

Host: Sty ela partita (Stimpson). 

Remarks: No specimens of this American species have been ob- 
tained for the present study. The original description furnishes all 
the details so far known about this notodelplryid. 

Doropygus pulex Thorell 

? Notodelphys ascidicola Allman, 1847a, pp. 2-6, pi. 1, figs. 1-14, pi. 2, figs. 15-22 
(part) . 

Doropygus pulex Thorell, 1859a, pp. 46-49, pi. 6, fig. 8 (type locality, Swedish 
coast in Ascidia venosa, A. canina, A. aspersa, A. parallelogramma, Cynthia 
lurida); 1859b, pp. 337, 339, 341-343; 1860, pp. 116, 118, 121, 122, 123 — 
Hesse, 1866, pp. 55-56.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 776, 777, 801 — 
Brady, 1878, vol. 1, pp. 133-135, pi. 28, figs. 1-12.— Kerschner, 1879, pp. 
184-185, pi. 1, fig. 4, pi. 2, figs. 4, 5, 9, pi. 3, fig. 9, pi. 6, figs. 10-12.— Richiardi, 
1880, p. 147.— AuriviUius, 1882a, p. 54; 1882b, p. Ill; 1883, pp. 24, 107- 
108.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, p. 324.— Cams, 1885, p. 342.— Herdman, 1889, pp. 
248, 249; 1891, pp. 209-210; ?1898, pp. 254, 263.— Thompson, 1889, p. 185; 
1893, p. 189, pi. 17, fig. 8.— Canu, 1891, p. 472; 1892, pp. 195-196, pi. 8, 
figs. 11-22, pi. 9, figs. 1-3.— T. Scott, 1900, p. 386; 1901, p. 351; 1907, pp. 
363-364.— Graeffe, 1902, p. 39.— Thompson and Scott, 1903, p. 255 — 
Brian, 1905, p. 2, pi. 4, figs. 10-12.— Norman, 1905, p. 36.— Norman and 
Scott, 1906, p. 202.— Norman and Brady, 1909, pp. 400-401.— Pesta, 1909, 
p. 259.— Smith, 1909, p. 66, fig. 33.— Hartmeyer, 1911, pp. 1734-1735.— 
G. Sars, 1921, pp. 42-44, pi. 20.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 246-248, figs. 26, 27 — 
Stephensen, 1929, p. 6. — Harant, 1931, p. 370. — Marine Biological Associa- 
tion, 1931, p. 173.— Wilson, 1932, pp. 389-390, fig. 239.— Pesta, 1934, p. 8 — 
Leigh-Sharpe, 1935, p. 48.— ?Wilson, 1935a, p. 779.— van Oorde-de-Lint and 
Schuurmans StekhoveD, 1936, p. 119, fig. 68,— Gray, 1938, p. 261 .—Stephen- 
sen, 1940, p. 20.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 157, 158, 160, 161, 169, 176, 177, 178, 182, 
184, 191, 192.— Lang, 1948, pp. 2, 7; 1951, pi. 1, fig. 2. 

Doropygus pullus Buchholz, 1869, pp. 116-119, pi. 6, fig. 3, pi. 7, fig. 3 (type 
locality, Naples) .—Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 804. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden, British Isles; 
West Africa; Faroes; Atlantic coast of North America, Barbados; 
Japan; Ceylon; Australia; New Zealand; ?Pacific coast of North 
America. 

Hosts: Alloeocarpa thilesii Mchlsn., Ascidia aspersa, A. canina, 
A. mentula, A. parallelogramma, A. plebeia, A. venosa, Ascidiella 
scabra, A. opalina, Ciona intestinalis, Clavellina lepadijormis, ICorella 
willmeriana, Cynthia lurida Thorell, C. morus Linnaeus, Microcosmus 
exasperatus Hell. var. australis, Herdm., M. oligophilus Hell. var. 
wahlbergi Mchlsn., Molgula oculata Forb., M. nodosa Hartmr., M. 
papillosa Verrill, Phallusia conchilega, P. obliqua, P. patula, P. vir- 
ginea, Polycarpa atomaria, P. goreensis Mchlsn., P. obscura Hell., 
P. pomaria Sav., P. spongiabilis Traust., P. variabilis, Pyura japonica 
Traust., P. spinijera (Q. u. Q.), P. squamulosa, P. stolonijera (Hell.). 



526 PROCEEDINGS OF THE. NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

P. tesselata, P. trita Sluit., IStyela gibbsii, S. gyrosa, S. loveni (Sars), 
S. plicata Lsr., Styelopsis grossularia van Beneden, Tethyum plicatum, 
T. rusticum. 
Specimens examined: 

Massachusetts 
From ascidiaD: 

Woods Hole, dredged in 6 fms., July 25, 1924, C. B. Wilson, 2 females. 
Florida 

From fStyela plicata (Lesueur): 

Hurricane Harbor, Biscayne Key, growing on submerged test blocks, Mar. 
23, 1950, L. B. Isham, 25-plus specimens. 
Bermuda 

From S. plicata: 

G. Hawes, 2 specimens. 

Description: This species has been thoroughly illustrated by 
Canu (1892, pis. 8, 9) and G. Sars (1921, pi. 20). The American speci- 
mens conform well to the illustrations presented by Sars, except for 
minor features brought out in the description below. 

Female: General features: The body is rather elongate, modified 
by the great expansion accommodating the brood sack. The pentam- 
erous metasome includes the head, subequal free thoracic segments 
of the first to third swimming legs, and the inflated incubatory segment 
of the fourth legs. The urosome is 6-segmented. The somite of the 
fifth legs is apparently urosomal, although the anterodorsal portion is 
associated with the structure of the brood sack. The caudal rami are 
moderately short and simple in structure, with reduced armature. 
The apex of the head is produced midventrally as the well-developed 
rostrum. 

Head appendages: The antennule is 8-segmented, with rather 
feebly developed setation. The two basal segments are the longest 
and by far the stoutest. A sharp taper brings about a graduated 
reduction of the mass of the proximal segments, so that the diameter 
of segment 6 is only a fourth or less of that of the first segment. 
The diameter of the two distal segments is subequal and the major 
differentiation of these in dimension is in length. Segment 7 is 
subquadrate and segment 8 is nearly twice as long as that preceding. 
In specimens from Florida, the antennule is 9-segmented, the terminal 
segment subdividing into two equal, subquadrate units. No seta of 
the appendage is particularly long, but the general armature is a 
weakly developed one for a species of Doropygus. 

The 3-segmented antenna is slender. The basal segment is the 
longest and is relatively slim and linear. The second segment is 
relatively long, although it is the shortest segment of the appendage. 
The outline is mainly linear, although each margin is slightly convex. 
The distal segment is long and slender, the length approximating 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 527 

four times the greatest width. The margins are more or less linear, 
the inner somewhat sinuate. The terminal articulated hook is a 
relatively large one. It is accompanied by two reduced setae inserted 
near the articulation of the hook. 

The mandible consists of a 2-segmented protopodite and well- 
developed rami. The coxa is produced medially as the masticatory 
process. The basipodite is relatively short, and its armature consists 
of a single well-developed seta inserted terminally on the medial 
margin. The articulation of the endopodite is apical on the basipodite. 
This ramus is 2-segmented, the segments subequal and relatively 
good-sized. The basal segment bears a row of four graduated setae 
closely spaced and inserted at the medial distal corner. A comple- 
ment of eight graduated setae form a marginal row, closely spaced, 
applied to the medial and apical margins of the distal segment. This 
row starts at a point on the medial margin about a fourth of the length 
of the segment distal from its articulation and the row extends around 
to the distal lateral corner of the sub quadrate segment. Sars depicts 
a considerably more reduced setation for his Norwegian specimens. 

The exopodite articulates on a wide emargination extending along 
the distal half of the lateral rim of the basis. The exopodite is 
well-developed and fairly long. It is obscurely 4-segmented. The 
armature consists of four well-developed setae, regularly inserted 
along the distal medial half and apex of the segment. All the setae 
of the mandible are plumose. A specimen from Woods Hole differs 
from the remaining American examples by the presence of a minute 
setule accompanying the apical seta. 

The protopodite of the maxillule shows a considerable degree of 
coalescence, with no clear indication of the fundamental plan of its 
segmentation. The proximal endite is the usual flaring lobe set with 
a masticatory row of nine setae of varying dimensions. A second 
endite is represented by a narrowly triangular process extending along 
the apex of the proximal endite. The epipodite is reduced to a slight 
prominence bearing a well-developed principal seta accompanied by a 
rudimentary auxiliary setule. The plane of coalescence of the coxal 
portion of the protopodite with the basis is displaced to proceed al- 
most longitudinally. The three long subequal setae assignable to the 
basipodite are inserted in a row along a truncate margin which is the 
distal boundary of the protopodite. The result of alteration of ori- 
entation is that both endopodite and exopodite are directed lateral^. 
The small endopodite bears two setae. Of the four setae of the exopo- 
dite, a long proximal seta is well developed, with the remaining three 
somewhat reduced. 

The slender maxilla is pentamerous. The protopodite is a single 

422202—58 5 



528 PROCEEDINGS OF THE, NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 10; 

segment bearing four rudimentary endites. The proximal process, 
doubtless representing an endite, is armed with three setae arranged 
in a characteristic row along a line at right angles to the axis of the 
appendage. Endite 2 has a single seta. Endite 3 bears a pair of 
equal setae. Endite 4 is the most produced and prominent and bears 
two subequal setae. The second segment bears two subequal setae 
and a vestigial setule. The distal seta, shorter and more rigid than 
its companion, is the homologue of the heavy claw-process of other 
genera. Segments 3 and 4 bear a single seta each. The terminal 
segment has three apical setae. 

The maxilliped is obsoletely bimerous. The gnathal margin bears 
a proximal quartet and a distal quintet of setae. The distal, reduced 
segment is articulated somewhat subapically and laterally on the basal 
segment. The armature of the distal segment consists of two long, 
subequal setae. 

Swimming legs: In the first legs the protopodite is extensive. The 
intercoxal plate is reduced almost to extinction. The coxa is ample, 
subquadrate; it bears a medial seta which extends slightly beyond the 
midpoint of the proximal segment of the exopodite. The distal margin 
of the basipodite is much indented to accommodate the articulations 
of the rami. The medial margin of the basipodite culminates in an 
expanded base supporting the usual articulated spine. This spine 
reaches to a point at about a level with the proximal third of the 
second segment of the endopodite. The usual lateral seta of the basi- 
podite is fairly long and conspicuously expanded basally. 

The major ornamentation of the trimerous exopodite consists of six 
spines and six setae. The basal segment bears a lateral spine, nearly 
distally directed, and a medial seta. The second segment bears a 
lateral spine and a medial seta. Of the four spines of the distal seg- 
ment three are ranged along the lateral margin and one is apical. Of 
the setae of this segment, one is apical and three are inserted along 
the medial margin. The most basal and most distal spines are the 
longest and stoutest. The remaining four are subequal; that of the 
second segment is shortest. 

The trimerous endopodite is ornamented with a single medial seta 
on the basal segment, a single medial seta on the second segment, and 
six setae on the distal segment. The disposition of these setae is as 
a medial row of three, two apical and one near the midpoint of the 
lateral margin. 

The 2-segmented protopodites of the second legs are much extended. 
Most of the production is in the coxa. An intercoxal plate is present, 
but it is reduced. The inner coxal seta is a well-developed one and 
reaches well beyond the tip of the endopodite. The basis bears no 
readily detectable armature. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 529 

The exopodite is trimerous. All the elements of the armature 
markedly exhibit the general qualities of setae, although those in 
positions usually occupied by spines on appendages homologous to 
this are somewhat differentiated from the remainder and in the main 
lack the ciliation usually occurring in setae. The basal segment bears 
a medial typical seta and a lateral seta which occupies the position 
of the usual spine. The second segment bears a lateral and a medial 
seta. The distal segment bears three lateral setae, two apical setae, 
and four medial setae. 

The endopodite is bimerous with strong indication of fusion of two 
elements to form the distal segment. The proximal segment bears 
one medial seta. The armature of the distal segment is composed of 
four setae along the medial margin, two apical setae, one seta set 
sub terminally on the lateral margin, and one distinctly lateral seta. 

The protopodite of the third leg very much resembles that in the 
second legs. The intercoxal plate is vestigial. The medial coxal 
seta is long, extending considerably beyond the endopodite. The 
basis bears no armature. 

The armature of the trimerous exopodite consists of setae and the 
elongate setalike modifications of the usual spines. The basal seg- 
ment bears a seta on the medial distal corner and one on the lateral 
distal corner. The second segment is similarly ornamented. The 
third segment bears three setae on the lateral margin, two apical 
setae, and four setae along the medial margin. 

The endopodite is bimerous and the distal segment is somewhat 
produced. The basal segment bears a single medial seta. The distal 
segment has a medial row of four setae, two apical setae, one sub- 
terminal lateral seta, and a lateral seta. 

The fourth legs exhibit the prolongation of the protopodites which 
occurs in the two preceding pairs. The intercoxal plate is indiscern- 
ible. The distal medial seta of the coxa exceeds the endopodite. 

The exopodite is trimerous and the armature consists of slender 
setae. The basal segment bears a lateral and a medial seta. Segment 
2 has a lateral seta and a medial seta. The distal segment has two 
lateral setae, two apical setae, and four medial setae, these eight 
members crowded into a compact row around the distal third of the 
segment. 

The endopodite is bimerous. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta. The distal segment bears three medial setae, three 
apical setae, and one lateral seta inserted at the distal third of the 
segment. 

Short rows of minute spinules ornament the bases of some of the 
setae and portions of the margins of the segments of all the four pairs 
of swimming legs. 



530 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The fifth legs are Dimerous. The 
homology of the protopodite here is not clear. The distal segment is 
elongate. The lateral margin is roughly linear, the medial margin is 
characterized by a series of emarginations. Complications of the 
integumentary structure form three characteristic spinule-like orna- 
mentations of the emarginations. Two subequal setae are borne at 
the apex of the segment, the more medial markedly stouter and 
somewhat shorter. There are a few short spinules set just subapically 
on the median margin. 

The length of each caudal ramus is roughly 4% times its greatest 
width. The margins are rather smooth and there is a gentle taper to 
the rounded apex. There are four roughly equal, reduced apical 
setae. The lengths of the setae are about two-thirds the apical 
width of the ramus. 

Male: No adult males were available in the present series of ex- 
amples. Sars figured the habitus of the male and noted that in 
structural features of the appendages there is little disparity between 
the sexes. 

Remarks: The recorded distribution of this species is the most 
widespread so far compiled for a notodelphyid. The list of hosts is 
also the most diverse and extensive known. Lang has pointed out 
that some of the variants described are probably specifically distinct 
forms. However, the verification of the record must await the inten- 
sive study of variation in a local population, coupled with investiga- 
tion of a series representative of the extent of distribution. Present 
collections are too incomplete for this procedure to be followed practi- 
cally as yet. 

Doropygus laticornis Wilson 

Figure 4 

Doropygus laticornis Wilson, 1932, pp. 388-389, pi. 1, fig. c, pi. 24, figs, a-g (type 
locality Woods Hole, Mass., in Molgula manhattensis (DeKay)). — Gray, 
1938, p. 261— Pearse, 1947, pp. 8-9, figs. 32-35.— Lang, 1948, p. 6.— Sewell, 
1949, p. 157. 

Specimens examined: 

Massachusetts 

From M. manhattensis: 

Woods Hole, July 22, 1924, C. B. Wilson, holotypic female, 5 female paratypes. 
From Styela partita (Stimpson): 

Off Martha's Vineyard, dredged in 3-12 fms., July 1875, U. S. Fish Comm., 3 
females. 
North Carolina 

From Styela plicata (Lesueur) : 

Fisheries Institute Pier, Bogue Sound, Morehead City, from pilings neor 
surface at low tide, Feb. 14, 1951, W. H. Sutcliffe, Jr., 60-plus females. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 531 

Florida 

From S. plicata: 

Lemon Bay, Englewood, May 13, 1950, H. J. Humm, 20-plus females. 
Gulf of Mexico, 3^ miles southwest of Longboat Pass, Sarasota Bay, dredged 

in 5-6 fms., Mar. 24, 1951, J. B. Knight, 30-plus females. 
Alligator Harbor, Franklin County, Apr. 10, 1950, H. J. Humm, 5 specimens. 
From Bostrichobranchus digonas Abbott: 

Peace River estuary, Charlotte Harbor, stranded on beach, Sept. 18, 1950, 
J. C. Galloway, 15-plus females. 
From Molgula occidentalis Traustedt: 
Port St. Joe, November 1935, A. S. Pearse, 9 females. 

Description: Female (figs. 4,a-o): General features: This species 
is a medium-sized Doropygus, considerably inflated, and with a rela- 
tively plastic body habitus (fig. 4,a). The integument often is very 
flexible, and distortion of the body in preserved specimens is com- 
monly observed. The pentamerous metasome includes the head, 
three free thoracic somites, and the enlarged incubatory segment. 
In some specimens the brood sack has been noted to encroach con- 
siderably into the third free segment. The urosome (fig. 4,6) is 
6-segmented, and can be dissected free of the urosome preserving 
attachment of the somite of the fifth legs. The caudal rami are 
elongate, and an extreme variant of the species has the longest rami of 
any American notodelphyid. 

Head appendages: The obscurely 9-segmented antenule (fig. 4,c) 
is only slightly inflated basally. The first two segments are scarcely 
wider than long and the two together exhibit a uniform slight distal 
taper. The third, fourth, fifth, and sixth segments are each succes- 
sively slightly diminished in width, telescope-wise. The terminal 
four segments participate in a fairly uniform taper from the base of 
the sixth segment. The articulations of the last three segments in 
the appendage are variable ones, with a tendency toward suppression 
of the last two joints. The insertion of the first segment on the head 
involves a wide area of articulation, which can be readily dissected 
away from the head with the appendage. 

The armature of the antennule consists of varyingly reduced setae. 
From a single representative specimen the following approximation of 
a representative setation pattern was formulated : segment 1-3 setae : 
2-12; 3-4 ; 4-4 ; 5-3 ; 6-3 ; 7-1 ; 8-3 ; 9-5. Notably stout and elongated 
setae are borne on the first, fifth, sixth, seventh, and ninth segments. 
Only two setae of the first segment, one of the second, and the long 
seta of the sixth segment are plumose. 

The trimerous antenna (fig. 4,<f) is stout and compact. The posture 
is a right-angled flexure. The basal segment is the longest. At the 
distal corner innermost at the flexure there is a slight prominence 
furnishing insertion for a pair of much reduced setules. The unorna- 



532 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

mented second segment is slightly longer than wide. The outer margin 
is a slight convex curve. The inner margin is characterized by a 
semicircular bulge occupying the central half. The third segment is 
long and slender. Terminally articulated is a curved, tapered hook. 
Three setae are inserted near the base of the hook. Three more setae 
are inserted superficially at the distal third of the segment, near 
the outer margin. Near the outer margin at the proximal third is 
inserted a much reduced setule. 

The coxopodite of the mandible (fig. 4,e) is produced medially 
to form a flattened masticatory lamella. Along the inner border of 
this plate are four markedly subequal tooth-like projections, a ser- 
rated blade expanse, and two short setiform projections. The 
basipodite and rami constitute a setiferous palp (fig. 4= J) with indica- 
tions of segmentation considerably suppressed. A single seta is 
inserted on the medial margin of the basipodite slightly subterminally. 
The bimerous endopodite is somewhat tapered, forming in outline a 
truncated cone. Four setae are inserted in a distal row on the medial 
margin of the proximal segment. The armature of the apical segment 
consists of nine graduated setae arranged along the distal three- 
fourths of the medial margin and the whole of the distal border. A 
trio of these forms a rather compact lateral distal group. 

The segmentation of the exopodite is much modified, with a dis- 
tinctive arrangement of the four close-set setae. The unornamented 
basal segment is very long. The next four segments are short, much 
coalesced and each bears a distally inserted seta. This setiferous 
portion forms a terminal unit which proximally is somewhat enveloped 
by a flare-like expansion of the basal segment. 

The protopodite of the maxillule (fig. 4,g) is somewhat obscurely 
demarcated into two segments. The basal segment bears two endites 
and an epipodite. The proximal endite expands to provide a long 
medial margin ornamented with nine variously developed masticatory 
setae. The second endite is a projection which furnishes a very wide 
insertion for a single elongate tapering setiform process. The margins 
of the process are ciliated. The epipodite is a subquadrate projection 
bearing a long, stout seta proximally and a distal reduced accessory 
setule. 

The basipodite is produced medially as a broad lobe on which are 
inserted three slender, tapering, subequal setae. The endopodite 
bears three setae, two inserted along the distal margin and one medial. 
The exopodite bears three setae, inserted with close-set bases along 
the distal border of the ramus. 

The pentamerous maxilla (fig. 4,h) forms in outline an elongated 
triangle. The medial margin of the basal segment is produced into 
four setiferous endites. The proximal endite bears three setae, their 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — 1LLG 533 

bases transversely inserted in a close-spaced row. The second endite 
bears one seta. The third endite bears two equal setae. The 
fourth endite is well developed, exhibiting a subquadrate outline. 
Terminally inserted on it are two long, subequal setae accompanied 
by a setule. The second segment bears distally and medially a 
similar, subquadrate endite. The armature of this consists of two 
long setae and a reduced setule. The third segment is subquadrate 
in outline. Inserted at the distal medial corner is a single long 
seta. The fourth segment is subquadrate, with nearly parallel 
margins except for a slight distal medial projection furnishing insertion 
for a single long seta. The terminal segment is the smallest. It 
bears three subequal setae inserted apically. 

The obscurely bimerous maxilliped (fig. 4,i) is a flattened, short, 
stout appendage. The basal segment is about 1% times as long as 
wide with parallel margins. The distal medial border forms a semi- 
circular curve. Two groups of setae are inserted medially. The 
basal group consists of three setae inserted on the margin. The 
distal group consists of four setae arranged in a row around the distal 
medial curve. A fifth seta is inserted on the surface of the segment 
just proximal to the ultimate seta of the row. The second segment is 
much reduced, articulated diagonally and markedly subapically on the 
distal lateral corner of the basal segment. There are two long setae 
inserted apically on the vestigial second segment. 

Swimming legs: The first legs (fig. 4j) consist of bimerous protop- 
odites and trimerous rami. A well-developed intercoxal plate yokes 
the coxopodites. Inserted at the distal medial corner of the coxa 
is a long seta which extends to the distal margin of the second segment 
of the endopodite. The lateral marginal seta usually found on the 
basipodite of related species is here somewhat modified. On a 
greatly expanded basal half, the terminal half is set, preserving more 
usual setiform dimensions. Articulated on a strongly projecting 
base formed by the lateral distal corner of the basipodite is a stout 
tapered spine which reaches almost to the distal margin of the second 
segment of the endopodite. The basal segment of the exopodite 
bears a long, stout, tapered, lateral spine and a long medial seta. 
The second segment bears a lateral spine of about half the dimensions 
of that of the first segment and a medial seta. The third segment 
bears three nearly equal lateral spines about the size of the lateral 
spline on the second segment, an apical spine very slightly larger 
than that of the first segment, an apical seta, and three medial setae. 

The two proximal segments of the endopodite each bear a medial 
seta. The distal segment bears three medial setae, two apical setae, 
and a lateral seta inserted in an emargination at about the midpoint 
of the edge of the segment. All setae of the first leg are plumose. 



534 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE; NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 




Figure 4. — Doropygus laticornis Wilson, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, urosome, c, 
antennule; d, antenna; e, masticatory lamella of mandible; /, palp of mandible; g, 
maxillule; h, maxilla; i, maxilliped; /, first leg; k, second leg; /, third leg; m, fourth leg; 
n, fifth leg; o, caudal ramus. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 535 

The protopodites of the second legs (fig. 4,k) are yoked by a much 
reduced intercoxal plate. The coxopodites are elongated laterally 
so that the basal and distal articulations are divergent diagonals. 
Inserted on the distal medial corner of each coxa is a large, plumose 
seta extending well beyond the tip of the endopodite. 

All the elements of the armature of the trimerous exopodite are of 
setiform construction, although proximally on the lateral margin 
these are short and somewhat rigid. All the lateral setae, the apical 
seta, and the one most distal medial seta lack plumose ciliation. The 
basal two segments each bear one lateral and one medial seta. The 
lateral seta of the basal segment is about equal in length to the 
segment. The lateral seta of the second segment slightly exceeds 
the segment. The distal segment bears three relatively short lateral 
setae, two long apical setae, and four long medial setae. All the 
segments of the exopodite are somewhat broadened. 

The endopodite is bimerous but with strong indication of suppressed 
subdivision of the elongate distal segment. The proximal segment 
bears a single medial seta. The second segment bears five medial 
setae, two apical setae, and a lateral seta inserted at the distal third 
of the margin of the segment. Long spinules form rows on both 
segments of the endopodite and on the basipodite. 

The third leg (fig. 4,1) consists of a bimerous protopodite, trimerous 
exopodite, and bimerous endopodite. Inserted on the distal medial 
margin of the coxopodite is a slender seta which extends to the 
proximal third of the second segment of the endopodite. The lateral 
marginal seta of the basipodite is reduced. 

Each of the two proximal segments of the exopodite bears a short 
lateral seta (rather than a spine) and a medial seta. The distal 
segment bears three lateral setae, two apical setae, and four medial 
setae. All the segments of the exopodite are broadened and flattened. 
The basal segment is largest, nearly equaling the combined extent 
of the distal segment. 

The endopodite extends to the level of the distal third of the 
exopodite. The proximal segment of the endopodite bears a single 
medial seta. The second segment bears five medial setae, two apical 
setae, and a lateral seta inserted at the distal third of the margin 
of the segment. A curved row of stout spinules ornaments the distal 
lateral corner of the first segment. A parallel row starts on the 
lateral margin of the second segment at the proximal one-third and 
continues on over the surface of the segment for most of its width. 
The four more proximal medial setae of the exopodite are plumose; 
all the setae of the endopodite except the terminal quartet are 
plumose. 



536 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The fourth leg (fig. 4,m) consists of a bimerous protopodite, trim- 
erous exopodite, and bimerous endopodite. The segments of the 
protopodite are elongate and the articulation between them is dis- 
placed to run diagonally. Inserted on the distal medial corner of 
each coxa is a seta which extends about to the proximal fourth of 
the basal segment of the endopodite. The lateral marginal seta 
of the basipodite is somewhat reduced. 

The segments of the exopodite are broadened and flattened. The 
basal segment is about equal to the combined extents of the two 
distal segments. The first segment bears a short lateral setiform 
spine and a medial seta. The second segment bears a similarly seti- 
form spine and a medial seta. The third segment bears two short, 
lateral, setiform spines, an apical, much-elongated, heavy seta and 
an accompanying slender seta, and four medial setae. Only the 
medial seta of the first and second segments and the two proximal 
setae of the third segment are furnished with plumose cilia tion. 

The first segment of the endopodite bears a medial seta, which 
is slightly longer than the endopodite. The second segment bears 
four medial setae, two apical setae (the more lateral much shortened 
and rather stout), and a short stout seta inserted at the distal third 
of the lateral margin. A row of spinules is set along the distal lateral 
corner of the basal segment. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The fifth legs (fig. 4,n) are bimerous. 
The basal segment is unusually narrow, very slightly wider than long, 
tapering inward somewhat apically. On the distal medial corner and 
extending nearly to the lateral margin there is a row of numerous fine 
spinules. There is a well-developed lateral seta. 

The second segment is slightly more than four times as long as wide, 
the slight distal taper being provided mainly by the curving lateral 
margin. There is a slender seta apically inserted, and slightly sub- 
terminal on the segment. At the distal point of the inner margin there 
is a slightly shorter, much stouter, curved seta. Five or six clusters of 
fine spinules are regularly arranged along the distal half of the medial 
margin. 

The caudal rami (fig. 4,o) are long, slender, and markedly tapered. 
The apical width is a third of the basal, and the widest point of the 
ramus is at the proximal third. The length is five times the greatest 
width. There are four relatively well-developed setae arrayed across 
the apex. The longest of these slightly exceeds the greatest width of 
the segment. A seta of about half this length is inserted on the lateral 
margin at the proximal fourth. A similar seta is superficially inserted, 
nearly medially, just proximal to the terminal third. 

No male was available for the present study. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — 1LLG 537 

Kemarks: Of 19 females of this species collected at Morehead City, 
N. C, Feb. 14, 1951, 7 were immature in the last or next to last 
stadium, 12 had fully developed, empty brood sacks and the oviducts 
contained full-sized eggs. The eggs were rich salmon in color, closely 
matching the interior of the host, and the all-over color effect of the 
females was a flesh pink with salmon intensification along the oviduct. 
No coloration of the intestine was detected. Wilson recorded the 
color of this species at Woods Hole as yellowish. 

The range of variations of this species as it occurs through its several 
hosts should be subjected to intensive study. An extremely great size 
range was noted in the present series. It seems possible that correlat- 
ing other slight anatomical variations with distributional data might 
serve to provide a further taxonomic subdivision. 

Doropygus demissus AuriviUius 

Figure 5 

Doropygus demissus AuriviUius, 1885a, pp. 230-233, pi. 7, figs. 14-24 (type locality, 
off Pitlekaj, Siberia, in Cynthia echinata Linnaeus) ; 1885b, p. 282. — Hartmeyer, 
1911, p. 1734.— Schellenberg, 1922, p. 240.— Wilson, 1920, p. 14. 

Specimens examined: 

Siberia 

From Boltenia echinata (Linn.): 

Plover Bay, Bering Sea, U. S. Coast Survey, W. H. Dall, 3 females. 
Alaska 

From B. echinata: 

Off Point Barrow Base, Aug. 30, 1949, G. E. MacGinitie, 2 females. 
Off Point Barrow Base, Sept. 6, 1949, G. E. MacGinitie, 6 females. 
Off Point Barrow Base, Oct. 14, 1949, G. E. MacGinitie, 1 female. 
Off Point Barrow Base, Sept. 6, 1950, G. E. MacGinitie, 2 females. 
The Alaskan specimens were collected by G. E. MacGinitie while working for 
the Office of Naval Research as Scientific Director, Arctic Research Laboratory, 
through contracts with the California Institute of Technology and The Johns 
Hopkins University. 
Canada 

From B. ovifera (Linn.) : 

St. Lawrence Estuary, 1929, G. Prefontaine, 8 females. 
Maine 
From Ascidia prunum Mueller: 

Lat. 42°25 , 40 ,/ N., long. 60°08'35" W., dredged in 12 fms., Aug. 31, 1883, 
Albatross Station 2064, 8 females. 

Description: Female (fig. 5,a-p): General features: This species 
is a large, stout, trim copepod. The body is much inflated. The 
5-segmented metasome (fig. 5,<x) includes the head, three free thoracic 
segments, and the greatly expanded incubatory complex. The 
urosome is 6-segmented. The frontal margin of the head is midven- 
trally produced as a stout, blunt rostrum. 



538 PROCEEDINGS OF THE; NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 5,6) is distinctly 9-segmented 
and relatively slender. There is a marked basal expansion but this 
is developed to a considerably less degree than in nearly allied species. 
The two proximal segments are long and of fairly uniform thickness 
over the combined lengths. Each of the next four segments is char- 
acterized by a marked diminution of thickness from that of the pre- 
ceding segment. The seventh segment is constricted basally but its 
maximum width is nearly as great as that of the sixth segment. The 
eighth and ninth segments are about of equal width. The majority 
of the setae lack ciliation. However, long plumose setae form dis- 
tinctive features of the first, second, fourth, fifth, and sixth segments. 
The plumose seta of the sixth segment is the longest and stoutest 
of the entire appendage. 

The setation of a representative specimen provides an approximation 
of that usual for the species: Segment 1-3 setae; 2-10 plus; 3-5; 
4-3; 5-4; 6-4; 7-2; 8-2; 9-5. 

The margins of the long, slender basal segment of the trimerous 
antenna (fig. 5,c) are nearly parallel. Distally on this segment toward 
the inner side of the flexure of the appendage there is a short promi- 
nence with two fine filamentous apical projections which correspond 
to reduced setules. The second segment is slightly curved, so that 
its outer margin is much longer than the inner, and the articulations 
are somewhat diagonal. The distal portion of the inner margin 
expands prominently in a bulge approaching a semicircular outline. 
The distal segment is long and slender with nearly parallel margins. 
Articulated apically on this segment is a stout tapered curved hook. 
The hook has a characteristic, somewhat flexed posture and is ter- 
minated with a flangelike flare of the integument rather than the usual 
sharp point. Three rather reduced setae are inserted near the 
articulation of the hook. Just beyond the distal half of the segment 
there are inserted the close-set bases of two setae which are held 
closely appressed along the surface of the segment. 

The coxopodite of the mandible (fig. 5,d) is extended medially to 
form a flattened masticatory blade. The inner margin of this blade 
is differentiated as five tooth-like prominences, a short saw-edge, 
and two setiform projections. The basipodite and the rami form a 
setiferous palp. The single seta of the basipodite is inserted sub- 
terminally on the medial margin. The basal segment of the bimerous 
endopodite is ornamented with four graduated setae which are 
arranged around the distal medial corner. The distalmost of these 
setae is very long and protrudes beyond the distal end of the terminal 
segment of the endopodite for slightly over twice again the length 
of that segment. Ten setae form an inverted L-shaped row along 
the major portion of the medial margin and all the terminal border 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 539 

of the second segment of the endopodite. The exopodite is a rel- 
atively short, distinctly stocky cone, indistinctly bimerous. An 
apical trio of subequal setae ornaments the distal segment. A long 
seta is inserted at the midpoint of the anatomically medial margin 
of the basal segment and another seta is set at the distal medial corner 
of this segment. 

The protopodite of the maxillule (fig. 5,e) presents an aspect sug- 
gesting distinct subdivision into coxopodite and basipodite. The 
proximal segment bears two endites and the epipodite. The basal 
endite is wide-flaring medially and its inner margin is armed with a 
close-set row of nine masticatory setae of varying proportions. Just 
distal to this endite, and much obscured by the overlying distal- 
medial flare of the basal endite, is a prominence representing 
the second endite. This is produced as an elongate, flat, tapering 
blade, expanded basally. The margins are profusely ciliated. The 
epipodite is represented by a slight prominence bearing a long, stout, 
curved seta and a reduced accessory tapering setule. The seta is 
proximally directed. The basipodite has the medial margin displaced 
distally and laterally. The lateral margin is reduced to obsolescence. 
There are three graduated setae inserted on the anatomically medial 
margin of the basis and they are directed distally. The rami are so 
disposed as to project almost laterally. The endopodite bears three 
setae, two inserted along the medial margin and one apical. The 
exopodite bears three stout setae inserted fan-wise along the wide 
outer margin in specimens examined which were found associated with 
Boltenia echinata from Point Barrow, Alaska. Specimens obtained 
from Boltenia ovifera, from the St. Lawrence estuary, Canada, were 
characterized by the presence of a wisp of a setule inserted between the 
bases of the two farthest lateral setae of the ramus (fig. 5,/). In 
specimens taken from Boltenia echinata from Plover Bay, Siberia, the 
exopodite (fig. b,g) bears four well-developed setae. Otherwise 
specimens from the three localities correspond with each other 
extremely closely. The setation of the maxillular exopodite has been 
held as a fairly distinctive feature in notodelphyid species. The 
significance of the transitional series in the present material is not 
readily apparent. 

The pentamerous maxilla (fig. 5,h) is a much-flattened structure 
with a very slender, tapering triangular outline. The basal segment 
is a truncated cone with the basal width roughly twice that at the 
distal articulation. The medial margin of this segment is elaborated 
into four setiferous endites. The proximal endite bears three setae 
with their bases transversely inserted. The second endite bears a 
single seta. The third endite bears two equal setae. The fourth 
endite is much produced and it bears two equal setae and a minute 



540 



PROCEEDINGS' OF THE, NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 




Figure 5. — Doropygus demissus Aurivillius, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, antennule; c, 
antenna; d, mandible; e, maxillule;/, exopodite of maxillule with rudimentary seta; g, 
exopodite of maxillule bearing four setae; h, maxilla; i, maxilliped; /, first leg; k, spine 
from exopodite of first leg; /, second leg; m, third leg; n, fourth leg; o, fifth leg; p, caudal 
ramus. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 541 

accessory setule. The second segment is about as long as broad and is 
produced medially as a single endite. The armature of this consists 
of a stout, spiniform process, a typical seta, and a short accessory 
setule. The spiniform process, somewhat shorter than the seta, pre- 
serves in its marked sclerotization, slightly reduced length, and 
serrate proximal margin strong indication that it is the homologue of 
the usual stout hook-process of this segment in most other noto- 
delphyid species. Each of the succeeding two segments bears a single 
distal medial seta. The terminal segment bears three apical setae, 
and a fourth seta inserted superficially near the base of the segment. 
The terminal complex of three segments is much elongated, the com- 
bined lengths equaling fully twice the length of the second segment. 
The fourth segment contributes mainly to this arrangement, its 
length being twice its width. 

The bimerous maxilliped (fig. 5,i) is much flattened, short and 
stout in outline. The basal segment bears two groups of setae. Five 
setae are disposed around the distal medial margin. A second group 
of four setae are inserted near the midpoint of the medial margin. 
Displaced far laterally on the surface of the segment is the insertion of 
one differentiated seta in each of the two groups. These setae are 
stout, heavily sclerotized, disposed in a characteristic curve and 
ornamented with a profuse ciliation. The distal segment is a stout, 
short, truncated cone, articulated at the distal lateral corner of the 
basal segment. Its two apical setae are subequal, long, plumose. 
Medial to the insertion of this second segment the distal margin of the 
first segment is ornamented by a number of distinctive, long, stout 
hairs, which form a row extending to near the base of the terminal 
seta of the segment. The optical effect of these hairs when they are 
at all matted together and superficially viewed is remarkably like that 
of a short plumose seta inserted on the medial margin of the distal 
segment. Such a structure was depicted by Aurivillius in the illus- 
trations accompanying the original description of this species. It is 
proposed that this feature was based upon such an error of observa- 
tion. 

Swimming legs: The first legs (fig. 5,j) consist of bimerous proto- 
podites and trimerous rami. The coxopodites are yoked by an inter- 
coxal plate, triangular in outline and heavily sclerotized, particularly 
at the apex. Inserted on the distal medial corner of the coxa is a long, 
profusely ciliated seta which extends to the distal margin of the endo- 
podite. The armature of the basipodite consists of a medial spine. 
This spine, inserted at the distal medial corner of the basis, is stout 
and tapered, extending to the distal margin of the second segment of 
the endopodite. 



542 PROCEEDINGS OF THE, NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The segments of the exopodite are constricted basally. The two 
proximal segments bear each a lateral spine and medial seta. The 
distal segment bears three lateral spines, an apical spine and seta, and 
three medial setae. The spines of the exopodite are subequal, except 
that the terminal spine of the distal segment is half again as long as the 
next longest. Each spine (fig. 5,k) is stout, tapered, and provided 
with a narrow, unusually finely serrate marginal transparent flange. 
The margin of each segment proximal to the insertion of the spine, or 
set of spines, is markedly spinulose. 

The two proximal segments of the endopodite each bear a medial 
seta. The distal segment bears three medial setae, two apical setae, 
and a lateral seta which is inserted in an emargination at about the 
midpoint. All the setae of the endopodite are plumose. Stout 
spinules are set in rows along the lateral two-thirds of the distal mar- 
gin of each of the two proximal segments of the endopodite. 

The protopodite of the second leg (fig. 5,1) is produced and nar- 
rowed, with regularly transverse articulation of coxa and basis. The 
intercoxal plate of other species is here obsolescent. At the distal 
medial corner of the coxa is inserted a very long, plumose seta which 
extends almost to the midpoint of the distal segment of the endopodite. 

The basal segment of the trimerous exopodite is elongated and bears 
a lateral seta and a medial seta. The second segment has a lateral and 
a medial seta. The distal segment bears three lateral setae, two 
apical setae, and four medial setae. All the lateral setae and the 
outer distal one are in positions usually occupied by spines, but these 
members are thoroughly setiform, with the only distinctive feature a 
slightly reduced length. 

The bimerous endopodite extends slightly beyond the exopodite. 
The basal segment bears a single medial seta. The elongate distal 
segment is armed with five medial setae, two apical setae, and a 
lateral seta. Fine spinules provide additional armature on all the 
segments of the rami and on the basipodite. The three most basal 
medial setae of the exopodite and all but the distalmost setae of the 
endopodite are plumose. 

In the elongated bimerous protopodites of the third legs (fig. 5,ra) 
the articulation of coxa and basis is somewhat diagonal due to elonga- 
tion of the outer margin of the coxa. Inserted on the medial distal 
corner of the coxopodite is a long plumose seta which extends to the 
level of the basal third of the distal segment of the endopodite. There 
is a reduced setule inserted near the lateral margin of the basipodite. 

The segments of the trimerous exopodite are slightly broadened and 
flattened. The basal segment is well exceeded by the combined ex- 
tents of the distal two segments. The armature consists entirely of 
setiform elements. The basal segment bears a lateral seta and a 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 543 

medial seta. The second segment bears a lateral and a medial seta. 
The distal segment bears three lateral setae, two apical setae, and 
three medial setae. 

The bimerous endopodite is about equal in extent to the exopodite. 
The first segment. bears a medial seta. The long distal segment bears 
five medial setae, two apical setae, and a lateral seta inserted in an 
emargination just about at the distal fourth of the margin. Fine 
spinules arranged in curved rows and clusters furnish additional orna- 
mentation of the appendage. The most basal setae of the medial 
margin of the exopodite and all but the most apical three setae of the 
endopodite are plumose. 

The bimerous protopodite of the fourth leg (fig. 5,n) is elongated 
with a slightly diagonal articulation of the two segments produced by 
prolongation of the lateral margin of the coxopodite. Inserted on the 
distal medial corner of the coxopodite is a well-developed plumose seta 
reaching just about the midpoint of the endopodite. A minute re- 
duced seta is inserted in the short lateral margin of the basipodite. 

The three segments of the exopodite are flattened, but relatively 
slender. The basal segment is much elongated in addition so that it 
approximately equals the combined extents of the distal two segments. 
All the elements of the armature are setiform but the two most proxi- 
mal lateral ones are short. The basal segment bears only a very short 
seta, inserted at the distolateral corner and a normally long medial 
seta. The second segment bears a lateral seta, relatively short, and 
a medial seta. The distal segment bears three lateral setae, two 
apical setae, and four medial setae. 

The bimerous endopodite reaches about to the proximal third of 
the distal segment of the exopodite. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta, fairly elongate, extending beyond the tip of the ramus. 
The second segment bears four medial setae, two apical setae, and a 
lateral seta inserted at the distal fourth of the margin. Curved rows 
and patches of fine spinules furnish additional ornamentation to the 
segments of the appendage. The most proximal three medial setae 
of the exopodite and all but the apical quintet of setae of the endo- 
podite are plumose. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The fifth leg (fig. 5,o) is bimerous. 
The basal segment is longer than wide. The ornamentation consists 
of a short row of five or six fairly long spinules arranged on the surface 
of the segment near the distal medial corner. The second segment is 
about five times as long as its width at the midpoint, and markedly 
tapered. The apex is acute and is set with a slender seta. Slightly 
subapical and medial is a somewhat shorter second seta. Short rows 
of fine spinules arranged on the surface of the segment and extending 
to the medial margin furnish additional ornamentation. 

422202—58 6 



544 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The caudal rami (fig. 5,p) are slender and relatively long, about 
five times as long as their greatest width. They taper only slightly 
distally. The ornamentation is reduced to an apical group of merest 
vestiges of setules. 

No male has yet been found. 

Kemarks: The combination of circumstances presented by the dis- 
tribution of this copepod and the frequently noted host, B. echinata, 
suggest strongly that it is the form described by Aurivillius from the 
Vega collections. There are some features of the anatomy which do 
not correspond with Aurivillius' figures, but the inconsistencies could 
well be due to the lack of detail supplied in these early sketches. The 
antennule of Doropygus demissus was depicted as 13-segmented. No 
Doropygus is known with this feature and the appendage, as depicted, 
could hardly be homologized with the basic notodelphyid antennule, 
which is a remarkably consistent structure. The form of the maxil- 
liped was remarked upon under the description above. The remainder 
of Aurivillius' illustrations conform fairly well, as generalizations, to 
the structures of the present specimens. 

Doropygus demissus has not been reported since the original descrip- 
tion. Dr. Karl Lang, Director of the Invertebrate Collections at the 
Naturhistoriska Riksmuseet, Stockholm, has kindly informed me 
that Aurivillius' specimen is not in that museum, nor in that of Up- 
psala University. It is therefore concluded that this type has not 
been preserved. Accordingly, it seems entirely justifiable to apply 
the above emendations to Aurivillius' description and attach his name 
to these Arctic Boreal copepods. 

Doropygus bayeri, new species 

Figure 6 

Types.— Holotypic female, USNM 92802 (type locality, Washing- 
ton Sound, Washington, in Pyura haustor (Stimpson)); allotypic 
male, No. 92803, same collection, and paratypes listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

Washington 

From P. haustor: 

East of Upright Channel, dredged in 25-35 fms., June 22, 1950, holotypic 

female, allotypic male, 34 paratypes. 
East of Upright Channel, 25-35 fms., June 23, 1950, 65 females. 
Near Canoe Island, off Shaw Island, dredged, July 1, 1950, 43 females. 
North of east ei d of Lopez Pass, dredged, July 15, 1950, 42 females. 
British Columbia 
From Pyura sp: 

Off Cadboro Bay, dredged in 18 fms., Sept. 8, 1937, W. Williams, American 
Museum of Natural History 6926, 2 females. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 545 

California 

From fPyura sp: 

San Diego Bay, 6 fms., Mar. 31, 1896, Albatross, 18 females. 
From unidentified tunicate: 

Off National City, Jan. 29, 1889, Alboiross, 8 specimens. 

Description: Female (fig. 6,a-?i): General features: This species 
is a rather small-bodied Doropygus, with a notable tendency to in- 
flation (fig. 6, a). The segmentation is somewhat suppressed. These 
features, combined with the usual soft texture of the integument, 
frequently lead to considerable distortion in preserved specimens. 
The usual posture is a partially contracted one. The urosome is rel- 
atively pliable and usually lies in close conformation with the major 
The usual posture is a partially contracted one. The urosome is rel- 
atively pliable and usually lies in close conformation with the major 
mass of the body. 

The anteriormost portion of the head is produced ventrally as a 
substantial rostrum. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 6,6) is 9-segmented and 
relatively slender. There is a marked basal expansion but this is de- 
veloped to a considerably less degree than in nearly allied species. 
The two proximal segments are long and of fairly uniform thickness over 
the combined lengths. Each of the next four segments is characterized 
by a marked diminution of thickness from that of the preceding seg- 
ment. The seventh segment is constricted basally but its maximum 
width is nearly as great as that of the sixth segment. The eighth 
and ninth segments are about of equal width. The majority of the 
setae lack cilia tion. However, long plumose setae form distinctive 
features of the first, second, fourth, fifth, and sixth segments. The 
plumose seta of the sixth segment is the longest and stoutest of the 
entire appendage. The setation of a representative specimen pro- 
vides an approximation of that typical for the genus: Segment 1-3 
setae; 2-12 plus; 3-5; 4-5; 5-4; 6-4; 7-1; 8-3; 9-6. 

The trimerous antenna (fig. 6,c) is disposed in a nearly right-angled 
flexure. The margins of the long, slender basal segment are nearly 
parallel. Distally on this segment toward the inner side of the flexure 
there is inserted a short stublike setule with two fine filamentous 
apical projections. The second segment is slightly curved, so that its 
outer margin is much longer than the inner ; its articulations are some- 
what diagonal. The distal portion of the inner margin expands 
prominently in a bulge approaching a semicircular outline. The 
distal segment is long and slender with nearly parallel margins. 
Articulated apically on this segment is a stout tapered curved hook. 
Three rather reduced setae are inserted near the articulation of the 
hook. At the distal sixth of the segment there are inserted the close- 



546 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

set bases of two setae which are held closely appressed along the sur- 
face of the segment. 

The coxopodite of the mandible is extended medially to form a 
flattened masticatory blade (fig. 6,d). The inner margin of this blade 
is differentiated as four tooth-like prominences, a short saw-edge, and 
two setiform projections. The basipodite and the rami form a seti- 
ferous palp (fig. Q,e). The single seta of the basipodite is inserted 
subterminally on the medial margin. The basal segment of the 
bimerous endopodite is ornamented by four graduated setae which are 
arranged around the distal medial corner. Nine setae form an in- 
verted L-shaped row along the major portion of the medial margin 
and all the terminal border of the second segment of the endopodite. 
The exopodite is truncated apically with a subterminal flare, so that 
the base is constricted. The five setae are arranged as a close-set 
row across the diagonal distal margin. Segmentation of the ramus is 
obsolete, although there are some conspicuous grooves in the in- 
tegument. 

The protopodite of the maxillule (fig. 6,f) presents an aspect 
suggesting subdivision into coxopodite and basipodite. The proximal 
segment bears two endites and the epipodite. The basal endite is 
wide-flaring medially and its inner margin is armed with a close-set 
row of nine masticatory setae of varying proportions. Just distal to 
this endite, and much obscured by the overlying distal medial flare 
of the basal endite, is a prominence representing the second endite. 
This is produced as an elongate, flat, tapering blade, much-expanded 
basally. The margins are profusely ciliated. The epipodite is re- 
presented by a slight prominence bearing a long stout seta and a re- 
duced accessory setule. The seta is proximally directed. The basi- 
podite has the medial margin displaced distally and laterally. The 
lateral margin is reduced to obsolescence. There are three graduated 
setae inserted on the anatomically medial margin of the basis and they 
are directed distally. The rami are so disposed as to project almost 
laterally. The endopodite bears three setae, two inserted along the 
medial margin and one apical. The exopodite bears three stout 
setae inserted fan-wise along the wide outer margin. 

The pentamerous maxilla (fig. Q,g) is a much-flattened structure 
with a slender, tapering triangular outline. The basal segment is a 
truncated cone with the basal width 2% times that at the distal artic- 
ulation. The medial margin of this segment is elaborated into four 
setiferous endites. The proximal endite bears three setae with their 
bases transversely inserted. The second endite bears a single seta. 
The third endite bears two equal setae. The fourth endite is much 
produced and it bears two equal setae and a minute accessory setule. 
The second segment is longer than broad and is produced medially as 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 



547 




Figure 6. — Doropygus bayeri, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, antennule; c, 
antenna; d, masticatory lamella of mandible; <?, palp of mandible; /, maxillule; g, 
maxilla; h, maxilliped; i, first leg; /, second leg; k, third leg; /, fourth leg; m, fifth leg; 
n, caudal ramus. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



548 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

a single endite. The armature of this consists of two subequal setae 
and a short accessory setule. The distal seta is sclerotized and 
slightly reduced in length. Each of the succeeding two segments 
bears a single distal medial seta. The terminal segment bears three 
apical setae. 

The bimerous maxilliped (tig. Q,h) is much flattened, short and 
stout in outline. The basal segment bears two groups of setae. Five 
setae are disposed around the distal medial margin. A second group 
of four setae are inserted near the midpoint of the medial margin. 
Displaced far laterally on the surface of the segment is the insertion 
of one differentiated seta in each of the two groups. These setae 
are stout, heavily sclerotized, disposed in a characteristic curve and 
ornamented with a profuse ciliation. The distal segment is so re- 
duced as to constitute little more than a minute setiferous prominence 
at the distal lateral corner of the basal segment. Its two setae are 
subequal, long, plumose. Medial to the insertion of this second 
segment the distal margin of the first segment is ornamented by a 
number of distinctive long stout hairs which form a row extending to 
the base of the most distal seta of the segment. 

The first legs (fig. 6,i) consist of bimerous protopodites and tri- 
merous rami. The coxopodites are yoked by an intercoxal plate, 
triangular in outline and heavily sclerotized in a complicated pattern. 
Inserted on the distal medial corner of the coxa is a long, profusely 
ciliated seta which extends almost to the distal margin of the endo- 
podite. The armature of the basipodite consists of a lateral seta 
and a medial spine. The seta is long, stout basally with a constriction 
in outline at about the midpoint. It is inserted distally on the short 
lateral margin of the basis. The medial spine, inserted at the distal 
medial corner of the basis, is slender and curved, extending slightly 
beyond the distal margin of the basal segment of the endopodite. 

The segments of the exopodite are markedly constricted basally. 
The two proximal segments bear each a lateral spine and medial seta. 
The distal segment bears three lateral spines, an apical spine and seta, 
and three medial setae. 

The two proximal segments of the endopodite bear each a medial 
seta. The distal segment bears three medial setae, two apical setae, 
and a lateral seta which is inserted in an emargination at about the 
distal fourth of the segment. Rows of fine spinules form additional 
ornamentation on the segments of the rami and on the basipodite. 

The protopodites of the second legs (fig. 6j) are produced and 
narrowed. The articulation of coxa and basis is somewhat diagonal. 
A vestige of an intercoxal plate connects the basal portions of the coxo- 
podites. At the distal medial corner of the coxa is inserted a very 
long, plumose seta which extends well beyond the distal margin of the 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 549 

endopodite. A short seta is inserted near the short lateral margin 
of the basipodite. 

The basal segment of the trimerous exopodite is greatly elongated 
and bears a lateral seta and medial seta. The second segment has a 
lateral and a medial seta. The distal segment bears three lateral setae, 
two apical setae, and four medial setae. All the lateral setae and the 
outer distal one are in positions usually occupied by spines, but these 
members are thoroughly setiform, with the only distinctive feature a 
slightly reduced length. 

The bimerous endopodite is not quite as long as the exopodite. The 
basal segment bears a single medial seta. The elongate second seg- 
ment is armed with five medial setae, two apical setae, and a lateral 
seta. Fine spinules provide additional armature on all the segments 
of the rami and on the basipodite. 

The elongated bimerous protopodites of the third legs (fig. Q,k) are 
united by a vestigial intercoxal plate. The articulation of coxa and 
basis is somewhat diagonal, due to elongation of the outer margin of 
the coxa. Inserted on the medial distal corner of the coxopodite is 
a long seta which extends just beyond the tip of the endopodite. 
There is a reduced seta inserted near the lateral margin of the basi- 
podite. 

The segments of the trimerous exopodite are broadened and 
flattened. The basal segment about equals the combined extents of 
the distal two segments. The armature consists entirely of setiform 
elements. The basal segment bears a single lateral seta. The second 
segment bears a lateral and a medial seta. The distal segment bears 
three lateral setae, two apical setae, and four medial setae. 

The bimerous endopodite reaches just beyond the distal margin of 
the second segment of the exopodite. The first segment bears a medial 
seta. The long distal segment bears five medial setae, two apical 
setae, and a lateral seta inserted in an emargination just beyond the 
distal fourth of the margin. Fine spinules arranged in curved rows and 
clusters furnish additional ornamentation of the appendage. 

The bimerous protopodites of the fourth legs (fig. 6,0 are elongated 
with a diagonal articulation of the two segments produced by pro- 
longation of the lateral margin of the coxopodite. The coxae are 
united by an almost obsolete vestige of the usual intercoxal plate. 
Inserted on the distal medial corner of the coxopodite is a well- 
developed seta reaching just beyond the midpoint of the endopodite. 
A reduced seta is inserted in the short lateral margin of the basipodite. 

The three segments of the exopodite are broadened and flattened. 
The basal segment is much elongated in addition, so that it approxi- 
mately equals the combined extents of the distal two segments. All 
the elements of the armature are setiform. The basal segment bears 



550 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

only a single seta, inserted at the distolateral corner. The second 
segment bears a lateral seta and a medial seta. The distal segment 
bears two lateral setae, two apical setae, and four medial setae. 

The bimerous endopodite reaches just to the distal margin of the 
second segment of the exopodite. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta, considerably reduced, so as to be shorter than the distal 
segment. The second segment bears four medial setae, two apical 
setae, and a lateral seta inserted at the distal quarter of the margin. 
The two proximal setae are short, neither equaling the length of the 
segment. Curved rows and patches of fine spinules furnish additional 
ornamentation to the segments of the appendage. 

The fifth leg (fig. 6,m) is bimerous. The basal segment is wider 
than long and articulates somewhat diagonally with the distal seg- 
ment. The ornamentation consists of numerous short curved rows of 
fine spinules arranged on the surface of the segment near the distal 
medial corner. The second segment is about three times as long as its 
greatest width, and somewhat tapered. The apex is acute and is set 
with a short slender seta. Slightly sub apical and medial is a second 
seta of about the same dimensions. Short rows of fine spinules arranged 
on the surface of the segment and extending to the medial margin 
furnish additional ornamentation. 

The caudal rami (fig. 6, ft,) are short, about three times as long as 
their greatest width. They taper considerably distally and there is a 
strong tendency toward roughly spiral coiling of the apical third of 
the ramus. Four equal short setules are inserted on the apex. The 
setae are about equal in length to the width of the ramus at the 
insertion of the most proximal of the four setae. At the basal fifth of 
the ramus there is inserted near the lateral margin a fifth equally 
reduced seta. 

Male: There is no outstandingly notable feature in the male of 
this species. The body of course lacks the expansion occasioned by the 
presence of the brood sack in the female. The antennule remarkably 
resembles that in the female except for the possession of a stout curved 
spine inserted on the outer margin of the second segment. The 
homologue of this member, on a considerably less developed scale, is 
present in the female, however. The swimming legs resemble those 
of the female in segmentation, but in proportion and ornamentation 
they are of much more generalized cyclopoid type, although still with 
poorly differentiated spines. The setae missing on the posterior 
exopodites in the female are present in the male. The urosome is 
modified in accordance with the presence of the reproductive struc- 
tures. The sixth legs are represented by the usual bisetiferous integ- 
umentary prominences. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS ILLG 551 

Doropygus fernaldi, new species 

Figure 7 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92804 (type locality, Washington 
Sound, Washington, from Boltenia villosa (Stimpson)); allotypic male, 
No. 92805; paratypes listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

Washington 
From B. villosa: 

Upright Channel, dredged, June 23, 1950, holotypic female, allotypic male, 

5 female paratj^pes. 
Obstruction Pass, Orcas Island, dredged, Aug. 18, 1948, R. L. Fernald, 

3 females. 
Upright Channel, June 23, 1950, 5 specimens. 

Mitchell Bay, San Juan Island, from floats, July 12, 1950, 1 female. 
Just north of east end of Lopez Pass, July 15, 1950, 1 female. 
Upright Channel, dredged, July 19, 1950, 2 females. 

Desckiption: Female (fig. 7,a-m): General features: This large 
species (fig. 7, a) is relatively stout-bodied, with markedly reduced 
caudal rami. The metasome is distinctly 5-segmented, consisting of 
the head, three free thoracic somites, and the large incubatory seg- 
ment. The urosome is 6-segmented and includes the somite of the 
fifth legs. The head is produced anteriorly at the midventral line as 
a conspicuous rostrum. 

Head appendages: The 9-segmented antennule (fig. 7,6) is enor- 
mously inflated basally. The first two segments are much wider than 
long and the two together exhibit a uniform slight distal taper. The 
third, fourth, fifth, and sixth segments are each successively markedly 
diminished in width, telescopically. The terminal four segments 
participate in a fairly uniform taper from the base of the sixth segment. 
Various of the articulations in the appendage are very complicated 
ones, with a tendency toward a sleevelike overlap of the more proximal 
segments over the bases of those next distal. The insertion of the 
first segment on the head involves a wide area of articulation, sclero- 
tized and well-delimited, which can be readily dissected away from the 
head with the appendage. The extent of overlapping of segments, of 
course, would vary with the posture of the appendage. The usual 
aspect in the preserved specimen has some characteristic features 
which can, with some validity, be compared to the condition of the 
antennule in other species. The basal segment overlaps about one- 
half the second. The second segment envelops the proximal third of 
segment 3. The third segment envelops about a quarter of segment 4. 
The overlaps of the fourth segment on the fifth and the fifth segment 
on the sixth are complicated diagonals, producing articulations which 
must involve restriction of the planes of motion of the terminal part of 



552 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

the antennule. The articulations of the four terminal segments do 
not involve overlapping. 

The armature of the antennule consists mostly of much-reduced 
setae. Notably stout and elongated setae are borne on the first, 
fifth, sixth, seventh, and ninth segments. 

The trimerous antenna (fig. 7,c) is stout and compact. The posture 
is a right-angled flexure. The basal segment is the longest. At the 
distal corner innermost at the flexure there is a slight prominence 
furnishing insertion for a pair of much-reduced setules. The unorna- 
mented second segment is slightly longer than wide. The outer 
margin is a slight convex curve. The inner margin is characterized 
by a semicircular bulge occupying the central two-thirds. The third 
segment is long and slender. Terminally articulated is a curved, 
tapered hook. Four setae are inserted near the base of the hook. 
Three more setae are inserted at the distal third of the segment, on 
its surface, near the outer margin. Near the outer margin at the 
proximal third is inserted a much-reduced setule. 

The coxopodite of the mandible is produced medially to form a 
flattened masticatory lamella. Along the inner border of this plate 
are four subequal toothlike projections, a serrated blade expanse, and 
two short setiform projections. The basipodite and rami constitute 
a setiferous palp (fig. 7,d). A single seta is inserted on the medial 
margin of the basipodite at about the distal sixth. The bimerous 
endopodite is much tapered, forming in outline a truncated cone. 
Four setae are inserted in a row around the distal medial corner of the 
proximal segment. The armature of the apical segment consists of 
ten graduated setae arranged along the distal three-fourths of the 
medial margin and the whole of the distal border. 

The exopodite is pentamerous, with a distinctive arrangement of 
the five closely set setae. The unornamented basal segment is the 
longest. The next three segments are short and each bears a distalry 
inserted seta. The minute terminal segment bears the remaining 
two setae. 

Near the articulations of the maxillules and medial to their bases 
are a pair of well-developed paragnaths. Each paragnath reaches 
about to the midpoint of the protopodite of the maxillule. Each 
paragnath is a rounded triangle in outline. The integument is furred 
with fine ciliation. The sternal integument between the bases of the 
paragnaths is roughened by a symmetrical patch of fine scalelike 
denticulations. 

The protopodite of the maxillule (fig. 7,e) is well demarcated into 
two segments. The basal segment bears two endites and an epipo- 
dite. The proximal endite expands to provide a long medial margin 
ornamented with variously developed masticator} 7 setae. The second 



X0T0DELPHY1D COPEPODS ILLG 



553 




Figure 7. — Doropygus fernaldi, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, antennule; c, 
antenna; d, mandible; e, maxillule; /, maxilla; g, maxilliped; h, first leg; i, second leg; 
;', third leg; k, fourth leg; /, fifth leg; m, caudal rami. The scale, referring to a, represents 
1.0 mm. 



554 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

endite is a projection which furnishes insertion for a single elongate 
tapering setiform process. The epipodite is so coalesced with the 
main mass of the protopodite as to constitute no more than a place of 
insertion for a long, stout seta and a reduced accessory setule. 

The basipodite is produced medially as a broad lobe on which are 
inserted three long, tapering, subequal setae. The endopodite bears 
three setae, two inserted along the medial margin, one apical. The 
exopodite bears three setae, inserted with close-set bases along the 
distal border of the ramus. Between the bases of the two more 
proximal setae is a small protuberance terminating in a filamentous 
wisp of a setule. This structure seems to be the rudiment of a fourth 
seta. 

The pentamerous maxilla (fig. 7,/) is a notably slender one so that 
it forms in outline an elongated triangle. The medial margin of the 
basal segment is produced into four setiferous endites. The proximal 
endite bears three setae, their bases transversely inserted in a close- 
spaced row. The second endite bears one seta. The third endite 
bears two equal setae. The fourth endite is well developed, exhibit- 
ing a subquadrate outline. Terminally inserted on it are two long, 
subequal setae. The second segment is produced distally and medial- 
ly as an endite. The armature of this consists of a long seta and a 
more rigid, curved, tapering spine. The spine is of about the same 
diameter as the seta, but shorter, and it is somewhat more heavily 
sclerotized. The third segment is subquadrate in outline. Inserted 
at the distal medial corner is a single long seta. The fourth segment 
is nearly twice as long as wide, with nearly parallel margins except for 
a slight distal medial projection furnishing insertion for a single long 
seta. The terminal segment is the smallest. It bears four setae. 
The smallest seta is inserted proximally near the medial margin. 
Three subequal setae are inserted apically. 

The bimerous maxilliped (fig. 7,g) is a flattened, short, stout ap- 
pendage. The basal segment is as long as wide with parallel margins. 
The distal medial border forms a semicircular curve. Two groups of 
setae are inserted medially. The basal group consists of three setae 
inserted on the margin and a fourth with the articulation removed a 
short distance laterally to the surface of the segment. The distal 
group consists of four setae arranged in a row around the distal medial 
curve. A fifth seta is inserted on the surface of the segment just 
proximal to the ultimate seta of the row. The second segment is a 
stout truncated cone, articulated diagonally on the distal lateral 
corner of the basal segment. There are two long setae inserted apical- 
ly on the second segment. A tuft of very fine but long cilia projects 
medially from the basal third of the inner margin of the second 
segment. 



NOT0DEI.PHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 555 

Swimming legs: The first leg (fig. 7,h) consists of a bimerous proto- 
podite and trimerous rami. A well-developed intercoxal plate yokes 
the coxopodites. Inserted at the distal medial corner of the coxa is 
a long seta which extends to the midpoint of the distal segment of the 
endopodite. The lateral marginal seta, usually found on the basi- 
podite of related species, is here lacking. Articulated on a strongly 
projecting base formed by the lateral distal corner of the basipodite 
is a stout tapered spine which reaches to the proximal fourth of the 
second segment of the endopodite. The basal segment of the exopo- 
dite bears a long, stout, tapered lateral spine and a long medial seta. 
The second segment bears a lateral spine of about half the dimensions 
of that of the first segment and a medial seta. The third segment 
bears three nearly equal lateral spines, slightly larger than that of the 
second segment, an apical spine, approaching in dimensions that of 
the first segment, an apical seta, and three lateral setae. 

The two proximal segments of the endopodite each bear a medial 
seta. The distal segment bears three medial setae, two apical setae, 
and a lateral seta inserted in an emargination just distal to the mid- 
point of the edge of the segment. 

The protopodites of the second legs (fig. 7,i) are yoked by a much- 
reduced intercoxal plate. The coxopodites are elongated so the 
length of each is about equal to the width. Inserted on the distal 
medial corner of each coxa is a slender seta extending to the proximal 
sixth of the second segment of the bimerous endopodite. Inserted at 
the short lateral margin of the basipodite is a much-reduced filamen- 
tous setule. 

All the elements of the armature of the trimerous exopodite are of 
setiform construction. All the lateral setae, the apical setae, and the 
two most distal medial setae lack plumose ciliation. The basal two 
segments bear each one lateral and one medial seta. The distal 
segment bears three lateral setae, two apical setae, and four medial 
setae. All the segments of the exopodite are markedly broadened, 
and also inflated. This tendency is progressively increased in the 
posterior legs. 

The endopodite is bimerous but with strong indication of suppressed 
subdivision of the elongate distal segment. The proximal segment 
bears a single medial seta. The second segment bears five medial 
setae, two apical setae, and a lateral seta inserted at the distal third of 
the margin of the segment. Long spinules form rows on both segments 
of the endopodite and finer spinules furnish additional ornamentation 
at the bases of the lateral setae of both rami. 

The third legs (fig. 7,j) each consist of a bimerous protopodite, 
trimerous exopodite, and bimerous endopodite. All the elements of the 
armature are setiform. The usual intercoxal plate is reduced to a 



556 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

vestige. Inserted on the distal medial margin of the coxopodite is 
a slender seta which extends to the proximal tenth of the second seg- 
ment of the endopodite. The lateral marginal seta of the basipodite is 
reduced to a minute thread. 

Each of the two proximal segments of the exopodite bears a short 
lateral seta and a medial seta. The distal segment bears three lateral 
setae, two apical setae, and four medial setae. All the segments of 
the exopodite are broadened and inflated. The basal segment is 
longest, nearly equaling the combined extent of the distal segments. 

The proximal segment of the endopodite bears a single medial seta. 
The second segment bears five medial setae, two apical setae, and a 
lateral seta inserted at the distal third of the margin of the segment. 
A curved row of stout spinules ornaments the distal lateral corner of 
the first segment. A parallel row starts on the lateral margin of the 
second segment at the proximal one-third and continues on over the 
surface of the segment for half its width. 

The fourth legs (fig. 7,k) each consist of a bimerous protopodite, 
trimerous exopodite, and bimerous endopodite. All the elements of 
the armature consist of setae, several of them of markedly reduced 
proportions. 

The segments of the protopodite are elongate and the articulation 
between them is displaced to run diagonally. The intercoxal plate is 
reduced to a vestige. Inserted on the distal medial corner of each 
coxa is a much-reduced seta which extends only just beyond the mid- 
point of the sinuate medial margin of the basipodite. The lateral 
marginal seta of the basipodite is reduced to a slender but elongate 
cilium. 

The segments of the exopodite are broadened and much inflated. 
The basal segment is about equal to the combined extents of the two 
distal segments. The first segment bears only a short lateral seta. 
The second segment bears a similarly reduced lateral seta and a 
medial seta. The third segment bears two lateral setae, two apical 
setae, and five medial setae. Only the seta of the second segment and 
the proximal medial seta of the third segment are furnished with 
plumose cilia tion. 

The first segment of the endopodite bears a much-reduced medial 
seta, which is about as long as the segment. The second segment bears 
four medial setae, two apical setae, and a seta inserted at the distal 
third of the lateral margin. The proximal medial seta is much reduced, 
only slightly exceeding in length the seta of the basal segment. A row 
of stout spinules is set along the distal lateral corner of the basal seg- 
ment. A second parallel row starts on the lateral margin of the distal 
segment at its proximal third and continues over the surface of the 
segment for half its width. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 557 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The bimerous fifth legs (fig. 7,1) are 
very large. The tip of each reaches to the proximal sixth of the second 
urosomal segment posterior to that bearing the legs. The basal seg- 
ment is wide and thick, tapering inward somewhat apically. On the 
distal medial corner there is a short row of a few stout, elongate 
spinules. There is no lateral seta. 

The second segment is 2% times as long as wide, the slight distal 
taper being provided mainly by the curving lateral margin. There is a 
slender seta apically inserted, and slightly subterminal on the segment 
at the distal point of the linear inner margin there is a shorter, stouter, 
curved seta. Five or six fine spinous projections of the integument are 
regularly arranged along the medial margins. The distal spinule is at 
the base of the medial articulated spine and constitutes the medial- 
most of a short row of five to six fine spinules inserted on the surface of 
the segment. A long row of extremely fine spinules ornaments the 
surface of the segment at about the proximal third. 

The caudal rami (fig. 7,m) are very short and stout, the length 
equaling the greatest width. They taper regularly but slightly to the 
distal sixth, then terminate in a smoothly curved apex. There is no 
ornamentation. There is a slight ventral subapical prominence of 
the integument forming a toelike protrusion. 

Male: The sexual dimorphism of this species is of a relatively un- 
developed grade. The antennule is somewhat slenderer in the male 
than in the female. The swimming legs of the male are more gen- 
eralized in structure and the posterior exopodites lack the marked 
inflation seen in those of the female. The armature of the legs of the 
male is much less specialized. The usual sixth legs are present as 
bisetiferous lobes of the seventh thoracic somite. 

Doropygus hummi, new species 

Figure 8 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92793 (type locality, Gulf of 
Mexico, off Apalachicola, Fla., in unidentified ascidian); allotypic 
male, No. 92794, and paratypes listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

Florida 

From unidentified solitary ascidian : 

Gulf of Mexico, off Apalachicola, lat. 28°45' N., long. 85°02' W., dredged 
in30fms., Mar. 15, 1885, Albatross Station 2405, holotypic female, allotypic 
male, 30 female paratypes. 
Gulf of Mexico, 3H miles southwest of Longboat Pass, Sarasota Bay, dredged 
in 5-6 fms., Mar. 24, 1951, J. B. Knight, 40-plus females. 

Description: Female (fig. S,a-m): General features: This is a 
minute species of Doropygus. The body, however, presents the usual 



558 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

aspect (fig. 8,a) of 5-segmented metasome and 6-segmented urosome. 
The brood sack is not an exaggerated feature in this form and, since 
the eggs are relatively enormous, accommodates very few of them, 
generally less than 10. Instead of presenting the usually conspicuous 
epimera, the head and thoracic segments are inflated laterally, so that 
the appearance, viewed from above, is of a series of bulges of varying 
dimensions. The head is produced ventrally at the apex as a con- 
spicuously developed rostrum. 

Head appendages: The 9-segmented antennule (fig. 8,6) is much 
enlarged basally with a long, slender, tapering terminal portion. The 
two proximal segments are massive and of about equal width. Seg- 
ments 3 through 6 participate in a fairly uniform taper and the elongate 
three terminal segments are about equal in width. The setation is 
profuse and the setae are fairly long and slender, mostly with well- 
developed ciliation. Particularly elongate setae are inserted on the 
sixth and ninth segments. 

The three segments of the antenna (fig. 8,c) are unequal. The 
basal segment is the longest, nearly three times as long as wide and 
of fairly uniform width. The second segment is less than half as long 
as the first, about as wide. Its medial margin bows slightly outward 
in a gentle curve. The terminal segment is relatively short, about 
twice as long as its greatest width. The lateral margin is roughly 
linear. The medial margin tapers outward to the distal fourth then 
is constricted inward to the apex. A stout curved claw is apically 
inserted, and is accompanied by a slender seta. 

The coxopodite of the mandible is expanded medially as a flattened 
masticatory plate. The basipodite (fig. 8,d) is compact. It bears a 
single medial seta, inserted at the distal fourth of the inner margin. 
The medial two-thirds of the distal extent of the basipodite affords 
articulation for the bimerous endopodite. The first segment of the 
endopodite bears three subequal setae arranged in a distal medial row. 
Nine setae of varying dimensions are arranged along the medial and 
distal margins of the second segment. 

The exopodite is narrow and elongate. Five long, slender, sub- 
equal setae are arranged in a compact diagonal row along the terminal 
third of the ramus. Segmentation is suppressed. 

The basal portion of the maxillule (fig. S,e) is expanded medially as 
the proximal endite, along the medial margin of which are arranged 
eight masticatory setae. A tapered setiform structure is inserted on 
a more distal slight prominence representing the second endite. The 
epipodite is a reduced lateral protuberance bearing a long proximal 
seta and a distal reduced setule. The basipodite bears three long 
subequal setae, distally directed. The subequal endopodite and 
exopodite each bear three setae inserted distally. 



NOTODELPHYID COPE-PODS — HiLG 559 

The maxilla (fig. 8,f) is pentamerous with each segment produced 
medially in one or more setiferous protuberances. The four pro- 
tuberances of the proximal segment bear respectively three, one, two, 
and two setae each. The second segment bears two subequal setae, 
the more distal only three-fourths as long as the other. The third 
and fourth segments bear one seta each. The fifth segment bears 
two subequal medially directed setae and a smaller apical seta. 

The maxilliped (fig. S,g) is obscurely bimerous. The bulk of the 
appendage is a subrectangular flattened plate. Along the medial 
margin seven setae are arranged as a more proximal pair and distal 
quintet. At the distal lateral corner a slight protuberance represent- 
ing the second segment bears two long slender setae. The medial 
margin of the protuberance bears a row of fine hairlike cilia. 

Swimming legs: The protopodites of the first swimming legs (fig. 
8,h) are connected by a well-developed intercoxal plate. Each coxa 
bears at the distal medial corner a long well-developed seta which 
extends beyond the tip of the endopodite. On a distal medial pro- 
longation of the basipodite is set a long, stout spine. It reaches to 
just beyond the proximal margin of the terminal segment of the 
endopodite. There is a reduced seta borne just medial to the short 
lateral margin of the basis. 

The three segments of the exopodite are more or less equivalent in 
size. The proximal segment is largest, the second is smallest. There 
are a lateral spine and medial seta borne on each of the two more 
proximal segments. The terminal segment bears three lateral mar- 
ginal spines, a terminal spine and seta, and three medial marginal 
setae. The spine of the basal segment is the stoutest spine and its 
length about equals that of the apical spine. The remaining spines 
are subequal and very little smaller. 

The trimerous endopodite is armed only with setae; one on the basal 
segment, one on the second segment, and six on the terminal segment. 
Of these six, three are lateral, one is apical, one subterminal laterally, 
and one is inserted in an emargination of the lateral margin which 
is at about the proximal third of the length of that margin. 

A very reduced intercoxal plate connects the protopodites of the 
second swimming legs (fig. 8,i). There is a well-developed seta at the 
distal medial corner of the coxa extending much beyond the tip of the 
endopodite. There is a reduced, fine seta borne laterally on the 
basipodite. The ornamentation of the rami consists entirely of seti- 
form elements. The two proximal segments of the trimerous exopodite 
bear each a lateral seta and a medial seta. The terminal segment has 
three marginal lateral setae, two terminal setae, and four setae 
arranged along the medial margin. 

422202—58 7 



560 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure 8. — Doropygus hummi, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, antennule; 
c, antenna; d, mandible; e, maxillule;/, maxilla; g, maxilliped; h, first leg; i, second leg; 
/,. third leg; k, fourth leg; /, fifth leg; m, caudal ramus. The scale, referring to a, repre- 
sents 0.5 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPE PODS — ILLG 561 

The proximal segment of the bimerous endopodite bears a single 
medial seta. Four setae are arranged along the medial margin of the 
terminal segment, two setae are apical, one seta is just subapical 
laterally, and one seta is set in an emargination at the distal third of 
the lateral margin of the segment. The endopodite is an unusually- 
small one. 

The protopodite of the thud leg (fig. S,j) consists of two subequal 
segments, basipodite and coxopodite. The coxas are yoked by a 
somewhat reduced intercoxal plate. A very elongate seta is inserted 
at the distal medial corner of each coxa. There is a reduced seta 
inserted near the lateral margin on the basipodite. 

The exopodite is trimerous. All elements of the armature are 
setiform. The proximal two segments each bear a lateral seta and 
medial seta. The terminal segment bears three lateral marginal setae, 
two terminal setae, and four setae arranged along the medial margin. 

The proximal segment of the reduced bimerous endopodite bears a 
single medial seta. The distal segment bears four setae arranged 
along the medial margin, two apical setae, a subapical lateral seta, and 
one seta inserted in an emargination at the distal thud of the lateral 
margin. 

The coxopodites of the fourth legs (fig. 8,k) are yoked by an almost 
obsolete intercoxal plate. At the distal medial corner of each coxa 
is inserted a seta which extends just beyond the midpoint of the distal 
segment of the endopodite. There is a reduced seta inserted near the 
lateral margin of the basipodite. 

All the elements of the armature of the trimerous exopodite are 
setiform. The proximal segment bears a lateral seta and the medial 
seta may be present or absent. The second segment bears a lateral 
and medial seta. The terminal segment bears two setae on the 
lateral margin, two apical setae, and four medial setae. 

The bimerous endopodite reaches only to the terminal segment of 
the short exopodite. The basal segment bears one medial seta. The 
distal segment bears six setae, two on the medial margin, two apical, 
one subapical laterally, and one inserted in an emargination at the 
distal third of the lateral margin. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami : The large fifth leg (fig. 8,1) is bimer- 
ous. The basal segment is relatively small, subrectangular, about half 
again as broad as long. A small seta is inserted in the distal lateral 
corner. The width of the terminal segment is two-thirds that of the 
basal. It is 3% times as long as its basal width and tapered slightly to 
the rounded apex. Two subequal setae are subapically inserted. The 
medial seta is stouter and somewhat spiniform. Fine spinules form 
several short rows along the medial margin. 



562 PROCEEDINGS OF THE: NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The caudal ramus (fig. 8,m) is relatively stocky. The length is 
slightly less than four times the basal width. There is a considerable 
taper distally. Four long, subequal setae are apically inserted. The 
length of the longest is nearly twice the basal width of the ramus. A 
fifth seta is inserted on the lateral margin just beyond the proximal 
fourth of its length. 

Male : The male is of minute size. In most features there is general 
conformity in structure to the female, except for the presence of the 
sixth legs on the genital somite. 

Remarks: This species seems to be very closely related to D. 
laticornis. In most of the features of segmentation and ornamentation 
it conforms rather well to the latter. However, its minute size, most 
distinctive proportions of appendages, and reduced setation of the 
swimming legs furnish ample characters for satisfactory separation 
from the notably variable earlier species. 

Doropygus mohri, new species 

Figure 9 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92814 (type locality, Puget 
Sound, Washington, in Styela gihbsii (Stimpson)); allotypic male, No. 
92815, and paratypes listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

Washington 
From S. gibbsii: 

Puget Sound, 1895, holotypic female, allotypic male. 

East of Upright Head, dredged in 25-35 fms, June 23, 1950, 1 female. 

Description: Female (fig. 9,a-v): General features: This rarely 
encountered form is a distinctly characterized one nonetheless. It is 
a relatively large representative among the Western American species. 
The body (fig. 9,a) is that of a robust generalized Doropygus. The 
metasome is 5-segmented, the urosome is 6-segmented. The head 
terminates apically in a conspicuous rostrum. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 9,6) is 9-segmented. The 
two basal segments are much inflated. There is a considerable dimi- 
nution in measurement from the second segment to the third. There 
is a very sharp taper through the third through sixth segments. The 
terminal four segments taper gradually. The apical segment is about 
as long as wide. The setae are fairly well developed, but sparsely or 
obsoletely plumose. They are concentrated along an outer setiferous 
margin. The basal segment has two long stout setae at the outer distal 
corner, these accompanied by one or two minor setae. The second 
segment bears the greatest number of setae, 10 or more. Third, 
fourth, and fifth segments bear a small number of setae. The sixth 
segment is distinctive for the very long and well-developed seta 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ELLG 563 

inserted at the distal outer corner. The seventh and eighth segments 
have few setae. The terminal segment is ornamented with six or 
more setae which tend in their arrangement to concentrate in an apical 
radiating tuft. 

The antenna (fig. 9,c) is trimerous, with the basal segment the 
longest. The posture of the limb is in a characteristic right-angled 
flexure. At the distal corner of the basal segment internal to the 
flexure are inserted two minute but distinct setules. The length of 
the second segment but slightly exceeds its width. The segment is 
slightly but not markedly narrower than the first. The terminal 
segment is the narrowest. Inserted on the distal end in a compli- 
cated articulation is a curved stout tapered hook. Three setae are 
set on the distal end of the segment close to the articulation of the 
hook. Three setae form a compact cluster appressed on the surface 
of the segment at a level about a third of the length of the segment 
proximal to the articulation of the hook. Proximal still another third 
is the outer marginal insertion of a single reduced setule. 

The mandible consists of a 2-segmented protopodite, a bimerous 
endopodite, and a tetramerous exopodite. The coxopodite is extended 
medially as the usual masticatory plate featured by a serrate inner 
margin (fig. 9,d). The basipodite (fig. 9 } e) is a large segment. Near 
its distal medial corner is inserted a single seta. The medial half of 
the terminal margin of the segment is produced to form a wide articu- 
lation with the bimerous endopodite. Around the distal medial 
corner of the proximal segment of the endopodite is inserted a row of 
four setae. These are graduated markedly from a small proximal 
seta to an elongate distal seta. Forming a row around the distal 
two-thirds of the medial margin and the whole of the truncate apical 
border of the terminal segment are nine graduated setae. Six of 
these form a close-spaced row. Three have their bases closely asso- 
ciated on a slight distolateral prominence of the segment. 

The exopodite is conspicuous, long and tapered from a broad in- 
sertion on the basipodite to a narrow apex. Each of the three proxi- 
mal segments bears a long stout seta inserted at the distal medial 
corner. The minute apical segment bears two subequal setae 
terminally placed. 

The maxillule (fig. 9,/) is characterized by a marked tendency to 
obliteration of obvious segmentation. The protopodite is obscurely 
2-segmented. The basal portion supports two endites and a reduced 
epipodite. The proximal endite is expanded and conspicuous. Dis- 
tally along its medial margin is inserted a row of nine setae, predomi- 
nantly stout and sharply tapered, although two are slender. Just 
distal to this principal endite is a small projection terminating in a 
setiform elongation which is considered to represent a second endite. 



564 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



The epipodite is represented by a long tapered seta accompanied by 
a minute accessory setule. 

The terminal mass of the protopodite, equivalent to the basipodite, 
bears a medially directed distal row of three setae. Somewhat 
laterally oriented on the apex of the protopodite are the two reduced 
rami, each bearing three setae. The setae of the endopodite are 
inserted respectively apically and upon two emarginations of the me- 
dial border arranged in uniform step-formation. The setae of the 
exopodite radiate fan-wise from closely set bases along the truncate 
distal margin. 

The maxilla (fig. 9,g) is pentamerous. The principal mass of the 
appendage consists of the basal segment which bears four setiferous 
prominences representing endites. The basal endite bears three setae. 
The second endite is represented by a single seta inserted on a very 
slight prominence. The third endite bears two equal setae. The 
fourth endite is the longest. It forms a well-demarcated quadrate 
mass bearing three setae. Two of these are well developed, of about 
equal proportions, inserted apically. Just proximal to these is set 
a reduced setule. 

The second segment is much wider than long. Distally this seg- 
ment extends in a medial prolongation which constitutes a stout, 
heavily sclerotized hook, about two-thirds as long as the principal 
setae of the maxilla. Inserted at the base of the hook are one well- 
developed long seta and an accessory reduced setule. 

The two next distal segments are subequal in proportion with a well- 
discernible apical taper. Inserted prominently at the distal medial 
corner of each of these segments is a single long seta. The reduced 
terminal segment bears four setae. Three of these are subequal and 
their bases are close-set in an apical insertion. The fourth is the small- 
est and is inserted on the surface of the segment toward the basal 
articulation. 

The bimerous maxiliped (fig. 9,h) is elongate and relatively slender. 
The medial margin bears nine setae arranged in two groups. The 
proximal set of setae consists of four. The distal five setae are close-set 
around the curved distal medial margin. Articulated subapically and 
far laterally is the much-reduced distal segment. It constitutes little 
more than an insertion for two long, approximately equally developed 
setae. 

Swimming legs: The protopodites of the first legs (fig. 9,^) are 
conspicuously bimerous; the rami are trimerous. The coxopodites, 
yoked by a triangular, apically bilobed intercoxal plate, are of rec- 
tangular outline. At the medial distal corner of each coxa is inserted 
a long tapering seta, the tip of which reaches just beyond the distal 
border of the endopodite. The basipodite has a very short lateral 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 



565 




Figure 9. — Doropygus mohri, new species, a-r, Female: a, habit, lateral view; b, anten- 
nule; c, antenna; d, masticatory lamella of mandible; e, palp of mandible;/, maxillule; 
g, maxilla; h, maxilliped; i, first leg; /, exopodite of first leg; k, second leg; /, third leg; 
m, fourth leg; n, exopodite of fourth leg; o, endopodite of fourth leg; p, fifth leg; q, 
medial ornamentation of fifth leg; r, caudal ramus, s-v, Male: s, antennule; t, endo- 
podite of first leg; y, endopodite of fourth leg; v, fifth leg. The scale, referring to a, 
represents 1.0 mm. 



566 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

margin and a long diagonal articulation with the exopodite; the rest 
of the distal border is roughly parallel with that of the coxa. A re- 
duced seta is inserted near the lateral margin. At the medial distal 
corner of the basis is articulated a well-developed tapering spine which 
reaches just beyond the distal border of the basal segment of the endo- 
podite. A curved tow of spinules constitute an ornamentation of the 
basis near the articulation of the endopodite. There are also a few 
spinules inserted near the base of the medial spine. 

The segments of the exopodite (fig. 9j) are subequal. The basal 
is the widest and each of the succeeding segments diminishes somewhat 
in width. The distal segment is longest. Each of the two basal seg- 
ments bears a stout lateral spine and an elongate medial seta. Inserted 
on the terminal segment are three spines along the lateral margin, an 
apical outer spine and inner seta, and three setae along the medial 
border. The spine of the basal segment is the stoutest and longest. 
All the others are of about equal thickness. The apical spine is just 
slightly shorter than the basal one. The proximal spine of the third 
segment is the shortest. All the spines have partial or extensive trans- 
parent serrated marginal flanges. 

The two proximal segments of the endopodite bear each a medial 
seta. The terminal segment bears three medial marginal setae, two 
apical setae, and a seta inserted in an emargination at about the 
midpoint of the lateral margin. 

The second legs (fig. 9, k) show the initial stages of tendencies pro- 
gressively developed in the succeeding two pairs of legs. The articu- 
lation of coxopodite and basipodite is somewhat diagonal so that the 
lateral margin of the coxa is longer than the medial margin. There is 
a uniting inter coxal plate, but the distal extent of this is only to about 
the midpoint of the medial margin of the coxa and the plate is weakly 
sclerotized. There is inserted on the medial distal corner of the coxa 
a well-developed seta which extends to a point just slightly beyond 
the distal border of the basal segment of the endopodite. Inserted 
near the short lateral margin of the basipodite is a very reduced seta. 

The exopodite is trimerous. Its armature consists of the usual 
lateral spines and medial setae. However, the distal elements in the 
usual position of spines are of markedly setiform construction. There 
is a short slender lateral spine and a well-developed medial seta borne 
on each of the two proximal segments. On the distal segment there are 
three laterally inserted elements graduated from an elongate spiniform 
proximal member to a distal element approximating a seta in propor- 
tions. There are two apical setae, the lateral one much shorter and 
presumably representing a modified spine. Inserted along the medial 
border are four well-developed setae. 

The endopodite is bimerous, with the elongate distal section pre- 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 567 

serving traces of a fundamental segmentation. The basal segment 
bears one medial seta. The elongate distal segment tapers apically. 
It bears five marginal medial setae, two apical setae, and a single seta 
inserted in an emargination removed proximally about one-third the 
length of the segment from the apex. A short row of spinules curves 
across the face of the segment at the level of the second medial seta. 
There are also spinules at the base of the lateral and apical setae and 
a row of spinules on the lateral distal border of the basal segment. 

The line of articulation of the coxopodite and basipodite of the 
third legs (fig. 9,1) is markedly diagonal. The medial proximal corners 
of the coxopodites are yoked by a rudimentary intercoxal plate, the 
length of which approximates only one-third its width. At the distal 
medial corner of the coxa is borne a seta which extends to the level of 
the insertion of the medial seta of the proximal segment of the endo- 
podite. Inserted near the short lateral margin of the basipodite is a 
much -reduced setule. 

The armature of the exopodite is a series of diverse setiform mem- 
bers, the laterally inserted elements which ordinarily would be 
spines having all the characteristics of short setae. The proximal 
two segments bear each a short lateral seta and a normal medial seta. 
The terminal segment bears three lateral setae, two apical setae, and 
four medial setae. The two proximal lateral setae are short and of 
dimensions similar to those of the basal segments. 

The endopodite is bimerous. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta. The distal segment, elongate, slightly tapered, and with 
vague indications of fundamental subdivision, bears five medial setae, 
two apical setae, and one lateral seta. Further ornamentation of the 
rami is provided by short rows of fine spinules. 

The protopodites of the fourth legs (fig. 9,m) are produced. The line 
of articulation of the coxopodite and basipodite is diagonal so that the 
outer margin of the coxopodite is about double the length of the medial 
margin. The coxopodites are yoked by an intercoxal plate. This is 
conspicuously reduced but the outer margins are coextensive with the 
medial margins of the coxa. Inserted on the distal medial corner of 
the coxopodite is a slender seta which extends to about the midpoint 
of the proximal segment of the endopodite. Near the short lateral 
margin of the basipodite is inserted a much-reduced setule. 

The armature of the trimerous exopodite (fig. 9,ri) consists of mostly 
normal setae and, on the outer margins of the segments, elements 
which approach somewhat more spiniform construction than the 
corresponding setiform members of the other swimming legs. 

The basal segment is elongate. It bears a short lateral spine and a 
very short medial seta which scarcely exceeds the spine in length. 
The second segment bears a lateral spine and a medial seta. The 



568 PROCEEDINGS^ OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

terminal segment bears three lateral spines, considerably tending 
toward setiform aspect, an apical spine which closely approximates 
setiform proportions, an apical seta, and four setae disposed along the 
medial border. 

The endopodite (fig. 9,o) is bimerous, but with the elongate second 
segment preserving traces of the fundamental subdivision into two 
podomeres. The basal segment bears a very short, reduced medial 
seta. The distal segment bears four setae arranged along the medial 
margin, two apical setae, and a lateral seta inserted hi an emargination 
of the border of the segment opposite the insertion of the third medial 
seta. The lateral seta and the two more proximal setae of the distal 
segment are considerably reduced. A row of fine spinules ornaments 
the distal border of the basal segment of the endopodite and a 
second row curves over the surface of the distal segment at the level 
of the second seta. A few spinules are set at the insertions of the 
lateral setae of the endopodite and of the spines of the exopodifce. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The bimerous fifth legs (fig. 9, 2?) are 
of reduced absolute dimensions. The basal segment is half again as 
wide as long and lacks ornamentation. The distal segment is 2}{ 
times as long as its basal width. The margins are roughly parallel 
for slightly more than half the length, then there is a taper to the 
somewhat narrowed apex. The armature consists of two apically 
inserted elements, the more medial spiniform; the lateral a reduced 
seta. Along the medial side there are four projections (fig. 9,q) 
interrupting the margins. These constitute elaborations of the integu- 
ment related to rows of fine spinules. Each row of spinules extends a 
considerable distance laterally over the surface of the segment. The 
spinules are fine-textured, closely appressed to the segment, and not 
readily obvious. 

The caudal rami (fig. 9,r) are long, their length about six times the 
greatest width. The margins are nearly parallel for about one-third 
of the length where a distinct emargination provides insertion for a 
short seta. From the seta distally the ramus tapers gradually and 
curves slightly inward, terminating in a curved apex narrowed to about 
one-third of the basal width. There is no apical armature. 

Male (fig. 9, s-v) : There is a relatively strong sexual dimorphism 
shown in the appendages of this species for a representative of Doro- 
pygus. The antennule (fig. 9,s) retains weak indications of an ob- 
solete prehensile function, particularly in the coalescence of terminal 
segments. The swimming legs are not so elongate and the armature 
is much reduced in length and markedly spinose (fig. 9,^). The 
fifth leg (fig. 9,v) is a much less elaborate structure than that in the 
female, with simplified outline and reduced ornamentation. The 
sixth legs are of the generalized type. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 569 

Doropygus profundus, new species 

Figure 10 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92801 (type locality, off San 
Nicolas Island, Calif., in Bathypera ovoidia (Ritter)); allotypic male, 
USNM 92829, paratypes listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

California 

From B. ovoidia: 

Off San Nicolas Island, dredged in 1,084-1,100 fms., Apr. 13, 1904, Albatross 
Station 4425, holotypic female, allotypic male, 4 female and 4 male 
paratypes. 

Desckiption: Female (fig. 10, a-ri): General features: The body 
(fig. 10,a) is a comparatively slender one. In the long-preserved 
material studied the brood sack is prolonged posteriorly as a tubular 
structure. Whether this is an artificiality related to the collection of 
the host from a great depth and long preservation before removal of 
the copepod is not obvious. The usual body segments are all neatly 
delimited, and the appendages are trim and symmetrically disposed. 
The anteriormost portion of the head is produced ventrally as the 
well-developed rostrum. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 10,6) is 9-segmented, with 
fairly well-developed setation. The two basal segments are the 
longest and by far the stoutest. The appendage forms an inflection 
at the joint between the fifth and sixth segments. A sharp taper 
brings a graduated reduction of the mass of the proximal segments 
so that the diameter of the fifth segment is only a fourth or less of that 
of the first segment. The diameter of the distal four segments is 
subequal and the major differentiation of these in dimension is the 
variety of lengths. The sixth segment is the longest of the terminal 
four, succeeded in rank of length by segments nine, eight, and seven. 
No seta of the appendage is particularly long, but the general armature 
is a well-developed one for a species of Doropygus. 

The 3-segmented antenna (fig 10,c) is slender. The basal segment 
is the longest and is relatively slim and linear, with a slight distal 
flare. The apex of the flare provides an insertion for two reduced 
setae, which are extremely well developed for a Doropygus. The 
longer is about double the dimensions of the lesser one and its length 
is about equal to the diameter of the segment at its longitudinal 
midpoint. The second segment is relatively long, although it is the 
shortest segment of the appendage. The outer margin is linear, the 
inner is produced in a markedly subsemicircular convexity. Sub- 
terminally on the outer margin is set a reduced seta. The distal 
segment is long and slender, the length approximating four times the 



570 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

greatest width. The outer margin is linear, the inner somewhat 
sinuate. The terminal articulated hook is a relatively slender one. 
The setal armature includes six apical and slightly subterminal setae, 
a trio of graduated setae inserted on the surface of the segment about 
a third of its length proximal from the tip, and a reduced seta articu- 
lated near the outer margin at about a quarter of the length of the 
segment from its base. 

The mandible (fig. 10 ,d) consists of a 2-segmented protopodite and 
well-developed rami. The coxa is produced medially as the mas- 
ticatory process. The basipodite is relatively short, and its armature 
consists of a single well-developed seta inserted subterminally on the 
medial margin. The articulation of the endopodite is apical. This 
ramus is 2-segmented, the segments subequal and relatively large. 
The basal segment bears a row of graduated setae closely spaced and 
inserted at the medial distal corner. A complement of 10 graduated 
setae form a marginal row, closely spaced, applied to the medial and 
apical margins of the distal segment. This row starts at a point on 
the medial margin about a fourth of the length of the segment distal 
from its articulation and extends around to the distal lateral corner 
of the subquadrate segment. 

The exopodite articulates with a wide emargination extending along 
the distal half of the lateral rim of the basis. The exopodite is well- 
developed, fairly long, and tapered from a wide base. It is 4-seg- 
mented. The armature consists of five well-developed setae, one 
inserted on each of the more proximal segments and two of the 
ultimate segment. All the setae of the mandible are plumose. 

The protopodite of the maxillule (fig. 10,e) shows a considerable 
degree of coalescence, with no clear indication of the fundamental 
plan of its segmentation. The proximal endite is the usual flaring 
lobe set with a masticatory row of eight setae of varying dimensions. 
A second endite is represented by a narrowly triangular process 
extending along the apex of the proximal endite. The epipodite is 
a slight prominence bearing a well-developed principal seta accom- 
panied by a rudimentary auxiliary seta. The plane of coalescence of 
the coxal portion of the protopodite with the basis is displaced to 
proceed almost longitudinally. The three subequal setae assignable 
to the basipodite are inserted in a row along a truncate margin which 
is the distal boundary of the protopodite. The result of alteration of 
orientation is that both endopodite and exopodite are directed 
laterally. The endopodite bears three setae. The exopodite has 
three setae well developed, with an articulated fine setule which is the 
obvious vestige of a fourth seta. 

The maxilla (fig. 10, f) is pentamerous. The protopodite is a single 
segment bearing four endites. The proximal endite is armed with 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS ILLG 



571 




n 

il i / I ' 

f lift, 

m 

n 1 




Figure 10. — Doropygus profundus, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, antennule; 
c, antenna; d, palp of mandible; e, maxillule; /, maxilla; g, maxilliped; A, first leg; i, 
exopodite of first leg; ;, second leg; k, third leg; /, fourth leg; m, fifth leg; n, caudal 
ramus. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



572 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

three setae, arranged in a characteristic row along a line at right 
angles to the axis of the appendage. The second endite has a single 
seta; the third endite bears a pair of equal setae; the fourth endite 
is the most produced and prominent and bears two subequal setae 
accompanied by a basal vestigial setule. The second segment bears 
two subequal setae and a vestigial setule. The distal seta is shorter 
and more rigid than its companion. It is the homologue of the heavy 
claw-process of other genera. The third and fourth segments bear a 
single seta each. The terminal segment has four setae. Three of 
these are apical. A reduced seta is borne on the surface of the seg- 
ment just distal to the articulation. 

The maxilliped (fig. 10,g) is bimerous. The gnathal margin bears 
a proximal quartet and a distal quintet of setae. The distal segment 
is articulated somewhat subapically and laterally on the basal seg- 
ment. The armature of the distal segment consists of two long, 
subequal setae. 

Swimming legs: In the first legs (fig. 10, h) the protopodites are 
extensive. The intercoxal plate is well developed. The coxa is 
ample, quadrate; it bears a medial seta which extends slightly beyond 
the midpoint of the distal segment of the exopodite. The distal 
margin of the basipodite is much indented to accommodate the 
articulations of the rami. The medial margin of the basipodite 
culminates in an expanded base supporting the usual articulated 
heavy spine. This spine reaches to a point at about a level with the 
proximal third of the second segment of the endopodite. The usual 
lateral seta of the basipodite is here either rudimentary or lacking. 
As an unusual feature of the outline of the basis there occurs a distal 
prolongation beyond the articulated spine to the level of articulation 
with the endopodite. 

The major ornamentation of the trimerous exopodite (fig. 10, i) 
consists of six spines and six setae. The basal segment bears a lateral 
spine, nearly distally directed, and a medial seta. The second seg- 
ment bears a lateral spine and medial seta. Of the four spines of the 
distal segment three are ranged along the lateral margin and one is 
apical. Of the setae, one is apical and three are inserted along the 
medial margin. The most basal and most distal spines are the longest 
and stoutest. The remaining four are subequal. 

The trimerous endopodite is ornamented with a single medial seta 
on the basal segment, a single medial seta on the second segment, 
and six setae on the distal segment. The disposition of these setae 
is as a medial row of three, two apical and one near the midpoint of 
the lateral margin. The seta of the basal endopod segment is borne 
on a marked prolongation of the distolateral corner of the segment. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 573 

The 2-segmented protopodites of the second legs (fig. 10, j) are 
somewhat produced and extended laterally as well as distally in the 
sagittal plane. Most of the production is in the coxa. An intercoxal 
plate is present, but it is reduced and insignificant. The inner coxal 
seta is a highly developed one and reaches almost to the tip of the 
endopodite. The basis bears no readily detectable armature. 

The exopodite is trimerous. All the elements of the armature 
exhibit the general qualities of setae, although those in positions 
usually occupied by spines on appendages homologous to this are 
somewhat differentiated from the remainder and, in the main, lack 
the ciliation usually occurring in setae. The basal segment bears 
a medial typical seta and a lateral seta which occupies the position 
of the usual spine. The second segment bears a lateral and a medial 
seta. The distal segment bears three lateral setae, two apical setae, 
and four medial setae. 

The endopodite is bimerous with strong indication of fusion of 
two elements to form the distal segment. The proximal segment 
bears one medial seta. The armature of the distal segment is com- 
posed of five setae along the medial margin, two apical setae, and one 
seta set considerably sub terminally on the lateral margin. 

The protopodite of the third leg (fig. 10, k) very much resembles 
that in the second leg. The intercoxal plate is present, but somewhat 
more reduced than in the second legs. The medial coxal seta is long, 
extending to the level of the distal quarter of the length of the distal 
segment of the endopodite. The basis bears no armature. 

The armature of the trimerous exopodite consists of setae and the 
elongate setalike modifications of the usual spines. The basal seg- 
ment bears a spine on the medial distal corner and one on the lateral 
distal corner. The second segment is similarly ornamented. The 
third segment bears three setae on the lateral margin, two apical 
setae, and four setae along the medial margin. 

The endopodite is bimerous and the distal segment is somewhat 
produced. The basal segment bears a single medial seta. The distal 
segment has a medial row of five setae, two apical setae, and one 
lateral seta. 

The fourth legs (fig. 10,0 exhibit the prolongations laterally of 
the protopodites which occur in the two preceding pairs. The inter- 
coxal plate is reduced to near vestigial proportions. The armature 
of the protopodite is either vestigial or lacking. 

The exopodite is trimerous and the armature consists of slender 
setae. The basal segment bears a single lateral seta. Segment two 
has a lateral seta and a medial seta. The distal segment has three 
lateral setae, two apical setae, and four medial setae. 



574 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The endopodite is bimerous. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta. The distal segment bears three medial setae, two apical 
setae, and two lateral setae. 

Short rows of minute spiniiles ornament the bases of some of the 
setae and portions of the margins of the segments of all the four 
pairs of swimming legs. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The fifth legs (fig. 10,m) are bimer- 
ous. The proximal segments of the pair are connected by a medial 
sclerotized ridge suggestive of the intercoxal plates of legs 1 to 4. 
However, the homology of the protopodite here is not clear. The dis- 
tal segment is elongate. The lateral margin is roughly linear, and the 
medial margin is characterized by a series of emarginations. Compli- 
cations of the integumentary structure form characteristic spinulelike 
ornamentation of the emarginations. Two subequal setae are borne 
at the apex of the segment. There are a few short spinules set just 
subapically on the medial margin. 

The length of each caudal ramus (fig. 10, ri) is roughly 4% times its 
greatest width. The margins are rather smooth and there is a gentle 
taper to the rounded apex. A lateral seta is set at about the proximal 
quarter of the length of the outer margin. There are four roughly 
equal apical setae. The lengths of the setae are about two-thuds 
the greatest width of the ramus. 

Male : There is no outstanding feature in the sexual dimorphism of 
this species except the presence of the usual rudimentary sixth legs 
borne on the genital segment of the male. 

Remarks: This species comes from the greatest depth so far 
recorded for an ascidicolous copepod. 

Doropygus schellenhergi, new species 

Figure 11 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92796 (type locality, off Georgia, 
in unidentified ascidian), and paratypes listed below. 
Specimens examined: 

Georgia 

From ascidian: 

Off Georgia, lat. 32°03' N., long. 79°49.5' W., dredged in 14 fms., Feb. 13, 
1940, U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service Vessel Pelican, Station 181-13, 
holotypic female and 10 female paratypes. 

Description: Female (fig. 11, a-m): General features: This is a 
minute species of Doropygus. A notable feature is the distinct 
sclerotization, particularly in its extension to the urosome and caudal 
rami. The metasome (fig. 11, a) is much inflated with some tendency 
to obscuring of the segmentation. The head is produced anteriorly 
and ventrally in a stout projection, forming the usual rostrum. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 575 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 11,6) is of moderate length, 
much greater in diameter basally than at the tip. No segment is 
particularly elongate. There are nine segments, of which the proximal 
is longest and by far the most massive. The second segment and the 
third approach the first in length and mass. The proximal two 
segments are of fairly uniform thickness and are succeeded by the 
third to sixth, which are sharply graduated in diameter so that the 
appearance has a telescope effect tapering the appendage to the 
terminal trimerous unit of seventh to ninth segments, which are 
subequal in length and fairly equal in width. The setation is rela- 
tively profuse and exhibits no differentiation of particularly distinctive 
elements except that the second, fourth, and fifth segments bear long, 
fairly robust setae. 

The trimerous antenna (fig. ll,c) is slender and elongate, with 
reduced ornamentation. The basal segment forms a complicated 
articulation with the head and the medial margin has a slight distal 
expansion. The length is about four times the width at the midpoint. 
The articulating ends of the second segment are of the same width as 
the basal segment and the length is twice this. The outline of the 
segment is modified by the production of the middle half of the medial 
margin as a semicircular protuberance. The terminal segment is 
half again as long as the second segment. The greatest width is at 
the distal eighth and from this the segment tapers proximally to a 
width at the articulation of half that of the articulating margin of the 
second segment. Apically the segment tapers sharply to the articula- 
tion of the relatively slender, curved terminal hook. A slender seta 
is inserted at the articulation of the hook. A second seta is inserted 
at the distal third of the outer margin. 

The basal segment of the mandible is the expanded coxa produced 
medially into a masticatory process. The medial portion of this 
process is a flat dentate plate, heavily sclerotized. jThe remainder of 
the mandible consist? of a basipodite and two rami (fig. 11, d). The 
ornamentation of the basis consists of a single, slight seta inserted 
somewhat distal to' the midpoint of the medial margin. The endopo- 
dite is placed terminally on the elongate basis and is 2-segmented. 
Four setae are arranged in a close-spaced row on the distolateral 
portion of the medial margin of the proximal segment. The somewhat 
larger distal segment is ornamented with seven setae. Three are 
widely spaced along the medial margin, the remainder are close-set 
along the broadly truncate terminal margin. The exopodite is 
inserted considerably sub terminally on the basis and is extremely 
long and somewhat slender. The four long, slender, subequal setae 
are crowded into a compact row across the distal fourth of the ramus, 

422202—58 8 



576 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

with the bases so compacted as to offer the appearance of a terminal 
segment. 

The maxillule (fig. 1 l,e) is distinctive. The basal portion is long and 
is expanded medially as the proximal endite. Eight masticatory 
setae are arranged along the medial margin of the endite. A single 
seta is inserted on the slight prominence representing the second endite. 
The epipodite is represented by a long, proximally directed seta. 
The basipodite is so directed that its anatomically medial setiferous 
margin is distal. Three long, subequal setae are inserted in an apical 
row. The endopodite is directed laterally and bears two widely 
spaced terminal setae. The exopodite bears three setae inserted along 
the broadly truncate distal margin. 

The maxilla (fig. 11,/) is pentamerous, with all the segments exhibit- 
ing setiferous medial protuberances. The basal segment bears four 
projections upon which are inserted, respectively, three, one, two, and 
two setae. The second segment bears two almost equal setae. The 
third and fourth segments bear each a single seta. The fourth segment 
bears two medially inserted setae and a more reduced apical seta. 

The maxilliped (fig. ll,g) is a flattened, subrectangular plate ex- 
hibiting marked suppression of segmentation. At the midpoint of the 
medial margin is borne a trio of setae inserted in a transverse row. 
Distally on this margin is an irregular row of five setae.lt Subapically 
on the distal lateral corner two long setae are inserted on a slight 
protuberance which represents the suppressed terminal segment. 

Swimming legs: The first leg (fig. 11, h) is generalized in plan. The 
coxa bears a medial seta, and there is a well-developed intercoxal 
plate. The basipodite exhibits the characteristic oblique distal 
margin, the lateral edge very short. The medial margin is long, 
accommodating the marked distal prolongation which supports a 
stout, tapered, curved spine which reaches to the distal margin of the 
second segment of the exopodite. Each of the rami consists of three 
subequal segments. 

The proximal segment of the exopodite bears a lateral spine and a 
medial seta. The second segment bears a lateral spine and a medial 
seta. The lateral margin of the distal segment bears three equal 
spines. There is a much longer apical spine, accompanied by a short, 
slender seta. The three medial setae are graduated in length proxi- 
mally, so that the tip of the most basal one actually extends beyond 
that of the most distal. The spines of the two proximal segments are 
roughly equal in dimension with the three marginal spines of the distal 
segment. 

The two proximal segments of the endopodite bear each a single 
medial seta. The six setae of the distal segment are arranged as three 



X010DELPHYID COPEPODS 1LLG 



577 




Figure 11. — Doropygus schellenbergi, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, anten- 
nule; c, antenna; d, palp of mandible; e, maxillule;/, maxilla; g, maxilliped; h, first leg; 
i, second leg; ;', third leg; k, fourth leg; /, fifth leg; m, caudal rami. The scale, referring 
to a, represents 0.5 mm. 



578 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

along the medial margin, two apical, and one placed on an apically 
oriented emargination at about the midpoint of the lateral margin. 

The second legs (fig. 11 ,i) consist each of a Dimerous protopodite, 
the coxopodites yoked by a rudimentary intercoxal plate, and of a 
trimerous exopodite and bimerous endopodite. Each coxa bears a 
slender, relatively short seta at the distal medial corner. The very 
short lateral margin of the basis is set with a short, slender seta. 

The two proximal segments of the exopodite bear each a lateral 
slender spine and a proximal seta. The terminal segment bears four 
spines and five setae, one of each apical, the remaining three spines 
disposed along the lateral margin, the setae medial. On each segment 
the portion of margin just proximal to the first spine is finely spinulose. 

The basal segment of the endopodite has a single medial seta. The 
complement of eight setae of the terminal segment is arranged with 
four along the medial margin, two apical and one sub terminal on the 
lateral edge, and one inserted at the distal fourth of the lateral margin. 
A pronounced constriction at the midpoint of this segment indicates 
its suppressed segmentation. 

The third legs (fig. llj) are almost identical in proportion and 
ornamentation with the second legs. The formulae of spines and 
setae are the same in the two pairs. The spines of the exopodite are 
even longer and more slender and closely approach setiform dimensions. 

The fourth legs (figs. 11 } k) consist of bimerous protopodites, trimer- 
ous exopodites, and bimerous endopodites. The intercoxal plate is 
obsolete. Each coxa bears a slender, rather short medial seta. Each 
basis bears a slender lateral seta. 

The two basal segments of the exopodite bear each a lateral spine 
and a medial seta. The terminal segment bears two lateral marginal 
spines, an apical spine and seta, and four medial setae. The spines 
are slender and markedly setiform. 

The basal segment of the endopodite bears a single medial seta. 
The distal segment bears three setae on the medial margin, two apical 
setae, one subterminal laterally, and one inserted at the distal fourth 
of the lateral margin. The segment is constricted at the midpoint. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami : The bases of the bimerous fifth legs 
(fig. 11,0 are broad, subrectangular, and relatively massive. The 
length approaches the width in measure. Inserted at the lateral distal 
corner is a small seta. The terminal segment is articulated along the 
medial portion of the distal margin and its basal width is half that of 
this margin. The segment is slightly less than four times as long as 
wide. It tapers very slightly to the distal fourth, then much more 
markedly to the narrow apex. Two slender setae are apically inserted. 
Fine spinules arranged in four short rows along the medial margin 
furnish the remaining ornamentation. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 579 

The caudal rami (fig. ll,m) are notable for the rigid sclerotization 
of their lateral and medial margins. The lateral margin is linear, the 
medial so inclined as to furnish a marked taper throughout the ramus. 
The apical width is half the basal. The length is four times the basal 
width. Three graduated setae are compactly inserted across the apex. 
The medial of these is half again as large as that next to it and the 
lateral one is less than half of the size of the middle seta. The longest 
is over a third as long as the ramus. Inserted just proximal to the 
medial seta is a fourth, reduced seta. Inserted at the proximal third 
of the lateral margin is a small, rudimentary seta. 

No male has yet been found. 

Doropygus seclusus, new species 

Figure 12 

Types: Holotj^pic female USNM 92806 (type locality, Washing- 
ton Sound, Washington, in Chelyosoma productum Stimpson) ; allotypic 
male, No. 92807, and paratypes listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

Washington 

From C. production: 

East of Upright Channel, dredged in 25-35 fms., June 23, 1950, holotypic 

female, allotypic male, 29 female paratypes. 
Friday Harbor, July 1928, K. L. Hobbs, 4 specimens. 

Off Upright Head, Lopez Island, dredged in 15 fms., Aug. 2, 1949, 1 female. 
Garrison Bay, San Juan Island, June 30, 1950, P. Knight, 4 females. 
Roche Harbor, San Juan Island, growing on floats, July 6, 1950, 1 female. 
Garrison Bay, San Juan Island, in lowest intertidal, July 30, 1950, 4 females. 

Description: Female (fig. 12,a-m): General features: This is a 
large species of Doropygus with a markedly inflated body (fig. 12,a). 
The integument is rather heavily sclerotized so that the segments are 
neatly delimited. The metasome includes the head, free somites of 
the first, second, and thud swimming legs, and the expanded incuba- 
tory segment corresponding to the fourth swimming legs. The 
urosome is 6-segmented. It includes two thoracic somites, of which 
the more anterior is that of the fifth legs. The front of the head is 
midventrally produced as a well-developed rostrum. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 12,6) is 9-segmented. The 
two basal segments are inflated. There is a considerable diminution 
in measurement from the second segment to the third, succeeded by a 
sharp taper through the third through sixth segments. The terminal 
three segments taper gradually. The apical segment is much longer 
than wide. The basal segment, measured along its greatest length, 
is three times as long as the apical segment. The greatest width of 
the basal segment is seven times that of the apical segment. The setae 



580 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

are short, somewhat rudimentary, with plumose cilia tion almost 
entirely obsolete. They are concentrated along an outer setiferous 
margin. The basal segment has two long stout setae at the outer 
distal corner, these accompanied by one or two minor setae. The 
second segment bears the greatest number of setae, 10 or more. Third, 
fourth, and fifth segments bear a small number of setae. The sixth 
segment is distinctive for the very long and well-developed seta in- 
serted at the distal outer corner and bears two or more minor setae 
as well. The seventh and eighth segments have few setae, one or two 
each. The terminal segment is ornamented with six or more setae 
which tend in their arrangement to form an apical radiating tuft. 

The antenna (fig. 12,c) is trimerous with the basal segment the 
longest. The posture of the limb is in a characteristic right-angled 
flexure. At the distal corner of the basal segment, internal to the 
flexure, are inserted two minute but distinct setules. The length of 
the second segment but slightly exceeds its greatest width. The 
segment is slightly but not markedly narrower than the first. The 
outer margin is longer than the medial, and the central two-thirds of 
the medial margin is occupied by a prominent hemispherical bulge. 
The terminal segment is the narrowest, about 2}i times as long as wide, 
and its greatest width is about two-thirds that of the second segment. 
Inserted on the distal end in a complicated articulation is a long, 
curved, stout, tapered hook. Three much-reduced setae are set on 
the distal end of the segment close to the articulation of the hook. 
Three setae form a compact cluster appressed on the surface of the 
segment at about its midpoint. 

The mandible consists of a 2-segmented protopodite, a bimerous 
endopodite, and a tetramerous exopodite. The coxopodite is extended 
medially as the usual masticatory plate featured by a serrate inner 
margin. The basipodite (fig. 12, d) is a much-elongated segment. 
Near its distal medial corner is inserted a single seta. The medial 
portion of the terminal margin of the segment is arranged to form a 
wide articulation with the endopodite. The proximal segment of the 
endopod is a fourth again wider than the distal segment and about 
equal in length. Along the distal medial margin of the proximal 
segment is inserted a row of four setae. These are graduated markedly 
from a small proximal seta to an elongate distal seta. Forming a row 
around most of the medial margin and the whole of the truncate apical 
border of the terminal segment are 10 graduated setae. Seven of 
these form a close-spaced row. Three have their bases closely asso- 
ciated on a slight distolateral prominence of the segment. 

The exopodite is conspicuous, long and tapered from its insertion 
on the basipodite to a narrow apex of about half the width of the base. 
The segmentation is obsolete. The four setae are arranged with three 



XOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 581 

regularly spaced along the distal half of the medial margin and one 
apical. 

The maxillule (fig. 12, e) is characterized by a marked tendency to 
obliteration of obvious segmentation. The protopodite is obscurely 
2-segmented. The basal portion supports two endites and a reduced 
epipodite. The proximal endite is expanded and conspicuous. Dis- 
tally along its medial margin is inserted a row of nine setae, pre- 
dominantly stout and sharply tapered, although two are slender. 
Just distal to this principal endite is a small projection terminating in 
a setiform elongation which is considered to represent a second endite. 
The epipodite is almost obsolete, represented by a long tapered seta 
accompanied by a minute accessory setule. 

The terminal mass of the protopodite, equivalent to the basipodite, 
bears a distally directed row of three setae. Almost entirely laterally 
oriented on the apex of the protopodite are the two reduced rami, each 
bearing three setae. The setae of the endopodite are inserted respec- 
tively apically and upon two emarginations of the medial border. 
The setae of the exopodite radiate fan-wise from closely set bases 
along the truncate distal margin. 

The maxilla (fig. 12,/) is pentamerous. The principal mass of the 
appendage consists of the basal segment which bears four setiferous 
prominences representing endites. The basal endite bears three setae. 
The second endite is represented by a single seta inserted on a very 
slight prominence. The third endite bears two equal setae. The 
fourth endite is the longest. It forms a fairly well demarcated mass 
bearing three members. Two of these are well developed, of about 
equal proportions, inserted apically. Just proximal to these is set a 
reduced setule. 

The second segment is much wider than long. Distally this segment 
extends in a medial prolongation which constitutes a rather slender 
hook, about three-fourths as long as the principal setae of the maxilla. 
Inserted at the base of the hook are one well-developed long seta and 
an accessory reduced setule. 

The two next distal segments are subequal in proportion. Inserted 
prominently at the distal medial corner of each of these segments is 
a single long seta. The reduced terminal segment bears four setae. 
Three of these are subequal and their bases are close-set in an apical 
insertion. The fourth is the smallest and is inserted on the surface 
of the segment toward the basal articulation. The terminal complex 
of three distal segments is relatively short, less than one-third again 
as long as the second segment. 

The bimerous maxilliped (fig. 12,g) is relatively stocky. The 
medial margin bears nine setae arranged in two groups. The proximal 
set of setae consists of a marginal trio and a single seta displaced far 



582 



PROCEEDINGSi OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 




Figure 12. — Doropygus seclusus, new species, a-m, Female: a, habit, lateral view; b, 
antennule; c, antenna; d, palp of mandible; e, maxillule; /, maxilla; g, maxilliped; h, 
first leg; t, second leg; /, third leg; k, fourth leg; /, fifth leg; m, caudal ramus, n, Male: 
fourth leg. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 583 

laterally onto the surface of the segment. The distal five setae are 
close-set around the curved distal medial margin. Articulated sub- 
apically and far laterally is the much-reduced distal segment. It 
provides insertion for two long, approximately equally developed setae. 
The medial margin of the terminal segment bears a row of fine, long 
cilia. 

Swimming legs: The protopodites of the first legs (fig. 12, h) are 
conspicuously bimerous; the rami are trimerous. The coxopodites, 
yoked by a triangular, apically bilobed, intercoxal plate, are of rec- 
tangular outline. At the medial distal corner of each coxa is inserted 
a long tapering seta, the tip of which reaches just beyond the distal 
border of the second segment of the endopodite. The basipodite has 
a relatively long medial margin and a long diagonal articulation with 
the coxopodite. A reduced seta is inserted near the lateral margin. 
At the medial distal corner of the basis is articulated a well-developed 
tapering spine which reaches to the midpoint of the second segment 
of the endopodite. A curved row of spinules constitutes an orna- 
mentation of the basis near the articulation of the endopodite. There 
are also a few spinules inserted near the base of the medial spine. 

The segments of the exopodite are subequal. The basal is the 
widest, and each of the succeeding segments is diminished somewhat in 
width. Each of the two proximal segments bears a stout lateral spine 
and an elongate medial seta. Inserted on the terminal segment are 
three spines along the lateral margin, an apical outer spine and inner 
seta, and three setae along the medial border. The lateral spines 
are subequal in length and of about equal thickness. The apical spine 
is about one-fourth again longer than any of these. The proximal 
spine of the third segment is perhaps the shortest. All the spines 
have partial or extensive transparent serrated marginal flanges. The 
lateral margin of each segment proximal to its spine or spines is mark- 
edly spinulose, and other fine spinules form ornamentation laterally on 
the two proximal segments. 

The two proximal segments of the endopodite bear each a medial 
seta. The terminal segment bears three medial marginal setae, two 
apical setae, and a seta inserted in an emargination at about the 
midpoint of the lateral margin. The medial and apical setae form a 
regular row and exhibit a graduated distal diminution in thickness. 

The second legs (fig. 12, i) show the initial stages of tendencies 
progressively developed in the succeeding two pairs of legs. The 
articulation of coxopodite and basipodite is somewhat diagonal so 
that the lateral margin of the coxa is longer than the medial margin. 
There is a uniting intercoxal plate, but the distal extent of this is only 
short of the midpoint of the medial margin of the coxa and the plate 
is weakly sclerotized. There is inserted on the medial distal corner 



584 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. jo? 

of the coxa a well-developed seta which extends to a point at about 
the distal fourth of the basal segment of the endopodite. 

The exopodite is trimerous. Its armature consists of the usual 
lateral spines and medial setae. However, the distal elements in the 
usual position of spines tend to setiform construction. There is a 
short slender lateral spine and a well-developed medial seta borne 
on each of the two proximal segments. On the distal segment there 
are three laterally inserted spines and an apical elongate spine ap- 
proximating a seta in proportions. There is a medial apical seta. 
Inserted along the medial border are four well-developed setae. 
There is a fairly profuse spinose ornamentation of all the segments. 

The endopodite is bimerous, with the elongate distal section pre- 
serving traces of a fundamental segmentation. The basal segment 
bears one medial seta. The elongate distal segment tapers only 
slightly apically. It bears five marginal medial setae, two apical 
setae, and a single seta inserted in an emargination removed proxi- 
mally about a third the length of the segment from the apex. A short 
row of spinules curves across the face of the segment at the level of 
the second medial seta. There are also spinules at the bases of the 
lateral and apical setae and a row of spinules on the lateral distal 
border of the basal segment. 

The line of articulation of the coxopodite and basipodite of the 
third legs (fig. 12 ,j) is markedly diagonal. The lateral margin of 
the coxa is two-thirds its width. The medial proximal corners of 
the coxopodites are yoked by a rudimentary intercoxal plate, the 
length of which approximates only one-half its width. At the distal 
medial corner of the coxa is borne a seta which extends to the level 
of the insertion of the second seta of the second segment of the en- 
dopodite. 

The proximal two segments of the exopodite bear each a short 
slender lateral spine and a normal medial seta. The terminal seg- 
ment bears three lateral spines, graduated in length, two apical setae, 
and four medial setae. The lateral apical seta is the shorter and is 
obviously somewhat spiniform. 

The bimerous endopodite extends to about the midpoint of the 
terminal segment of the exopodite. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta. The distal segment, elongate, somewhat tapered, and 
with vague indications of fundamental subdivision, bears five medial 
setae, two apical setae, and one lateral seta. Further ornamentation 
of the rami is provided by short rows of fine spinules. 

In the protopodite of the fourth leg (fig. 12, k) the line of articula- 
tion of the coxopodite and basipodite is slightly diagonal so that the 
outer margin of the coxopodite is greater than the length of the 
medial margin. The coxopodites are yoked by an intercoxal plate. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 585 

This is of nearly normal proportions and the outer margins are co- 
extensive with the medial margins of the coxa. Inserted on the distal 
medial corner of the coxopodite is a slender seta which extends to 
about the midpoint of the proximal segment of the endopodite. Near 
the short lateral margin of the basipodite is inserted a much-reduced 
setule. 

The basal segment of the trimerous exopodite is elongate. It 
bears a short lateral spine and a very short medial seta which scarcely 
exceeds the spine in length. The second segment bears a lateral 
spine and a medial seta. The terminal segment bears three lateral 
spines, slightly tending toward setiform aspect, an apical spine which 
closely approximates setiform proportions, an apical seta, and four 
setae disposed along the medial border. 

The endopodite is bimerous, but with the elongate second segment 
preserving traces of the fundamental subdivision into two podomeres. 
The basal segment bears a very short, reduced medial seta. The 
distal segment bears four setae arranged along the medial margin, 
two apical setae, and a lateral seta inserted in an emargination of 
the border of the segment opposite the insertion of the third medial 
seta. The lateral seta and the two more proximal setae of the distal 
segment are considerably reduced. A row of fine spinules ornaments 
the distal border of the basal segment of the endopodite and a second 
row curves over the surface of the distal segment at the level of the 
second seta. A few spinules are set at the insertions of the lateral 
setae of the endopodite and of the spines of the exopodite. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The bimerous fifth legs (fig. 12 } l) 
are elongate, with expanded bases. The basal segment is over twice 
as wide as long and lacks ornamentation. The distal segment is five 
times as long as its basal width and only about a fifth of the width 
of the basal segment. The margins are roughly parallel, with a very 
slight distal taper to the somewhat narrowed apex. The armature 
consists of two apically inserted subequal elements, the more medial 
somewhat spiniform; the lateral a reduced seta. Along the medial 
side there are five projections interrupting the margins. These 
constitute elaborations of the integument related to rows of fine 
spinules. Each row of spinules extends a considerable distance 
laterally over the surface of the segment. The spinules are fine- 
textured, closely appressed to the segment, and not readily obvious. 
A sixth row is inserted at the articulation of the terminal spine. 

The caudal rami (fig. 12,m) are relatively long, their length about 
four times the greatest width. The margins are nearly parallel for 
about half the length; distally the ramus tapers gradually and curves 
slightly outward, terminating in a curved apex narrowed to about 
one-third of the basal width. Four minute setules are inserted in a 



586 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

terminal row on the apex. A setule is inserted on the lateral margin 
at about the proximal fourth of its length. The length of the setules 
is about a sixth of the apical width of the ramus. 

Male (fig. 12, n): The sexual dimorphism in appendages of this 
species is expressed only in minor variations. The antennule of the 
male conforms very well to that in the female, except for a slight 
tendency to coalescence of the distal three segments, and the de- 
velopment of a somewhat enlarged hook-seta on the basal segment. 
The ornamentation of the swimming legs tends to much more spini- 
form aspect than in the female. In the first legs (fig. 12, n) the most 
distal setae of the endopodite are short, stiff, and sharply tapered, 
approaching the consistency of spines. On the posterior legs this 
tendency is still more marked, as was illustrated in the case of D. 
mohri. The spermatophores intrude considerably into the segment 
of the fifth legs. The sixth legs are bisetiferous prominences. 

Remarks: The mature female of this Doropygus has almost always 
been found solitarily in the branchial cavity of the host. This species 
shows wide tolerance to the site of habitation of the host. Specimens 
have been found in ascidians collected intertidally, on floats and 
subtidally, by dredging. 

The color of this species is striking, especially in contrast to the dull 
gray pallor of the host. The body varies from pink to pale orange, 
and the eggs are a dark red-purple. 

Species Incerta Sedis 

Doropygus cyiindriformis Schelienberg 

Doropygus cyiindriformis Schelienberg, 1922, pp. 240-241, figs. 21, 22 (type 
locality, Gulf of Suez, in Ascidia canelata (Sav. Ok.)). — Gurney, 1927, p. 
482.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 
Host: Ascidia canelata (Sav. Ok.). 

Indeterminable Species 

Doropygus acutus Hesse 

Doropygus acutus Hesse, 1866, pp. 64-65 (type locality, coast of France). — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus albidus Hesse 

Doropygus albidus Hesse, 1866, p. 61 (type locality, coast of France, in Ascidia 
intestinalis) . — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia intestinalis. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPOD.S — ILLG 587 

Doropygus arcticus Aurivillius 

Doropygus arcticus Aurivillius, 1885a, pp. 233-236, pi. 8, figs. 1-11 (type locality, 
off Pitlekaj, Siberia, from Chelyosoma macleayanum Sow. et Brod.) ; 1885b ; 
p. 282.— Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1734.— Wilson, 1920, p. 14.— Schellenberg, 
1922, p. 240.— Lang, 1948, p. 7. 

Distribution: Arctic coast of Siberia. 
Host: Chelyosoma macleayanum Sow. et Brod. 

Doropygus callipygus Hesse 

Doropygus callipygus Hesse, 1866, p. 58 (type locality, coast of France, in Ascidia 
venosa.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia venose. 

Doropygus coccineus Hesse 

Doropygus coccineus Hesse, 1866, pp. 67-68 (type locality, coast of France). — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus conicus Hesse 

Doropygus conicus Hesse, 1866, pp. 57-58 (type locality, coast of France, in 
Cynthia microcosmus) . — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 777, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Cynthia microcosmus. 

Doropygus crista tus Hesse 

Doropygus cristatus Hesse, 1871, pp. 21-23, pi. 2, fig. 18 (type locality, coast of 
France, in Ascidia canina). 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia canina. 

Doropygus curculio Hesse 

Doropygus curculio Hesse, 1866, pp. 54-55 Ctype locality, coast of France). — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-8171, pp. 775, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus deflexus Hesse 

Doropygus deflexus Hesse, 1866, pp. 58-59 (type locality, coast of France). — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 778, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus gihbosus Hesse 

Doropygus gibbosus Hesse, 1866, pp. 62-63 (type locality, coast of France, in 
Ascidia intestinalis) . — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia intestinalis. 



588 PROCEEDINGS' OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol, 107 

Doropygus globosipherus Hesse 

Doropygus globosipherus Hesse, 1869, pp. 307-308 (type locality, coast of 
France).— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801.— Delia Valle, 1883, p. 245. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus macroon Hesse 

Doropygus macroon Hesse, 1866, pp. 66-67 (type locality, coast of France). — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus molgulensis Pearse 

Doropygus molgulensis Pearse, 1952, pp. 188-189, fig. 1 (type locality, Alligator 
Harbor, Fla., in Molgula occidentalis Traustedt). 

Distribution: Florida. 

Host: Molgula occidentalis Traustedt. 

Doropygus oblongus Hesse 

Doropygus oblongus Hesse, 1866, p. 59 (type locality, coast of France, in Poly- 
clinum stellatum). — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 774, 801. — Delia Valle, 
1883, p. 245. 

Distribution : Coast of France. 
Host: Polyclinum stellatum. 

Doropygus ponticus Grebnitskii 

Doropygus ponticus Grebnitskii, 1873-1874, pp. 218, 246 (type locality, Black 
Sea). 

Distribution: Black Sea. 

Doropygus postremoglobosus Hesse 

Doropygus postremoglobosus Hesse, 1871, pp. 23-24 (type locality, coast of France, 
in Ascidia canina). 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia canina. 

Doropygus propinquus Hesse 

Doropygus propinquus Hesse, 1866, pp. 56-57 (type locality, coast of France). — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus reflexus Hesse 

Doropygus reflexus Hesse, 1866, pp. 65-66 (type locality, coast of France, in 
Ascidia venosa) . — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia venosa. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 589 

Doropygits rotundus Hesse 

Doropygus rotundus Hesse, 1866, p. 60 (type locality, coast of France, in Ascidia 
aspesa [sic]). — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia aspesa [sic]. 

Doropygus rufescens Hesse 

Doropygus refescens Hesse, 1866, p. 67 (type locality, coast of France). — Ger- 
staecker, 1870-1871, pp. 774, 801.— Delia Valle, 1883, p. 245. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus sphaerasipherus Hesse 

Doropygus sphaerasipherus Hesse, 1869, pp. 305-307 (type locality, coast of 
France).— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801.— Delia Valle, 1883, p. 245. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus tumefactus Hesse 

Doropygus tumefactus Hesse, 1866, p. 63 (type locality, coast of France). — 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 

Doropygus verrucosus Hesse 

Doropygus verrucosus Hesse, 1866, pp. 60-61 (type locality, coast of France, in 
Ascidia venosa). — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 776, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Ascidia venosa. 

Doropygus viridis Hesse 

Doropygus viridis Hesse, 1866, p. 61 (type locality, coast of France, in Cynthia 
microcosmus) . — Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 777, 801. 

Distribution: Coast of France. 
Host: Cynthia microcosmus. 

Doropygus sp. Herdman 

Doropygus n. sp. Herdman, 1889, p. 254. 

Distribution: Off Liverpool; Loch Fyne. 

Hosts : Polycarpa pomaria Savigny, Styela rustica. 

Nomina nuda 
Doropygus coeruleus Sewell 

Doropygus coeruleus Sewell, 1949, p. 157. 

Doropygus gibbosa T. Scott 

Doropygus gibbosa T. Scott, 1901, p. 351.— Sewell, 1949, p. 188 



590 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Genus Doropygella G. Sars, emended 

Doropygus Thorell, 1859a, pp. 43-46 (part). — Aurivillius, 1882b, p. 49. — Gies- 
brecht, 1882a, pp. 324-326 (part) .— Canu, 1892, pp. 193-194 (part).— 
Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 238-241 (part). 

Doropygella G. Sars, 1921, p. 49 (type species, by monotypy, Doropygus thorelli 
Aurivillius, 1882b).— Wilson, 1932, p. 599. 

Doropygelia Wilson, 1936, p. 376. 

The differentiation of this genus from Doropygus has already been 
discussed under the latter. The outstanding features of the generic 
diagnosis of Doropygella are as follows. The urosome, including 
segment of fifth legs, is 5-segmented. The exopodite of the maxillule 
bears four setae; the endopodite bears six or more, and may preserve 
indications of a bimerous condition. The maxilliped, basically 
trimerous with unornamented second segment, may be reduced to 
bimerous with terminal segment bearing three setae or the segmenta- 
tion may be obsolete with two terminal setae present. The remaining 
appendages are specifically variable. 

Key to the species of Doropygella, based upon females 

la. Caudal rami very long, coiled at the tip porcicauda (p. 590) 

16. Caudal rami not terminally coiled 2 

2a. Armature of lateral margins of third and fourth exopodites long setae 

normani (p. 590) 

26. Armature of lateral margins of third and fourth exopodites spines .... 3 

3a. Caudal rami no more than 2 or 3 times as long as wide . . thorelli (p. 591) 

36. Caudal rami 5 or more times longer than wide psyllus (p. 591) 

Species not known from North America 
Doropygella normani (Brady), new combination 

Doropygus normani Brady, 1878, pp. 136-138, pi. 32, figs. 1-14 (type locality, 
Ireland).— Richiardi, 1880, p. 147.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, p. 324.— Carus, 1885, 
p. 342.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1.— Herdman, 1889, p. 254.— T. Scott, 1891, 
p. 301; 1902, p. 455; 1906, p. 363; 1907, p. 364.— Thompson and Scott, 1903, 
p. 255.— Norman, 1905, p. 36.— Pesta, 1909, p. 259.— Schellenberg, 1922, 
p. 241.— Sewell, 1949, pp. 169, 176, 177, 182. 

Distribution: Mediterranean and British Isles; Ceylon. 
Hosts: ? Ascidia virginea, Cynthia papillosa L., Cynthia sp., Styela 
rustica. 

Doropygella porcicauda (Brady), new combination 

Doropygus porcicauda, Brady, 1878, pp. 138-140, pi. 27, figs. 1-9, pi. 33, figs. 
14-16 (type locality, British Isles, in Ascidia parallelogramma) . — Giesbrecht, 
1882a, p. 324.— Herdman, 1889, p. 249.— Thompson, 1889, pp. 185-186; 
1893, p. 190, pi. 18, fig. 1.— T. Scott, 1888, p. 239; 1897, p. 148; 1900, p. 386; 
1901, p. 351; 1906, p. 363; 1907, p. 364.— Norman and Brady, 1909, p. 401 — 
Pesta, 1909, p. 259.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 45-46, pi. 22.— Schellenberg, 1922, 
pp. 241, 264.— Gray, 1933, pp. 520-521.— Gurney, 1933, p. 304.— van Oorde- 
de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 119. — Sewell, 1949, p. 188. 



N'OTODELPHYID COPEPODS- — ILLG 591 

Distribution: British Isles, Norway. 

Hosts: Ascidia parallelogramma, A. plebeia Alder. 

Doropygella psyllus (Thorell), new combination 

Doropygus psyllus Thorell, 1859a, pp. 49-50, pi. 7, fig. 9 (type locality, coast of 
Sweden, in Ascidia aspersa Miiller); 1859b, pp. 339, 343; 1860, pp. 118, 123. — 
Hesse, 1866, pp. 54, 64.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 801.— Kerschner, 
1879, pp. 185-186.— Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 54-55; 1882b, p. 112; 1883, pp. 
24-25, 108.— Giesbrecht, 1882a, p. 324.— Cams, 1885, p. 342.— Gourret, 
1888, p. 1.— Canu, 1891, p. 472; 1892, pp. 194-195, pi. 8, figs. 1-11.— Graeffe, 
1902, p. 39.— T. Scott, 1907, pp. 364-365.— Pesta, 1909, p. 259.— Hartmeyer, 
1911, p. 1735.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 44-45, pi. 21.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 241, 
265.— Brian, 1924, p. 7.— Harant, 1931, p. 370.— van Oorde-de-Lint and 
Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 119.— Lang, 1948, p. 2— Sewell, 1949, pp. 
182, 188, 191. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Sweden and Norway. 
Hosts: Ascidia aspersa Mueller, A. jumigata, Phallusia patula, P. 
virginea. 

North American Species 

Doropygella thorelli (Aurivillius) 

Doropygus thorelli Aurivillius, 1882b, pp. 49-60, 112, pi. 13, fig. 10, pi. 14, figs. 

1-14 (type locality, Sweden, in Phallusia mentula) ; 1883, pp. 45-56, 108, pi. 

4, fig. 10, pi. 5, figs. 1-14.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 240, 265. 
Doropygella thorelli G. Sars, 1921, pp. 49-50, pi. 24. — Hansen, 1923, p. 23. — van 

Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 120, fig. 70. — Stephensen, 

1929, p. 7; 1940, pp. 2-3, 18, 20.— Sewell, 1949, p. 191. 
Doropygella thorellii Wilson, 1936, p. 368. 
Doropygelia thorellii Wilson, 1936, p. 376. 

Distribution: Norway and Sweden, Faroes, Iceland, Greenland, 
Davis Strait, Foxe Channel. 

Hosts: Ascidia obliqua, Phallusia mentula. 

Remarks: No specimens were available for the present study. 
The species has been thoroughly illustrated by G. Sars (1921, pi. 24). 

Genus Doropygopsis G. Sars 

Doropygus Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 48-54 (part) .—Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 238-241 

(part) . 
Doropygopsis G. Sars, 1921, pp. 46-47 (type species, by monotypy, Doropygus 

longicauda Aurivillius, 1882). — Wilson, 1932, p. 598. 

The basis of subdivision of this genus from the original concept of 
Doropygus is discussed under the latter. The principal features 
involved in the characterization of Doropygopsis are as follows. 

The urosome is pentamerous, including the thoracic segment of the 
fifth legs and also a second, genital somite composed of both thoracic 

422202—58 9 



592 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

and abdominal elements. The ornamentation of the caudal rami is 
fairly well developed, consisting of relatively normal short setae. 

The antennule is 9-segmented. The antenna is trimerous with 
setation relatively unreduced. The maxillule presents the distinctive 
feature in the endopodite of presence of seven to nine setae. The 
exopodite bears the usual four setae. The maxilliped is trimerous 
with all segments setiferous. 

The remaining appendages are more or less generalized in structure, 
conforming to the least specialized condition found in either Noto- 
delphys or Doropygus. 

Key to the species of Doropygopsis, based upon females 

la. Endopodite of maxillule with 7 setae longicauda (p. 592) 

16. Endopodite of maxillule with 9 setae novemsetiferus (p. 592) 

Species not known from North America 

Doropygopsis novemsetiferus (Schellenberg), new combination 

Doropygus novemsetiferus Schellenberg 1922, p. 244 (type locality, Gulf of Suez, 
in Styela canopus Sav. and Pyura gangelion (Sav.). — Gurney, 1927, p. 480. — 
Sewell, 1949, pp. 169, 179. 

Distribution: Gulf of Suez. 

Hosts: Styela canopus Sav., Pyura gangelion (Sav.). 

North American Species 

Doropygopsis longicauda (Aurivillius) 

Doropygus longicauda Aurivillius, 1882a, pp. 48-54, pi. 7, figs. 1-12 (type locality, 
Bohuslan, Sweden, in Phallusia obliqua); 1882b, pp. 60-61, pi. 13, fig. 11; 
1883, pp. 18-24, 56-57, 108, pi. 3, figs. 1-12, pi. 4, fig. 11; 1886, pp. 43-44, 
pi. 1, figs. 1-6.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 240, 264. 

Doropygopsis longicauda G. Sars, 1921, pp. 47-49, pi. 23. — Hansen, 1923, pp. 
22-23.— Stephensen, 1932, p. 3; 1940, pp. 2, 18, 20.— Blake, 1933, p. 226.— 
Pesta, 1934, p. 8. — ? Wilson, 1935a, p. 779. — van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuur- 
mans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 119, fig. 69.— Lang, 1948, p. 2.— Sewell, 1949, 
pp. 161, 191-194. 

Distribution: Sweden and Norway, Spitzbergen, Kara Sea, Faroes, 
Iceland, Greenland, Davis Strait, Maine, ? California. 

Hosts: Phallusia obliqua, P. mentula, Ascidia callosa, A. prunum, 
Boltenia echinata, lEugyra sp. 

Specimens examined: 

Canada 

From Ascidia sp.: 

Off Grand Manan Island, New Brunswick, dredged in 97-110 fms., 1872, 

U. S. Fish Comm. Station 5028, 1 female. 
Near entrance to Goose Bay, Lake Melville, Labrador, dredged 17-19 fms., 

Aug. 26, 1951, D. C. Nutt, 3 females. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 593 

From Ascidia prunum Miiller: 

Lake Melville, Labrador, dredged, July-August 1950, D. C. Nutt, 1 female. 
From unidentified ascidians : 

Off Labrador, lat. 53°22.3' N., long. 55°56.7' W., dredged in 35 fms., July 12, 

1949, D. C. Nutt, 3 females. 

Soak Point, Hebron Fjord, Labrador, dredged in 13 fms., Aug. 31, 1949, 

D. C. Nutt, 3 females, 4 males. 
Off Labrador, 53°52' N., long. 59°19' W., dredged in 30-35 fms., July 11, 

1950, D. C. Nutt, 5 specimens. 
Washington 

From Ascidia callosa Stimpson: 

Off Dinner Island, San Juan Island, dredged in 30 fms., Aug. 10, 1949, R. L. 
Fernald, 3 females, 1 male. 

East of Upright Channel, dredged, June 23, 1950, 3 females. 
From Ascidia parairopa (Huntsman) : 

Off Upright Head, Lopez Island, dredged in 15 fms., July 27, 1949, R. L. 
Fernald, 1 female. 

Upright Channel, dredged, July 19, 1950, 2 females. 
From Halocynthia igaboja (Oka) : 

Off Upright Head, Lopez Island, dredged, June 23, 1950, 1 female. 

Description: Female: General features: Thorough illustration of 
this species has been provided by G. Sars (1921, pi. 23). The body is 
compressed, the metasome modified by the greatly expanded incuba- 
torium. The head includes the segment of the maxillipeds and is 
characterized by wide-flaring lateral epimeral expansion. The seg- 
ment of the first swimming legs is free, but seemingly lacks epimera. 
The segments of the second and third legs are much larger in size than 
the first segment and present well-developed, closely appressed 
epimeral plates. The fourth segment is the much-inflated brood sack. 
The major body articulation is between the segments of the fourth 
and fifth legs, since the latter segment does not conspicuously partici- 
pate in the structure of the brood sack. The urosome is 5-segmented. 
The second segment is apparently a ' 'genital somite" formed by 
coalescence of the last thoracic segment and first abdominal somite. 
There are three free abdominal segments, the last supporting the well- 
developed caudal rami. 

A conspicuous rostrum is produced ventrally from the anterior tip 
of the head. It is bluntly pointed and relatively flattened. 

Head appendages: The antennule is 9-segmented. The two basal 
segments are much expanded and so articulated on the head and with 
each other as to provide a nearly right-angled flexure. The third 
segment is much narrower than the second. The terminal six seg- 
ments are graduated in a fairly regular, slight taper. The terminal 
segment is about an eighth as thick as the first segment and two- 
thirds as thick as the third segment. Most of the distal segments are 
slightly longer than wide. The sixth segment is twice as long as wide. 



594 PR'OCEEDINGSi OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The seventh segment is roughly subquadrate. The terminal segment 
is twice as long as wide. Several segments are distinctive for the 
possession of one or more very long, basally stout setae. Two of 
these are inserted on each of the first two segments. Segments five 
and six bear one each. In addition, each segment bears a number 
of shorter, slender setae. The approximate count of setae by segments 
is: 1-3; 2-10 plus; 3-3; 4-3; 5-4; 6-3; 7-1; 8-2; 9-6. The larger 
setae are plumose and of fairly stiff consistency. 

The trimerous antenna presents no indication of the fusion of the 
two more proximal segments of the antenna of the type found in 
Notodelphys. A long plumose seta is inserted terminally on the basal 
segment. The basal segment is twice as long as its greatest width. 
The second segment is \}{ times as long as wide, and two-thirds the 
length of the basal segment. The distal segment is slightly constricted 
basally and is the longest segment of the appendage. Its length is 
nearly four times its greatest width. Terminally there is articulated a 
Stout, tapered, curved claw. Several setae, of varying lengths, are 
inserted apically, close to the base of the claw. At about the distal 
fourth of the segment there is inserted a compact row of three gradu- 
ated setae which lie closely appressed to the surface of the segment. 
Just proximal to these is set a short marginal seta. 

The mandible differs from that of Notodelphys. The masticatory 
plate of the coxa is ornamented along the medial edge by four principal 
tooth-like projections, a saw-edge of fine, close-spaced denticles, and 
two fine, setalike members. The basipodite is widely expanded. At 
the distal fourth of the medial margin is inserted one well-developed 
seta. The endopodite is bimerous. The subquadrate basal segment 
bears four setae, arranged as a row around the distal medial corner. 
The margins of the terminal segment are parallel, the length is about 
V/% times the width, and the segment is about three-fourths the greatest 
width of the basal segment. Nine setae form a close-set row along the 
distal three-fourths of the medial margin and across the terminal 
border. The exopodite is a broad, flat plate with the segmentation 
obsolete. Five very long subequal setae are disposed along the distal 
expanse of the ramus. 

The protopodite of the maxillule is elongate and rather narrow. 
The segmentation is strongly indicated. A small lateral protuberance, 
doubtless representing the epipodite, furnishes insertion for a long, 
stout, proximally directed seta and a short accessory setule. Medially 
there are two projections, probably representing endites. The proxi- 
mal endite is a greatly developed, flaring prominence bearing a row of 
nine masticatory setae close-set along the medial margin. Just distal 
to this endite is the slight prominence of the second, produced distally 
as an elongate, tapering, setiform structure. The distal portion of the 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS' — ILkG 595 

protopodite is produced apically, directing the rami laterally. A trio 
of basipodal setae ornament the distal medial margin of the second 
segment of the protopodite. The endopodite is bimerous. The first 
segment bears three setae on the medial margin. The minute distal 
segment bears four setae disposed along the apical margin. Four long, 
stout, almost equal setae are arranged fan-wise across the outer margin 
of the exopodite. 

The pentamerous maxilla preserves indications of further division 
of the basal segment. This proximal segment is complicated medially 
by the production of the margin as four setiferous lobes, presumably 
the counterparts of endites. The basal prominence bears three setae. 
The second prominence bears a single straight seta. The third endite 
bears two equal setae. The fourth endite is fairly well developed and 
bears two equal setae and an accessory setule. The second segment 
is produced medially as a heav}^, tapered, curved, stout hook, bearing 
denticulations along the proximal edge. One seta is inserted basally 
on the hook-process accompanied by a minute setule. The succeeding 
two segments are very slender. On the distal medial corner of each is 
inserted a well-developed seta. The apical segment is much reduced. 
Its ornamentation consists of an apical trio of subequal setae. 

The trimerous maxilliped is markedly slender and elongate. The 
basal segment bears eight setae arranged in two groups. Proximally, 
three setae are set close together along the margin. A quartet of setae 
is disposed around the distal medial corner and a large superficial seta 
is inserted near their bases. The second segment is rectangular, about 
a fourth again as long as wide. A single large seta is inserted at the 
distal medial corner. The distal segment is a truncated cone, its 
length 1% times its greatest width. There are two setae inserted along 
the medial margin, and at the apex are inserted two long, subequal, 
plumose setae. 

Swimming legs: The protopodite segments of the first legs are 
somewhat elongated. The intercoxal plate is slightly reduced. In- 
serted on the medial distal corner of the coxa is a slender seta which 
extends to the midpoint of the first segment of the endopodite. The 
basipodite is characterized by a very short lateral margin, near which 
is set a moderate-sized seta, and a much longer medial margin. At the 
distal medial corner of the basis is articulated a slender tapering spine 
which reaches to the distal margin of the first segment of the endopodite. 

The rami are trimerous. The large basal segment of the exopodite 
bears a lateral spine and a well-developed medial seta. The second 
segment bears one much shorter, slighter lateral spine and a medial 
seta. The distal segment bears three lateral spines, an apical spine 
and seta, and three medial setae. The dimensions of the spines of the 
distal segment are varied. The proximal spine is very short. The 



596 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MTJSETJM vol. iot 

two next distal spines are slender but more elongate. The apical 
spine is slender and half again as long as the next longest spine. 

The endopodite tapers somewhat from a distinctly thickened basal 
segment. The first two segments each bear a single medial seta. The 
terminal segment bears three medial setae, two apical setae, and a 
single seta inserted about midway on the lateral margin. Fine spinules 
form short rows ornamenting each of the segments of the endopodite 
and the basipodite near its medial spine, and produce a fine serration 
along the lateral margins of the segments of the exopodite. 

The protopodites of the second legs are very long in proportion to 
width. The coxopodites are linked by a somewhat reduced inter- 
coxal plate. At the distal medial corner of each coxa is inserted a 
slender seta. The only ornamentation of the basipodite is a reduced 
seta inserted near the short lateral margin. 

The trimerous exopodite is slender and elongate. All the spinous 
elements of the armature are considerably setiform. Each of the two 
basal segments bears a lateral setiform spine and a medial seta. The 
distal segment bears three lateral setiform spines, graduated somewhat 
in length, two apical setae (the lateral one representing a spine), and 
four medial setae. 

The endopodite is trimerous. The elongate third segment exhibits 
a most distinctive outline produced by strong medial emarginations 
into which the setae are inserted. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta. The second segment bears two medial setae. The distal 
segment bears three medial setae, two apical setae, and a lateral seta 
inserted at the distal third. 

The third legs are somewhat elongate and narrowed. The coxopo- 
dites are more or less rectangular and they are united by a reduced 
intercoxal plate. At the distal medial corner of the coxa is inserted 
a slender seta which does not quite reach the distal margin of the 
first segment of the endopodite. The armature of the basipodite 
consists of a single reduced seta inserted near the short lateral margin. 

The basal segment of the trimerous exopodite is elongated. The 
second segment is slightly prolonged, subquadrate. The distal 
segment is elongate and tapered. All the elements of the armature 
are more or less setiform. 

The basal segment bears a short, rigid, lateral, setiform spine and 
a medial seta. The second segment bears a lateral, elongate, setiform 
spine and a medial seta. The terminal segment bears three lateral 
setiform spines, two apical setae, and four medial setae. 

The trimerous endopodite is elongate, mainly due to the pronounced 
extension of the distal segment, which is twice as long as the basal 
segment. All segments are relatively slender, the basal segment being 
a little longer than wide. The first segment bears a single medial seta. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 597 

The second segment bears two medial setae. The terminal segment 
bears three medial setae, two apical setae, and a lateral seta inserted 
at about the midpoint of the segment. 

The protopodites of the fourth legs are elongate and slightly tapered 
to a somewhat conical aspect. The coxopodites are united by an 
inter coxal plate. At the distal medial corner of the coxa is inserted 
a small seta which extends just beyond the midpoint of the basal 
segment of the endopodite. Inserted near the very short lateral 
margin of the basipodite is a short, much-reduced seta. 

All elements of the armature of the exopodite are setiform. The 
basal segment bears a short, lateral setiform spine and a medial seta. 
The second segment bears a lateral setiform spine and a medial seta. 
The terminal segment bears two lateral setiform spines, two apical 
setae, and four medial setae. 

The trimerous endopodite is elongate. The basal segment is about 
as long as its greatest width and it bears a medial seta. The second 
segment bears two medial setae. The outline of the somewhat tapered 
third segment is characterized by emarginations accommodating the 
insertions of lateral and medial marginal setae. There are two medial 
setae, two apical setae, and one lateral seta. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The bimerous fifth legs are markedly 
elongate. The basal segment articulates along a diagonal line with 
the main mass of the body. There is a laterally inserted seta. The 
distal segment is half as wide as the basal segment, about 4% times 
as long as wide, and exhibits a gradual distal taper. Inserted ter- 
minally on the distal segment are two unequal setae, one being half 
the length of the other. Along the distal half of the medial margin are 
set five or more curving rows of fine spinules, each row accommodated 
by a slight emargination of the integument. 

The caudal rami are slightly over six times as long as their greatest 
width. They taper markedly but uniformly to the apex, which is 
half as wide as the base. Inserted on the apex are two long central 
setae, accompanied by one short lateral seta and a short medial seta. 
The longest seta is about two-thirds as long as the ramus. The short 
setae are between a third and a half of this length. Inserted on the 
lateral margin in a slight emargination at the proximal fourth is a 
short, slight seta. Another is set on the medial margin at its distal 
fourth. Cilia tion of the setae of the ramus is reduced or obsolete. 

Sars has provided an illustration of the male of this species. The 
outstanding feature of the sexual dimorphism is the possession of 
paired geniculate antennules. These are 10-segmented, with the 
articulation falling between the two terminal, much-elongate segments. 
The urosome of the male, including the somite of the fifth legs, is 
6-segmented. 



598 PROCEEDINGSi OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Remarks: Sars described the color of females of this species as 
uniform light reddish, with the eggs somewhat darker. Specimens 
from Ascidia callosa in Washington Sound were recorded as reddish 
orange. 

The southernmost occurrence of this species in North America is 
not quite clearly established. Wilson (1935a) published a report of 
finding it in ascidians from California. Examination of specimens in 
the collections of the U. S. National Museum labeled to correspond 
with this record has not substantiated the identification. All the 
specimens so far found are other species of notodelphyids. Most 
specimens are assignable to the new genus Pygodelphys. It is possible, 
however, that the whole of the material examined by Wilson is not 
in the Museum collections. 

Pygodelphys , new genus 

Doropygus Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 238-241 (part). 

Type species : Pygodelphys aquilonaris, new species. 

Description and discussion of taxonomic characters: The 
differentiation of this genus from Doropygus was discussed under the 
latter. Four North American and Antarctic-Sub-Antarctic species 
form a coherent group which can best be treated by recognition of 
generic status. In many features Pygodelphys exhibits a transitional 
grade of structure between Notodelphys and Doropygus. 

The body is compressed, with 5-segmented metasome and 5- 
segmented urosome. The fifth legs are borne on the metasome 
and the first urosomal segment is the genital somite. The caudal 
rami are of moderate size, well sclerotized, and bear relatively well- 
developed setae. 

The antennule is intermediate between those of Notodelphys and 
Doropygus. Composed of nine or ten segments, it is long and the 
setation is profuse. 

The antenna, mandible, maxillule, and maxilla much resemble 
those of Notodelphys, with close conformity of segmentation and 
ornamentation. 

The maxilliped is much like that of Doropygus, distinctive in propor- 
tion, perhaps, but similar in basic structure. It is bimerous; the 
armature of the terminal segment is two robust plumose setae. 

The swimming legs are highly characteristic. The first legs are 
most nearly generalized, with a well differentiated pattern of arrange- 
ment of spines. The posterior legs are elongate, with much modifica- 
tion of the armature, which is predominantly setiform. The endo- 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 599 

podites tend toward coalescence of segments, accompanied by great 
prolongation. In most species the endopodites are flat lamellae. 

The fifth legs are distinctive. They seem best derivable from the 
structure found in Notodelphys, but they are much reduced, consisting 
of two roughly equivalent setiferous lobes. 

Sexual dimorphism of the appendages is less highly developed than 
in Notodelphys. It is comparable to the degree found in species of 
Doropygus having the most extreme differentiation. 

Key to the species of Pygodelphys, based upon females 

la. Antennules with 9 segments novaeseeiandiae (p. 599) 

16. Antennules with 10 segments 2 

2a. Furca pointed apically, with stiff, saber-shaped terminal setae. 

antarctica (p. 599) 

26. Furca blunt apically, with spirally curled terminal setae 3 

3a. Terminal 4 segments of antennule much elongate . . . lamellipes (p. 599) 
36. Seventh segment of antennule much elongate, 3 terminal segments sub- 
quadrate aquilonaris (p. 600) 

Species not known from North America 

Pygodelphys antarctica (Schellenberg), new combination 

Doropygus antarcticus Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 243, 264 (type localities: Falkland 
Islands; Tierra del Fuego, in Paramolgula gigantea (Cun.)). — Sewell, 1949, 
p. 174. 

Distribution: Falkland Islands and Tierra del Fuego. 
Host: Paramolgula gigantea (Cun.) 

Pygodelphys lamellipes (Schellenberg), new combination 

Doropygus lamellipes Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 242-243, 264, fig. 23 (type localities: 
Falkland Islands and Tierra del Fuego, in Styela paessleri Mchlsn.). — Sewell, 
1949, p. 174. 

Distribution: Falkland Islands and Tierra del Fuego. 
Host: Styela paessleri Mchlsn. 

Pygodelphys novaeseeiandiae (Schellenberg), new combination 

Doropygus novae seelandius Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 244-245, 264 (type locality, 
New Zealand, in Pyura pulla Sluit., Paramolgula filholi (Piz.), Cnemidocarpa 
novaeseeiandiae Mchlsn.) . 

Doropygus novaesealandicus Sewell, 1949, p. 163. 

Distribution: New Zealand. 

Hosts: Pyura pulla Sluit., Paramolgula filholi (Piz.), Cnemidocarpa 
novaeseeiandiae Mchlsn. 



600 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

North American Species 
Pygodelphys aquilonaris, new species 

Figures 13, 14 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92812 (type locality, Washing- 
ton Sound, Wash., in Pyura kaustor (Stimpson)); allotypic male, 
USNM 92813; paratypes, all specimens listed below. 

Specimens examined: 

Alaska 

From Halocynthia aurantium, (Pallas) : 

Unalaska Island, October 1878, L. M. Turner, 1 female, 1 male. 
British Columbia 

From Ascidia paratropa (Huntsman) : 

Departure Bay, Jan. 20, 1931, G. H. Wailes, 1 female. 
Washington 

From Pyura haustor: 

Off Johns Island, July 5, 1939, dredged, types above. 

Mitchell Bay, on floats, July 13, 1950, 1 female. 

Indian Cove, Shaw Island, Aug. 18, 1948, dredged, 6 fms., R. L. Fernald, 

6 specimens. 
East of Upright Head, Lopez Island, June 23, 1950, dredged in 25-35 fms., 

15 females. 
Near Canoe Island, Off Shaw Island, July 1, 1950, dredged, 2 females. 
Just north of east end of Lopez Pass, July 15, 1950, dredged, 3 females. 
From Halocynthia aurantium: 

Near Friday Harbor, July 1950, from polyp of Endocrypta huntsmani (Fraser) 
in branchial cavity, 1 female. 
From Styela gibbsii (Stimpson) : 

Off Upright Head, Lopez Island, Aug. 2, 1949, R. L. Fernald, 4 females. 
East of Upright Channel, June 23, 1950, dredged in 25-35 fms., 45 females. 
Just north of outer end of Lopez Pass, July 15, 1950, dredged, 2 females. 
From Cnemidocarpa finmarkiensis (Kiaer) : 

Brown's Island, Friday Harbor, July 1, 1950, intertidal, R. L. Fernald, 10 

plus specimens. 
Outer end of Lopez Pass, July 15, 1950, dredged, 6 specimens. 
Minnesota Reef, Turn Point, San Juan Island, July 16, 1950, intertidal, 
1 female. 
From Boltenia villosa (Stimpson) : 

Obstruction Pass, Orcas Island, Aug. 18, 1948, dredged in 16 fms., R. L. 

Fernald, 11 specimens. 
Upright Channel, San Juan Island, June 23, 1950, 10 females. 
Just north of outer end of Lopez Pass, July 15, 1950, dredged, 5 females. 
Upright Channel, July 19, 1950, dredged, 20 specimens. 
From Chelyosoma productum Stimpson: 

East of Upright Channel, June 23, 1950, dredged in 25-35 fathoms, 3 females, 
1 male. 
Oregon 

From S. gibbsii: 

Off Alseya River, Sept. 3, 1889, 116 fms., U. S. Fish Comm. Steamer Alba- 
tross, 3 females. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 601 

California 

From Eugyra sp.: 

Corona del Mar, 1934, G. E. MacGinitie, 1 female. 
In ascidian: 

Corona del Mar, Aug. 1, 1933, 17 fms., G. E. MacGinitie, 2 females. 
From Molgula regularis Ritter: 

Scorpion Harbor, Santa Cruz Island, July 26, 1939, in 20 fms., W. G. Hewatt, 
5 females. 

Description: Female (figs. 13,a-Z, 14,m-s): General features: 
The body (fig. 13, a) is compressed, with 5-segmented metasome and 
well-developed 5-segmented urosome. The metasomal components 
are the head, well-developed free thoracic somites of the first to third 
legs, and the large incubatory segment bearing the fourth and fifth 
legs. The first urosomal segment (fig. 13,6) is the thoracic genital 
somite. The remaining segments are abdominal. The head is pro- 
duced ventrally at the apex into a stout rostrum. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 13,c) is 10-segmented. The 
two basal segments are much expanded and so articulated on the head 
and with each other as to provide a right-angled flexure. The third 
segment is much narrower than the second. The terminal seven 
segments are graduated in a fairly regular, slight taper. The terminal 
three segments are sub quadrate in outline and the proximal two of 
these bear a distinctive ornamentation of fine spinules. Most of the 
remaining segments are slightly wider than long. Several segments 
are distinctive for the possession of one or more very long, basally 
stout setae. Two of these are inserted on each of the first two seg- 
ments. Segments seven and ten bear one each. In addition, each 
segment bears a number of shorter, slender setae. The count of setae 
by segments is: 1-3; 2-10; 3-2; 4-3; 5-1; 6-2; 7-2; 8-2; 9-2; 10-7. 
The setae are plumose and of fairly stiff consistency. 

The bimerous antenna (fig. 13,d) preserves only traces of the 
probable derivation by fusion of the two more proximal segments of 
the antenna of the type found in Notodelphys. Diagonal sulci in the 
integument at the distal sixth of the basal segment are related to the 
close-set insertions of two long, plumose, subequal setae. A short, 
reduced seta is inserted on the margin opposite to that bearing the 
two setae. The basal segment is five times as long as its greatest 
width. The second segment is nearly four times as long as wide and 
approximately three-fifths of the length of the basal segment. Termi- 
nally there is articulated a stout, tapered, curvedlclaw. Six setae, 
of varying lengths, are inserted apically, close to the base of the claw. 
At about the distal fourth of the segment there is inserted a compact 
row of three graduated setae which lie closely appressed to the surface 
of the segment. Just proximal to these is set a short marginal seta. 



602 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure 13. — Pygodelphys aquilonaris, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, uro- 
some; c, antennule; d, antenna; e, masticatory lamella of mandible;/, palp of mandible; 
g, maxillule; h, maxilla; i, maxilliped; /, first leg; k, spine from segment 2 of first 
exopodite; /, apical spine from first exopodite. The scale, referring to a, represents 
1.0 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 



603 




Figure 14. — Pygodelphys aquilonaris, new species, m-s, Female: m, second leg; n, third 
leg; o, fourth leg; p, terminal segment of fourth exopodite; q, fourth endopodite; r, fifth 
leg; s, caudal ramus, t-w, Male: t, antennule; u, fourth exopodite; v, fourth endopodite; 
w, somites of fifth and sixth legs, right side, x Female of variant from Boltenia villosa 
habit, lateral view, y, z, aa-ee, Variant aspects of distal segments of antennules of 
specimens from various hosts: y, from Pyura haustor; z, from Boltenia villosa; aa, 
from Halocyntkia aurantium; bb, from Ascidia paratropa; cc, from Cnemidocarpa 
finmarkiensis; dd, from Styela gibbsii; ee, from Molgula sp. 



604 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

At the proximal third of the segment is inserted another reduced 
marginal seta. Curving over the surface of the distal portion of the 
segment toward the margin opposite that with the setae are two rows 
of fine spinules. 

The mandible is much like that of Notodelphys. The masticatory 
plate (fig. 13,6) of the coxa is ornamented along the medial edge by 
five principal tooth-like projections, a saw-edge of fine, close-spaced 
denticles, and two fine, seta-like members. The basipodite (fig. 13,/) 
is long and slender. At the distal fourth of the medial margin is 
inserted one well-developed seta. The endopodite is bimerous. The 
subquadrate basal segment bears four setae, arranged as a row 
around the distal medial corner. The margins of the terminal seg- 
ment are parallel, the length is about 1% times the width, which is 
about half the greatest width of the basal segment. Nine setae form 
a close-set row along the distal three-fourths of the medial margin 
and across the terminal border. The exopodite is elongate and taper- 
ing. The segmentation is obsolete, apparently reduced to a bimerous 
condition. Five very long subequal setae are disposed along the 
ramus. 

The protopodite of the maxillule (fig. 13,#) is elongate and rather 
narrow. The segmentation is obscure or obsolete. A small lateral 
protuberance, doubtless representing the epipodite, furnishes insertion 
for a long, stout, proximally directed seta and a short accessory setule. 
Medially there are two projections probably representing endites. 
The proximal endite is a greatly developed, flaring prominence bearing 
a row of nine masticatory setae closely set along the medial margin. 
Just distal to this endite is the slight prominence of the second, pro- 
duced distally as an elongate, tapering, setiform structure. The distal 
portion of the protopodite is produced apically, turning the rami later- 
ally. A trio of basipodal setae ornament the distal medial margin of 
the protopodite. The endopodite is somewhat hand-shaped and bears 
five setae disposed along the apical margin. Four long, stout, almost 
equal setae are arranged fan-like across the outer margin of the 
exopodite. 

The pentamerous maxilla (fig. 13,A) is stout and compact. The 
massive basal segment is complicated medially by the production of 
the margin as four setiferous lobes, presumably the counterparts of 
endites. The basal prominence bears four setae. One is a reduced 
setule, the remaining three are long and stout, somewhat curved, and 
their bases are close-set in a compact row. The second prominence 
bears a single long straight seta. The third endite bears two equal 
setae. The fourth endite is well developed as an almost articulated 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 605 

extension from the main mass of the segment and bears two equal 
setae. The second segment is produced medially as a tapered, curved, 
stout hook, bearing denticulations along the proximal edge. Two 
setae are inserted basally on the hook-process, the dimensions of one 
nearly double those of the other. The succeeding two segments are 
very slender. On the distal medial corner of each is inserted a well- 
developed seta. The apical segment is much reduced. Its orna- 
mentation consists of an apical trio of subequal setae. 

The bimerous maxilliped (fig. 13, i) is markedly slender and elongate. 
The basal segment bears setae arranged in two groups. Proximally, 
three setae are set close together along the margin and a fourth is 
inserted on the surface close to them. A quartet of setae is disposed 
around the distal medial corner and a large superficial seta is inserted 
on the surface near their bases. The distal margin of this segment is 
diagonal, so that the distal segment, which is articulated at the far 
lateral margin, is markedly subapically inserted. The distal segment 
is a truncated cone, its length about twice its greatest width. At the 
apex are inserted two long, subequal, plumose setae. 

Swimming legs: The protopodites of the first legs (fig. 13,j) are 
somewhat elongated and inflated. The intercoxal plate is slightly 
reduced. Inserted on the medial distal corner of the coxa is a long 
slender seta which extends just beyond the distal border of the second 
segment of the endopodite. The basipodite is characterized by a very 
short lateral margin, near which is set a short seta, and a much longer 
medial margin. At the distal medial corner of the basis is articulated 
a stout, tapering, slightly curved spine which reaches well beyond the 
distal margin of the first segment of the endopodite. 

The rami are trimerous. The large basal segment of the exopodite 
bears a long, stout, lateral spine and a well-developed medial seta. 
The second segment bears one much shorter, slighter, lateral spine 
(fig. 13,k) and a medial seta. The distal segment bears three lateral 
spines, an apical spine (fig. 13,Z) and seta, and three medial setae. 
The dimensions of the spines of the distal segment are varied. The 
proximal spine is very short. The two distal spines are slender but 
elongate. The three more proximal spines of the ramus are distin- 
guished by the possession of thin, transparent, serrated, marginal 
flanges. 

The endopodite tapers somewhat from a distinctly thickened basal 
segment. The first two segments each bear a single medial seta. The 
terminal segment bears three medial setae, two apical setae, and a 
single seta inserted about midway on the lateral margin. Fine spin- 
ules form short rows, which ornament each of the segments of the 
endopodite and the basipodite near its medial spine, and a fine serra- 
tion along the lateral margin of the first segment of the exopodite. 



606 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The protopodites of the second legs (fig. 14,m) are very long in 
proportion to width. The coxae are linked by a much-reduced inter- 
coxal plate. At the distal medial corner of each coxa is inserted a 
slender seta which reaches to the distal margin of the first segment of 
the endopodite. The only ornamentation of the basipodite is a 
reduced seta inserted near the short lateral margin. 

The trimerous exopodite is slender and elongate. All the elements 
of the armature are setiform. Each of the two basal segments bears 
a lateral seta and a medial seta. The distal segment bears three 
lateral setae, graduated somewhat in length, two apical setae, and four 
medial setae. 

The endopodite is bimerous. The elongate second segment exhibits 
a most distinctive outline produced by strong medial emarginations 
into which the setae are inserted. The basal segment bears a single 
medial seta. The distal segment bears five medial setae, two apical 
setae, and a lateral seta inserted at the distal third. 

The third legs (fig. 14,n) are much elongate and narrowed. The 
coxopodites are more or less rectangular and they are united by a 
much-reduced intercoxal plate. At the distal medial corner of the 
coxa is inserted a slight seta which does not quite reach the distal 
margin of the first segment of the endopodite. The armature of the 
basipodite consists of a single reduced seta inserted near the short 
lateral margin. 

The basal segment of the trimerous exopodite is much elongated, 
nearly equaling the combined lengths of the two distal segments. 
The second segment is slightly prolonged, subquadrate. The distal 
segment is elongate and slightly tapered. All the elements of the 
armature are setiform. 

The basal segment bears a short rigid lateral seta and a short 
medial seta about twice as long. The second segment bears a lateral 
seta and a medial seta. The terminal segment bears three lateral 
setae, two apical setae, and four medial setae. 

The bimerous endopodite is elongate, mainly due to the pronounced 
extension of the second segment, which is 2% times as long as the 
basal segment. Both segments are relatively slender, the basal seg- 
ment being about as long as wide. The first segment bears a single 
medial seta. The terminal segment bears five medial setae, two apical 
setae, and a lateral seta inserted at the distal fifth. 

The protopodites of the fourth legs (fig. 14,o) are much elongate 
and slightly tapered to a somewhat conical aspect. The coxae are 
united at their basal third by a rudimentary intercoxal plate. At the 
distal medial corner of the coxa is inserted a small seta which extends 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 607 

just beyond the midpoint of the basal segment of the endopodite. 
Inserted near the very short lateral margin of the basipodite is a short, 
much-reduced seta. 

The basal segment of the elongate, trimerous exopodite approaches 
the combined lengths of the two distal segments, each of which is also 
markedly produced. All elements of the armature are setiform. The 
basal segment bears a short, lateral seta and a medial seta. The 
second segment bears a lateral seta and a medial seta. The terminal 
segment (fig. 14,2?) bears two lateral setae, two apical setae, and four 
medial setae. 

The bimerous endopodite (fig. 14,<z) is markedly elongate, its apex 
reaching the level of the midpoint of the terminal segment of the 
exopodite. The basal segment is about as long as its greatest width 
and it bears a medial seta. The outline of the somewhat tapered 
second segment, which is 3% times as long as the basal segment, is 
characterized by pronounced emarginations accommodating the inser- 
tions of lateral and medial marginal setae. There are four medial 
setae, two apical setae, and one lateral seta. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The fifth legs (fig. 14, r) are much 
reduced, with segmentation obsolete. Each consists essentially of a 
short plate with widely separated lateral and medial short prolonga- 
tions. At the apex of each prolongation is inserted a short, slender 
seta. The lateral prominence is somewhat complicated basally, 
presenting slight evidence that it might represent the vestige of the 
distal segment characteristic of this appendage in most notodelphyids. 

The caudal rami (fig. 14,s) are long, gently tapered, and somewhat 
flattened. The length is about five times the basal width. The in- 
tegument of the rami is fairly heavily sclerotized. The armature is 
well developed. Three" setae are inserted across the apex. Two of 
these are subequal and slightly exceed the length of the ramus. The 
third is half as long as these. Two setae are inserted in lateral 
emarginations. One, at the proximal fourth, is about three-fourths 
as long as the ramus. The other, at the distal fifth, is nearly as long 
as the ramus. A very short seta is inserted on the dorsal surface, 
toward the medial margin, at the distal eighth. 

Male (fig. 14,t-w) : The body is much smaller and slenderer than 
in the female. The metasome is 4-segmented. The urosome is 
6-segmented. The caudal rami are slender and bear much more 
highly developed setae. 

In the antennule (fig. 14,0 the terminal segments are coalesced and 
the second segment bears a short, stout hook-seta. 



422202—58 10 



608 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

The swimming legs are much more generalized than in the female. 
The armature of the posterior exopodites (fig. 14/&) includes well- 
developed spines. 

The posterior endopodites (fig. 14,w) are trimerous and the segments 
are not nearly so elongate. 

The fifth and sixth legs (fig. 14,w) are markedly similar in structure. 
In each, two setiferous lobes are borne at the end of the appropriate 
thoracic somite. 

Remarks: This species shows a considerable range of variation, 
as might be expected of so widespread and tolerant a form. Several 
structural features seem constant for representatives from specific 
hosts. The variants are not considered sufficiently demarcated to 
warrant taxonomic designation at the present stage of knowledge of 
the group. The description above is drawn from the holotype, which 
is associated with Pyura haustor. This form is also that considered in 
drawing up the key to the species above. When the full range of 
variation of North American representatives is accounted for in a 
description, it is impossible to separate this from the very generalized 
published description of P. lamellipes (Schellenberg) . However, 
since many specific details of the latter species have not received full 
treatment, it seems undesirable to give the northern specimens this 
specific name. 

The variant types from Washington show a number of distinctive 
features. Specimens from Boltenia villosa (fig. 14, x) present a charac- 
teristic silhouette, due to posterior prolongation of the dorsal margins 
of thoracic somites to present the appearance of a series of spikes. 

The terminal segments of the antennule vary in then proportions. 
The typical form from Pyura haustor has subquadrate terminal seg- 
ments with spinulose ornamentation (fig. 14,?/). Specimens from 
Boltenia villosa (fig. 14,2), Halocynthia aurantium (fig. 14,aa), Ascidia 
paratropa (fig. 14,66), Cnemidocarpa Jinmarkiensis (fig. 14,cc), Styela 
gibbsii (fig. 14,dd), and Molgula sp. (fig. 14, ee) are figured to show the 
corresponding variations. 

Genus Pachypygus Sars 

Doropygus Thorell, 1859a, p. 52 (part). 

Doropygus (Notopterophorus) Giesbrecht, 1882a, p. 294 (part). — Canu, 1892, p. 

191. 
Notopterophorus Schimkewitsch, 1893, p. 200 (part). — Schellenberg, 1922, p. 254. 
Notopterophorus (Doropygus), Allen and Todd, 1902, p. 316 (part). 
Pachypygus G. Sars, 1921, p. 51 (type species, by monotypy, Doropygus gibber 

Thorell, 1859). 

This genus, proposed by G. Sars (1921), is well delimited but has 
retained its monotypic status to date. However, the American repre- 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 609 

sentatives available have sufficiently characteristic features that it 
seems desirable at this time to emphasize the fact by proposing 
specific status for them. There is no outstanding distinction in 
setation, but there are sufficient minor deviations in detail to indicate 
a genetic separation. The diagnosis of the genus thus is not altered. 

The body is invested with a heavily sclerotized integument which 
emphasizes the marked compression. The pentamerous metasome 
consists of a large cephalosome and four free thoracic somites, very 
unequal in size, with the first minute and the third much enlarged; 
a greatly expanded brood sack occupies most of the posteriormost 
segment. The urosome is 6-segmented and bears the somite of the 
fifth legs. The reduced perianal ring upon which the caudal rami 
are inserted is counted as the sixth segment. 

The antennule is 7-segmented, with marked basal expansion. The 
setation of the trimerous antenna is much reduced. The endopodite 
of the mandible tends toward reduction, with accompanying diminu- 
tion of the setae both in number and proportion. In the exopodite 
segmentation is suppressed so that the ramus becomes a rigid flat 
plate bearing well-developed setae. 

The maxillule is characterized by the indistinctly bimerous endo- 
podite, with profuse setation. The well-developed exopodite bears 
four strong setae. The second segment of the tetramerous maxilla 
bears an extremely heavy, prehensile claw-process. The setation of 
this appendage is relatively reduced. The maxilliped is trimerous, 
with all segments setiferous. The basal segment bears about eight 
setae, the second segment one seta, and the terminal segment four 
setae. 

The swimming legs are marked by a strong tendency to reduction of 
setation. The first legs are not particularly distinctive, but in the 
succeeding three pairs the setae of the exopodites tend toward obso- 
lescence or are absent. The fifth legs are generalized, and, except 
for their heavy sclerotization, conform well to the usual type found in 
Doropygus. 

The caudal rami are highly sclerotized. They taper strongly from 
expanded bases. The terminal armature consists of a number of 
short, stout, curved claws rather than setae. 

Key to the species of Pachypygus, based upon females 

la. Medial margin of third segment of fourth exopodite straight and unorna- 
mented macer, p. 610 

16. Medial margin of third segment of fourth exopodite sinuate, set with 
spinules gibber, p. 610 



610 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

North American Species 
?Pachypygus gibber (Thorell) 

Doropygus gibber Thorell, 1859a, pp. 52-53, pi. 8, fig. 11 (type locality, Swedish 
coast, in Ascidia intestinalis) ; 1859b, pp. 339, 343; 1860, pp. 118-119, 123. — 
Hesse, 1866, pp. 63-64.— Buchholz, 1869, pp. 120-122, pi. 7, fig. 4.— 
Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775-777, 792, 801.— Kerschner, 1879, pp. 
186-187, pi. 1, figs. 5-7; pi. 2, fig. 6; pi. 3, figs. 2, 5-8; pi. 6, figs. 3-9.— 
Richiardi, 1880, p. 147.— Aurivillius, 1882a, p. 56, pi. 6, figs. 11, 12; 1882b, 
p. 112; 1883, pp. 26, 108, pi. 2, figs. 11, 12.— Koehler, 1890, pp. 137-138, fig. 
10.— Canu, 1891, p. 472.— Thompson, 1893, p. 190, pi. 18, fig. 2.— Brian, 1898, 
p. 9.— T. Scott, 1900, p. 386; 1907, p. 364.— Graeffe, 1902, p. 39.— Stephen- 
sen, 1913, p. 349.— Chatton and Brement, 1915c, pp. 147-149, fig. 2.— Wilson, 
1920, p. 14.— Gurney, 1933, p. 304. 

Doropygus (Notopterophorus) gibber, Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 294, 317, 328. — Cams, 
1885, p. 343.— Canu, 1892, pp. 191-193, pi. 5, figs. 25-31; pi. 6, figs. 1-8; 
pi. 7, figs. 1-10.— Pesta, 1909, pp. 258-262, pi. 1, figs. 1-6. 

Notopterophorus gibber, Schimkewitsch, 1893, pp. 200-203; 1896, p. 339, pi. 14, 
figs. 33, 39-42, 47-52, pi. 16, figs. 53-55, 57-60.— Norman, 1905, p. 36.— 
Norman and Scott, 1906, p. 202. — Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 1735. — Schellenberg, 
1922, pp. 254, 267.— Harant, 1931, p. 372.— Pesta, 1934, p. 8.— Sewell, 
1949, p. 182. 

Notopterophorus (Doropygus) gibber, Allen and Todd, 1902, pp. 316, 325. 

Pachypygus gibber, G. Sars, 1921, pp. 51-52, pi. 25. — van Oorde-de-Lint and 
Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 120, fig. 71.— Lang, 1948, p. 3.— Sewell, 
1949, pp. 182, 188. 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden; British 
Isles; (?) Greenland; (?) Australia. 

Hosts: Ascidia canina, A. glabra Hartmr., A. intestinalis, A. 
plebeia, A. venosa, Boltenia bolteni, Clavelina lepadiformis Mull., 
Clavellina sp., Cynthia microcosmus, Molgula ampulloides Beneden, M. 
oculata Forb., M. socialis Alder, Phallusia cf. cristata, P. jumigata 
Grube, P. obliqua, P. patula, P. virginea, Polycarpa comata (Aid.), 
P. gracilis Hell. 

Remarks: A report by Vanhoffen (1897, p. 292) of this species 
from Greenland has been shown by Hansen (1923, p. 26) to be based 
upon a misidentification of Schizoproctus inflatus. Whether Hansen's 
additional record of a specimen from Greenland is referable to this 
species or to P. macer will have to be decided by reference to the 
original specimen, if it can be located. 

Pachypygus macer, new species 

Figure 15 

Pachypygus gibber, Wilson, 1927, p. 162. 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92798 (type locality, Hurricane 
Harbor, Miami, Fla., in Styela plicata Lesueur), and paratypes listed 
below. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — TLLG 611 

Specimens examined: 

Florida 

From S. plicata: 

Hurricane Harbor, Miami, from test block, Mar. 23, 1950, L. B. Isham, 
holotype. 
From solitary ascidian: 

Gulf of Mexico, 3}i miles southwest of Longboat Pass, Sarasota Bay, Feb. 28, 
1951, J. B. Knight, 1 female. 
From Microcosmus exasperatus Heller: 

Sanibel Island, Stewart Springer, 2 females. 
South America 

From M. exasperatus: 

Spanish Water, Curacao, 1920, C. J. van der Horst, 5 females. 

Description: Female (fig. 15,a-n): General features: The body 
(fig. 15, a) is much compressed but with an inflated outline approaching 
an ovoid. This aspect is primarily that of the metasome, which much 
exceeds the urosome. The metasome is pentamerous, with a moderate 
sized head, a small thoracic segment bearing the first legs, a larger 
segment bearing the second legs, a much larger segment bearing third 
legs, and a much-expanded fourth segment which accommodates the 
brood sack. The urosome is 6-segmented and includes the somite of 
the fifth legs. 

A well-developed rostrum protrudes anteriorly and ventrally 
between the bases of the antennules. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 15,6) is 9-segmented, with a 
complicated articulation at the ventral surface of the head. The 
proximal two segments are subequal, each is elongate and inflated, so 
that the combined length of the two considerably exceeds the com- 
bined length of the terminal seven segments. The second segment is 
longer than the first. At its distal border the ventral margin con- 
siderably projects beyond the base of the third segment producing 
the characteristic aspect of enveloping it. The width of the second 
segment at its distal margin is nearly twice the greatest width of the 
third segment. The third segment also presents the effect of slightly 
enveloping the base of the slightly narrower fourth segment. The 
seven terminal segments form a tapered assemblage, each in linear 
order slightly narrower than the preceding. The lengths are in 
approximately serial order also, except that the fifth segment is 
slightly longer than the fourth. The setae of the antennule are short 
and slender and the ciliation is diminished to lacking. 

The antenna (fig. 15,c) is distinctly 3-segmented. The basal seg- 
ment is the longest; the second segment the shortest. All segments 
are heavily sclerotized. The terminal hook is relatively long, slender 
and taperingly acuminate. The two proximal segments bear no 
setae. The terminal segment is ornamented with several short, 



612 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 




Figure 15. — Pachypygus macer, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, antennule; 
c, antenna; d, masticatory lamella of mandible; e, palp of mandible; /, maxillule; g, 
maxilla; h, maxilliped; i, first leg;;, second leg; k, third leg; /, fourth leg; m, fifth leg; 
n, caudal rami. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS< — ILLG 613 

slender setae. Four setae are set near the articulating region of the 
terminal claw. A more proximal trio of setae is closely adherent to 
one of the flattened surfaces of the segment. Two isolated setae are 
more basally placed on the segment. 

The mandible is well developed. The masticatory portion is 
illustrated (fig. 15, d). The palp (fig. 15, e) bears a complement of 
profusely plumose setae. The exopodite is a heavily sclerotized 
flattened plate with all evidence of segmentation suppressed. The 
five subequal, plumose setae are long and stout and arranged in a 
fan-like row on the lateral margin. The basipodite bears a long, 
stout, plumose seta inserted on the medial margin at a point about 
opposite to the lateral articulation of the exopodite. The terminal 
endopodite is 2-segmented. The basal segment is the shorter, but 
is the wider. It bears a medial row of four plumose setae, all well 
developed. The terminal segment bears a medial row of four setae, 
a medial distal pair of subequal setae, and a distolateral trio, consisting 
of two approximately equal, shorter setae, and a much stouter and 
longer seta at the lateral angle. All the setae are plumose. 

The maxillule (fig. 15,/) has a well-developed protopodite, monomer- 
ous exopodite, and bimerous endopodite. The masticatory endite 
bears a medial row of about ten relatively short, stout, tapered setae. 
The next proximal endite supports a seta-like outgrowth of very much 
the same dimensions as the stoutest of the masticatory row of setae. 
The anatomically medial trio of setae of the basipodite are borne 
almost terminally on the appendage. The proximal seta of this 
group is much the longest and stoutest. The distal two setae are of 
about half the length and thickness of the accompanying seta. The 
endopodite is distinctly 2-segmented. The basal segment has a 
medial row of short, slender setae. There is a terminal trio of sub- 
equal longer, stouter setae on the very short distal segment. The 
exopodite widens sharply from a constricted articulation to a broadly 
truncate distal margin. Four subequal, long, stout setae are set along 
this margin. The epipodite supports a long, stout, tapering seta, 
accompanied by a very short, spike-like, plumose spinule or setule. 
All the setae of the appendage are plumose. 

The maxilla (fig. 15,0) is 5-segmented. The terminal four segments 
are much inclined as a distal unit upon the much longer, stouter basal 
segment. The terminal three segments are slender and the fourth is 
much the longest of this distal trio. The setation of the appendage is 
generalized. The basal segment is ornamented by a basal quartet of 
setae set upon the prominent proximal protuberance. There are 
arranged successively a single seta and two couples of setae all borne 
on less conspicuous protuberances. The distal medial margin of the 



614 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

second segment is much produced, flaring into the base of its heavy 
claw. The claw is accompanied by a long, plumose seta and a very 
short setule. The third segment supports a long, plumose seta at 
the distal medial corner. The armature of the fourth segment is a 
single distal, medial, long, plumose seta. The very short terminal 
segment bears four subequal setae, two of these seemingly terminal. 
The setae of the appendage are richly plumose. 

The maxilliped (fig. 15, h) is 3-segmented. The basal segment is 
very long and slender. It bears medially a more basal quartet and 
a distal quintet of slender masticatory setae. The long, stout second 
segment bears one medial seta, relatively long and slender. The 
distal segment is the shortest and slenderest. It bears a medial row 
of three long setae and a distal, short, much-tapered seta. All the 
setae are plumose. 

The first legs (fig. 15, i) are generalized. The intercoxal plate is 
tapering, with a resultant truncated triangular aspect. The medial 
coxal seta is long, reaching as far as the tip of the endopodite. The 
basipodite bears a lateral seta which approximately equals in length 
the basal segment of the exopodite. The medial spine of the basipo- 
dite is stout and tapered. It reaches about to the middle of the second 
segment of the endopodite. The spines of the exopodite are approxi- 
mately serially graduated in length and of about the same stoutness. 
The exopodite is linear with little flexure of the segments upon one 
another. The two basal segments each bear a lateral spine and a 
medial seta. The distal segment bears three lateral spines, an apical 
spine and seta, and three medial setae. 

The two proximal segments of the trimerous endopodite each bear 
a medial seta. The distal segment bears three medial setae, two 
apical setae, and a lateral seta. 

The second legs (fig. 15, j) are modified. There is no intercoxal 
plate. There is a medium-long medial coxal seta. The lateral seta 
of the basipodite is short and slender. The endopodite is linear and 
the ornamentation is of generalized type. The exopodite is longer 
than the endopodite. It is flattened and fairly heavily sclerotized. 
Its spines have a characteristic short, straight, blunted aspect. Only 
the basal segment bears a seta, which is normally long and plumose. 
The basal segment also bears a heavy, short spine. The second 
segment bears only a similar spine. The third segment bears three 
short stout lateral spines and an apical spine about twice as long as 
the lateral members. The medial margins of the segments are linear 
and heavily sclerotized. 

The ornamentation of the endopodite consists of one medial seta 
on the basal segment, two medial setae on the second segment, and 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS ILLG 615 

three medial setae, two apical setae, and one lateral seta on the distal 
segment. 

The third legs (fig. 15, k) show the same trend of modification as 
do the second but with the more extreme aspect of complete lack of 
setae on the exopodite segments. 

The two basal segments of the exopodite each bear a lateral spine. 
The distal segment bears three lateral spines and an apical spine. 
The medial margins of the two distal segments form almost a contin- 
uous, heavily sclerotized line. 

The fourth legs (fig. 15,0 are also consistently specialized. The 
bimerous protopodite is expanded and inflated, with ornamentation 
obsolete. 

The trimerous exopodite is conspicuously slender and elongate. 
It lacks setae entirely. The two basal segments bear each a stout 
lateral spine. The terminal segment bears three lateral spines and an 
apical spine. The medial margins of the segments are straight, un- 
interrupted, and heavily sclerotized. 

The ornamentation of the trimerous endopodite consists of one 
medial seta on the basal segment; two medial setae on the second 
segment; and two medial setae, one apical seta, and two lateral setae 
on the distal segment. 

The uniramous fifth legs (fig. 15,ra) are heavily sclerotized. The 
long basal segment is relatively narrow and fairly markedly set off 
from the body somite. It bears a distal, medial, short, slender seta. 
The distal segment is about a quarter again as long as the basis. 
The armature is a medial distal seta and a thornlike spine toward the 
lateral corner. The lateral margin is indented with a characteristic 
sclerotized flange projecting distally beyond each point of indentation. 
The length of the segment is about 3% times its greatest width. 

The caudal rami (fig. 15,ti) are very slender in proportion to their 
length, the ratio of greatest width to over-all length being 1:5. They 
exhibit a rather slight taper, further, with the basal width only about 
twice the apical width. The armature consists of four subequal, short 
spines, apically inserted, and a seta placed on the lateral margin 
three-fifths of the length of this margin from its base. 

No male specimen has been found. 

Remarks: This species is differentiated from Pachypygus gibber 
on the grounds of considerably less expanded development of various 
of the appendages. The body outline does not tend to so extreme 
a degree of exaggerated inflation. The urosome is a much slenderer 
cylinder with the middle segments tending to be somewhat longer than 
wide. The caudal rami are particularly slender in comparison with 
the older species. 



616 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

The segments of the posterior swimming legs are much more pro- 
duced in P. macer, and the inner margins of the terminal segments 
of the exopodites are linear and unornamented rather than sinuate 
and weakly spinose. 

Pomphopygus, new genus 

The genus is monotypic, with Pomphopygus pinguis, new species, 
described below, the type species. The specific description will also 
serve for the characterization of the genus, as it is so far known. 

Pomphopygus pinguis, new species 

Figure 16 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92808 (type locality, Channel 
Islands, Calif., in Ascidia clementea Hitter), and paratypic females. 
Specimens examined: 

California 

From A. clementea: 

Off San Nicolas Island, dredged, 1904, U. S. Fish Commission Steamer 

Albatross, Station 5582, female types. 
Off San Clemente Island, dredged in 659-704 fms., Apr. 9, 1904, U. S. Fish 
Commission Steamer Albatross, Station 4405, 1 female. 

Description: Female (fig. 16,a-p): General features: The body 
(fig. 16,a) is much inflated with very lightly sclerotized integument. 
A fine fur of light ciiiation covers most of the body. The general 
effect of the appearance in preserved specimens is that characterizing 
the hyperiid amphipods, combining transparency and sparseness of 
internal structure. 

The metasome consists of a head complex, three free thoracic 
somites, and the greatly inflated incubatory segment. 

The segmentation of the urosome has been impossible to establish 
accurately from the specimens available. The characteristics of 
texture mentioned above combined with the effects of poor preserva- 
tion have brought about obscuring of surface texturing which would 
indicate the anatomical subdivisions. The caudal rami are unique 
among those of notodelphyids I have studied in their ballonlike 
quality. The usual slight degree of sclerotized rigidity here is seem- 
ingly lacking. 

Head appendages: The 9-segmented antennule (fig. 16,6) is much 
like that in Doropygus but with reduced setation. The three basal 
segments form a fairly sharp taper. The six distal segments taper 
only gradually to the apex. The two most proximal segments are 
massive and much expanded. The distal portion of the third seg- 
ment envelops nearly a half of the fourth segment. All the setae are 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 617 

relatively weak and short. An approximation of the number present 
by segments is: 1-2; 2-5; 3-4; 4-3; 5-2; 6-3; 7-1; 8-1; 9-6. 

The trimerous antenna (fig. 16, c) is stout with a weak terminal 
segment. The basal segment is longest, about twice as long as wide. 
The second segment is shortest. The third segment is markedly 
narrower than the second. It is about twice as long as wide; artic- 
ulated at its apex is a weakly developed, curved, tapered prehensile 
claw. Four setae are inserted near the articulation of the claw. A 
very reduced seta is set at about the midpoint of the outer margin 
of the segment. 

The mandible consists of a bimerous protopodite and two rami. 
The coxopodite is extended medially as a well-developed masticatory 
lamella (fig. 16,gQ. The serrations of the inner margin of the lamella 
are differentiated into five stout toothlike projections, a finely dentic- 
ulate region, and two setiform processes. The basipodite (fig. 16,e) 
bears a single well-developed seta, inserted about midway on the 
medial margin. 

The endopodite is bimerous ; the first segment is much smaller than 
the second. A single seta is inserted on the medial margin of the 
basal segment. The distal segment bears six setae, three distributed 
along the medial margin, two apical, and one on the lateral margin. 
The setae are subequal and the longest and stoutest of them are still 
actually reduced. 

The exopodite is a flattened, broadly ovate, platelike structure. 
The five nearly equal setae are all well developed, long and stout, 
and arranged nearly regularly around the outer circumference of the 
ramus. 

The maxillule (fig. 16,/) is characterized by suppression of the rami 
and distal portion of the protopodite and exaggeration in bulk of the 
proximal portion of the protopodite. The single endite is greatly 
produced medially and bears along the inner margin six closely set, 
stout, stiff, masticatory setae. Inserted on the basal portion including 
this endite is the remainder of the appendage compressed to a palplike 
structure. Laterally at the base is borne a long, slender, proximally 
directed seta representing the epipodite. Just distal to this a pro- 
jection bearing four equal setae represents the exopodite in which the 
articulation with the segment has been almost completely suppressed. 
An apical prominence bears three terminal setae and two medial setae. 
The anatomical explanation of this structure would assign the two 
medial setae to the basipodite and the three terminal setae to the 
endopodite with the articulation again having been suppressed to 
near obsolescence. 

The tetramerous maxilla (fig. 16,#) is marked by great inflation 
proximally and some suppression of armature. The basal segment 



618 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 




Figure 16. — Pomphopygus pinguis, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, antennule; 
c, antenna; d, masticatory lamella of mandible; e, palp of mandible; /, maxillule; g, 
maxilla; h, maxilliped; i, first leg; /, second leg; k, protopodite and endopodite of third 
leg; /, third exopodite; m, protopodite and exopodite of fourth leg; n, fourth endo- 
podite; o, fifth leg; p, caudal ramus. The scale, referring to a, represents 0.5 mm. 



NOTODELPHYID C'OPEPODS — ILLG 619 

bears only three endites, the first one set with four setae and each of 
the two more distal ones bearing two approximately equal setae. 

The second segment is well developed and produced medially as a 
very stout, heavily sclerotized hook or claw. Basally inserted on the 
claw-process is one equally long, well-developed seta and an accom- 
panying reduced setule. The third segment bears a single seta inserted 
at the distal medial corner. The minute fourth segment bears three 
well-developed apical setae. 

The maxilliped (fig. 16, h) is a reduced flattened plate with weakly 
sclerotized integument. Five fairly stout setae are grouped along the 
medial margin. A single seta is inserted at the distal lateral corner. 

Swimming legs: The first legs (fig. 16,i) are composed of 2-seg- 
mented protopodites and trimerous rami. The coxopodites are yoked 
together by an intercoxal plate. The medial coxal seta of most 
notodelphyid genera is here absent. Inserted near the lateral margin 
of the basipodite is a short seta. Inserted distally and medially on 
the basipodite is a relatively stout spine which extends to near the 
distal margin of the second segment of the endopodite. 

The basal segment of the exopodite is much the largest. It bears 
a lateral spine and medial seta. The second segment bears a lateral 
spine and medial seta. The distal segment bears two lateral spines, 
an apical spine and seta, and three medial setae, a distinctive orna- 
mentation. 

The two basal segments of the endopodite are short ; their combined 
lengths are exceeded by that of the distal segment. Each of the two 
basal segments bears a single medial seta. The terminal segment 
bears two medial setae, two apical setae, and two lateral setae. 

The setae of the rami are relatively short and slender and only 
feebly ciliated. 

The second legs (fig. 16 j) are of small size and exhibit some reduc- 
tion in structure. The bimerous protopodites lack armature and no 
intercoxal plate is present. 

The exopodite is trimerous with the segments somewhat elongated 
in proportion to width. The basal segment, which is much the 
longest, and the second segment bear each a lateral spine and a medial 
seta. The third segment bears three lateral spines, an apical spine 
and seta, and four medial setae. 

The endopodite is much smaller than the exopodite. The segments 
are progressively lengthened, so that the second is about twice as 
long as the first and the length of the third about equals the combined 
lengths of the two basal segments. The first and second segments 
bear each a medial seta. The third segment bears two medial setae, 
two apical setae, and two lateral setae. The setae of both rami are 



620 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

short and slender and the usual plumose ciliation is here reduced or 
absent. 

The somewhat reduced third legs (fig. I6,k,l) consist of bimerous 
protopodites and bimerous rami. Coxopodite and basipodite lack 
armature and there is no intercoxal plate. 

The two proximal segments of the exopodite (fig. 16,Z) bear each 
a lateral spine and medial seta. The terminal segment bears three 
lateral spines, an apical spine and seta, and four medial setae. 

The endopodite is much smaller in bulk than the exopodite and 
slenderly linear in outline. The basal segment is much the smallest. 
The two sub equal distal segments are each about twice as long as the 
basal segment. Each of the two proximal segments bears a single 
seta inserted at the distal medial corner. The distal segment bears 
two medial setae, two apical setae, and two lateral setae. All the 
setae of both rami are slender and with the usual plumose ciliation 
scant or absent. 

The bimerous protopodites of the fourth legs (fig. 16,m) lack orna- 
mentation and there is no intercoxal plate. 

The two basal segments of the trimerous exopodite bear each a 
lateral spine and medial seta. The distal segment bears three equal 
lateral spines, an apical spine and seta, and four medial setae. 

The trimerous endopodite (fig. 16,n) is slender and linear in outline 
and much exceeded in mass by the exopodite. The basal segment 
is much the shortest, equaling in length only about half that of either 
of the two subequal distal segments. The two proximal segments each 
bear a single seta inserted at the distal medial corner. The distal 
segment bears two medial setae, two apical setae, and a single lateral 
seta. None of the setae of the rami are ciliated. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: The fifth legs (fig. 16,o) are reduced 
to thin scalelike plates lacking ornamentation. 

The lengths of the caudal rami (fig. 16, p) are about three times the 
greatest width. The integument is very lightly sclerotized and 
distinguished by a profuse fine ciliation. Four subequal reduced 
setae are inserted at the apex. A fifth seta is inserted at the proximal 
third of the lateral margin. 

No male specimen was found. 

Remarks: The characteristics of this copepod do not permit its 
inclusion in any of the previously known genera. In many ways it 
appears to be a transitional form between the genera with less modified 
habitus, like Doropygus, and exaggeratedly specialized examples, like 
Gunenotophorus. The suppression of the palp portions of the mandible 
and maxillule bear out the resemblance to Gunenotophorus, as do the 
reduced maxillipeds. The swimming legs are somewhat like those in 
Doropygus, but they are considerably reduced. The absence of a 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS ILLG 621 

medial coxal seta on the first legs and the armature of the terminal 
segment of the first exopodite are features most rarely encountered 
among the notodelphyids. The degree of reduction of the fifth legs 
is also an unique feature among the series of forms in which this species 
seems to have its closest allies. 

Genus Gunenotophorus Buchholz 

Gunenotophorus (nomen nudum), Costa, 1840, p. 7. — Hope, 1851, p. 37. — Leuckart, 
1859, p. 242— Thorell, 1859a, p. 6; 1859b, p. 336; 1860, p. 115.— Claus, 1864, 
pp. 381-382. 

Sphaeronotus Claus, 1864, p. 379 (not Sphaeronotus Laporte, 1832) (type species, 
by monotypy, S. thorellii Claus, 1864). 

Gunentophorus Buchholz, 1869, p. 144 (type species, by monotypy, G. globularis 
Buchholz, 1869).— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, p. 719.— Claus, 1875, p. 350 — 
Kerschner, 1879, p. 190.— Aurivillius, 1883, p. 26.— Cams, 1885, p. 344 — 
Brehm, 1927, p. 490.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 56-57.— Wilson, 1924, p. 21; 1932, 
p. 602. — van Oorde-de-Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1936, p. 121. — 
Lang, 1948, p. 3.— Sewell, 1949, p. 170. 

Gynentophorus von Martens, 1879, p. 44. 

Gunenotophorus Giesbrecht, 1882a, pp. 325, 326.— Canu, 1891, p. 475; 1892, p. 
199.— Brian, 1905, p. 3; 1906, p. 144.— T. Scott, 1907, p. 366.— Stebbing, 
1910, p. 550.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 257-258. 

Gunentopherus Koehler, 1890, p. 138. 

Gunenthophorus Graeffe, 1902, p. 40. 

Gunetotrophus Norman, 1905, p. 36. 

Guenenotophorus Harant, 1931, p. 371. 

Doropygus Pearse, 1952, p. 189 (part). 

The name Gunenotophorus was first published as an item in the 
specific catalog of Costa (1840, p. 7). This was a nomen nudum, and 
as such has been recorded by all the principal nomenclators. Accom- 
panying this genus in the list was Notopterophorus, with tw~o species, 
N. elongatus and N. elatus. These terms were also nomina nuda. In 
1852 a set of plates illustrating entomostracans was published in 
Costa's same series and included as one of two designated "plate 2," 
a group of figures of copepods. There was no explanation of these 
figures ever issued. Not all sets of Costa's work include this plate. 
I have not been able to locate it in several sets consulted in the 
United States. However, several European authors refer to it. Among 
the figures are recognizable depictions of previously named species. 
For some of the remaining figures, authors have been unanimous in 
their acceptance that the illustrated features are recognizably attribu- 
table to the concept of a "notopterophorus." The figures left, by 
exclusion, are available as the illustration of the only unillustrated 
name on Costa's list, Gunenotophorus globularis. 

Hope (1851) repeated Costa's listing of species, with the only addi- 
tional information a mention of Sicily as the locality. Leuckart 
(1859) described a species of Notopterophorus and accepted Costa's 



622 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

designation of the genus, referring to the list and to the figure. He 
also mentioned Costa's usage of Gunenotophorus , and stated that some 
of the figures of the plate perhaps refer to this name. Thorell (1859a, 
p. 6) referred to Costa, Hope, and Leuckart, and stated that Costa, 
on "plate 2," illustrated two crustaceans named Gunenotophorus and 
Notopterophorus. ThorelTs statements were repeated in his references 
of 1859b and 1860. 

Claus (1864, pp. 381-382), in his full description of Sphaeronotus 
thorellii, remarked that figures 1-3 of Costa would possibly apply to 
Sphaeronotus, in which case he assumed Costa's Gunenotophorus was 
the same as his genus. 

Buchholz (1869) described and figured Gunentophorus globularis, 
attributing the authorship to Costa. Brian (1905, p. 3) described 
specimens from the Costa collections that came from Messina. It is 
possible that these were the animals upon which the original reference 
and figures were based. 

It is clear that Costa's name was a nomen nudum and no one of the 
later workers, until Buchholz (1869), definitely established the con- 
nection of name, illustration, and organism. However, Claus' prior 
description of the species concerned as Sphaeronotus thorellii has 
precedence. Since Sphaeronotus Claus was preoccupied, the present 
genus is attributed to Buchholz (1869), emending his spelling. 

The genus Gunenotophorus is a markedly coherent one, doubtless 
due to the small number of known forms. These are among the most 
massive of the notodelphyids, exhibiting a great inflation of the 
incubatory cavity. 

The urosome is nearly normally developed, but the segmentation is 
partially obsolete. The caudal rami are so modified that seemingly 
they perform a prehensile function. 

The head appendages are much specialized. The segmentation of 
the antennule is reduced and the structure is inflated. In most of 
the remaining head appendages the segmentation shows marked sup- 
pression and the ornamentation is variously reduced. 

The first legs are unique in the expansions of the exopodites. The 
second to fourth swimming legs are also unlike those of any other 
notodelphyid. The exopodites are elongated and inflated, and the 
armature is obsolete to lacking. The endopodites are modified into 
members with no strictly comparable counterparts in other genera. 
Fifth legs are lacking. The male has not yet been described. 

Schellenberg (1922) described a new species in the genus and also 
proposed a variety in G. globularis, var. giganteus. In view of the 
small amount of information generally available on anatomic varia- 
tion in notodelphyids and of the distinctive character by which 
Schellenberg's variety is diagnosed, it is proposed to assign the form 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPCDS— ILLG 623 

specific status. By the addition of the new species described below, 
Gunenotophorus then includes four species, which may be separated in 
the following key. 

Key to the species of Gunenotophorus based upon females 

la. Inner margin of terminal segment of second exopodite with row of prominent 

spines spinipes (p. 623) 

16. Inner margin of terminal segment of second exopodite without prominent 

spines 2 

2a. Second exopodite thick and about one-third longer than second endopo- 

dite giganteus (p. 623) 

2b. Second exopodite at least twice as long as the endopodite 3 

3a. Terminal segment of second exopodite straight .... globularis (p. 623) 
ob. Terminal segment of second exopodite markedly curved . . curvipes (p. 629) 

Species not Known feom North America 

Gunenotophorus giganteus Schellenberg 

Gunenotophorus globularis Costa, var. giganteus Schellenberg, 1922, p. 258, fig. 39 
(type locality, South Africa, in Pyura stolonifera (Hell.)). 

Distribution: South Africa. 
Host: Pyura stolonifera (Hell.). 

Gunenotophorus spinipes Schellenberg 

Gunenotophorus spinipes Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 258-259, fig. 40 (type locality, 
Straits of Magellan, in Alloeocarpa emilionis Michaelsen and Polyzoa coccinea 
(Cun.)). 

Distribution: Straits of Magellan. 

Hosts: Alloeocarpa emilionis Mchlsn. and Polyzoa coccinea (Cun.). 

North American Species 
Gunenotophorus globularis Buchholz 

Figure 17,a 

Gunenotophorus globularis (nomem nudum), Costa, 1840, p. 7. — Hope, 1851, 
p. 37.— Leuckart, 1859, p. 242.— Claus, 1864, pp. 381-382. 

Sphaeronotus thorellii Claus, 1864, pp. 379-382, pi. 36, figs. 29-34 (type locality, 
Naples, in ascidians). 

Gunentophorus globularis Buchholz, 1869, pp. 144-149, pi. 10, fig. 8 (type locality, 
Naples, in Cynthia ?microcosmus). — Kerschner, 1879, pp. 190-192, pi. 2, 
fig. 3, pi. 6, figs. 17-28.— Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 775, 804.— Aurivillius, 
1882a, pp. 56-58; 1882b, pp. 70, 112, pi. 13, fig. 13; 1883, pp. 26-28, 66, 108, 
pi. 4, fig. 13.— Carus, 1885, p. 344.— Gourret, 1888, p. 1.— Koehler, 1890, 
pp. 137-138, fig. 11.— G. Sars, 1921, pp. 57-58, pi. 28, fig. 2.— van Oorde-de- 
Lint and Schuurmans Stekhoven, 1938, p. 121, fig. 75. — Lang, 1948, p. 3. — 
Sewell, 1949, pp. 170, 176, 177, 182, 188, 191. 

422202—58 11 



624 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

Gunenotophorus globularis Canu, 1891, p. 473; 1892, pp. 200-201, pi. 11, figs. 1-12.— 
Giesbrecht, 1892, p. 815.— T. Scott, 1900, pp. 387-388; 1901, p. 352; 1907, 
p. 366.— Brian, 1905, p. 3; 1906, p. 144.— Stebbing, 1910, p. 550.— Hart- 
meyer, 1911, pp. 1734-1735.— Schellenberg, 1922, pp. 258, 267-268, fig. 38. 

Gunenthophorus globularis Graeffe, 1902, p. 40. 

Gunetotrophus globularis Norman, 1905, p. 36. 

Guenenolophorus globularis Harant, 1931, p. 371. 

Doropygus robustus Pearse, 1952, pp. 189-191, figs. 2-8 (type locality, Alligator 
Harbor, Fla., in Styela plicata Lesueur). 

Distribution: Mediterranean to Norway and Sweden; British 
Isles; South Africa; Gulf of Mexico (Florida). 

Hosts: Ascidia conchilega, A. prunum, Dendrodoa grossularia, 
Microcosmus microcosmus, M. sulcatus, Molgula ampulloides (Bened.), 
M. manhattensis, M. tuberifera, Pyura lurida (?=Cynthia lurida), 
P. mammillata, P. mentula, P. obliqua, P. sp., Polycarpa comata Aid., 
Polycarpa pomaria Sav., Styela coriacea, S. gyrosa, S. loveni Sars, S. 
rustica, Tethyum plicatum, S. plicata. 

Specimens examined: 

Florida 

From S. plicata: 

Lemon Bay, Englewood, May 13, 1950, H. J. Humm, 48 females. 

Description: Female (fig. 17,a): General features: The body 
(fig. 17, a) is 7-segmented, the greatest bulk being contributed by the 
much-inflated metasome, although the urosome is a markedly well- 
developed one. The head incorporates only the maxillipeds as a 
thoracic component. The lateral margins are produced as flaring 
epimera, which are directed somewhat ventrally. The segment of the 
first legs is free. The segments of the second to fourth swimming 
legs are tremendously inflated and incorporated in the ovoid brood 
sack which constitutes the bulk of the body. 

The urosome is composed of four unequal segments, arranged as a 
gradually tapering cylinder. The first segment is the shortest and it 
bears the reproductive apertures. The second segment is as long as 
the succeeding two combined. The third segment is rectangular, 
about half again as long as wide. The terminal segment is of nearly 
the same proportions as the thud but over-all is a slightly smaller 
somite. Articulated somewhat diagonally on the distal margin of 
the terminal segment are the laterally directed, somewhat dorsally 
curved caudal rami. 

The front of the head is produced as a blunt, wedge-shaped rostrum 
with a very wide base. 

Head appendages: The antennule is much inflated, particularly 
basally, so that it forms a short rounded cone. The segmentation is 
obscure but seemingly there are eight segments represented, these 



NOTODELPHYID OOPEPODS — ILLG 




Figure 17. — Gunenotophorus globularis Buchholz and G. curvipes, new species, a, G. 
globularis Buchholz, female, habit, lateral view, b-r, G. curvipes, female: b, habit, 
lateral view; c, urosome; d, terminal segment of urosome and caudal rami; e, antennule; 
/, antenna; g, masticatory lamella of mandible; h, palp of mandible; i, maxillule; /, 
maxilla; k, maxilliped; /, first leg; m, second leg; n, second endopodite; o, third leg; 
p, third endopodite; q, fourth leg; r, fourth endopodite. The scale, referring to a, repre- 
sents 1.0 mm., that referring to b, 1.0 mm. 



626 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

much telescoped apically. The taper of the appendage is pronounced, 
so that the very small terminal segment is subquadrate. 

The antenna is stout, stumpy, and heavily sclerotized. The two 
basal segments are nearly equal in dimension except for the slight 
proximal flare of the basal segment related to the articulation with 
the head. The terminal segment is slightly over half as wide basally 
as the second segment and is inserted on the middle portion of the 
terminal margin of that segment. The distal segment is about twice 
as long as wide and tapers gradually to a blunt apex. Here is articu- 
lated a short, stout, curved, tapered hook. Accompanying the hook 
is one short setule. Inserted at about the midpoint of the outer mar- 
gin of the segment is another reduced seta. 

The mandible exhibits considerable modification of the rami. The 
protopodite is bimerous. The coxopodite is expanded medially as a 
masticatory lamella, the margin of which is sculptured into five widely 
spaced, subequal teeth, a finely serrated region, and two setiform 
processes. The basipodite bears a single stout seta inserted on the 
distal medial corner. The bimerous endopodite is considerably 
reduced. The basal segment is short, with its ornamentation con- 
sisting of a distally inserted medial seta. The terminal segment is 
about a fourth narrower than the first and about half again as long. 
It bears five subequal setae arranged rather regularly around the 
roughly rounded apex. The most lateral of the setae may be much 
reduced to a minute setule or fairly well developed. 

The exopodite is large, fairly wide, and somewhat flattened. The 
sides are roughly parallel, although the entire structure curves some- 
what, and the apex is broadly truncate. Two setae are inserted 
along the medial margin at regular intervals and three more form a 
fairly wide-spaced array around the apex. The most lateral seta is 
about half the dimensions of the next smallest. 

The protopodite of the maxillule is so oriented that the line of 
demarcation between basipodite and coxopodite portions is diagonal. 
A medially expanded basal endite supports a row of masticatory setae 
of varied dimensions. A second endite is represented by a blunt base 
furnishing insertion for a fairly stout, tapering seta. The epipodite 
is represented by a short protuberance upon which is set a long, 
proximally directed seta accompanied by a reduced setule. The 
basipodite is so oriented that the exopodite is directed entirely later- 
ally and the appendage is terminated distally by a quadrate process 
bearing four short, regularly spaced setae. Some of these represent 
the usual basipodite setae and some the setae of the completely 
coalesced endopodite. The exopodite supports four well-developed 
setae inserted along the distal margin. 



NOTODEIiPHYID COPEPODS — IULG 627 

The trimerous maxilla consists of nearly normally developed proxi- 
mal segments with the articulations of the terminal portion completely 
suppressed. The basal segment bears three medial endites. The 
first endite bears three setae arranged in a somewhat transverse row. 
The second endite bears two equal setae. The third endite bears two 
subequal setae accompanied by a minute setule. The second seg- 
ment is well developed and supports a very heavy, short, curved claw. 
Basally inserted on the claw is a seta accompanied by a reduced setule. 
The third segment is nearly obsolete, affording insertion for just two 
apical setae, the terminal one of which is reduced to a third or less 
of the dimensions of the more nearly normal proximal seta. 

The segmentation of the maxilliped is obsolete and the appendage 
is flattened, with a roughly conical outline. The ornamentation 
consists of seven variously developed setae arranged as a trans- 
versely inserted trio at about the midpoint of the distal margin, a 
more distal transversely inserted pair of setae, and two nearly equal 
apical setae. The later almost setae of the two more proximal groups 
are much reduced. 

Swimming legs : The protopodites of the first legs are bimerous and 
the rami are trimerous. A well-developed intercoxal plate yokes 
together the coxopodites. There is no medial coxal seta. Laterally 
inserted on the basipodite is a seta with the proximal half much ex- 
panded into a stout cylinder. At the medial distal corner of the 
basipodite is inserted a slender, tapered spine which reaches almost 
to the distal margin of the basal segment of the endopodite. The 
segments of the exopodite are subequal. The basal segment bears 
a large medial seta and, inserted on the distal part of the lateral 
margin, a much-reduced, short spine. The armature of the second 
segment is similar. The terminal segment is ovoid with the longer 
axis more or less transverse. Four long, well-developed setae are 
regularly inserted along the medial margin. On the apex and at the 
distal fourth of the lateral margin are inserted two short spines. 

The endopodite is rather little modified. The segments diminish 
regularly in width distally. The two basal segments are of about 
equivalent subrectangular proportions but the basal segment is about 
twice as large as the second. Each of the two proximal segments 
bears a large medial seta. The distal segment is roughly a short, 
blunt cone bearing five setae: two are inserted on the medial margin; 
one is apical; one is just subapical laterally; and the fifth is inserted 
on the lateral margin one-third of the length of the segment distal 
from the articulation. 

The articulation of the bimerous protopodite of the second legs 
with the body is diagonal, so that the lateral margin of the coxopodite 



628 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

is double the inner. The basipodite is small and with the lateral 
margin so reduced as to make it almost triangular in outline. There 
is no ornamentation borne on the segments of the protopodite. The 
exopodite is massively enlarged to several times the bulk of the endo- 
podite. 

The proximal segment of the trimerous endopodite is a large 
unornamented rectangle. The second segment is of similar propor- 
tions but of about half the absolute size. The third segment is 
slightly longer than the second, slightly narrower, and forms a tapered 
cone with semicircular apex. Six or more reduced spiaules are irreg- 
ularly set around the distal margins of the segment. 

The endopodite consists of a subquadrate basal segment, a second 
segment about twice as long as the first, and a third segment equaling 
in length the proximal two combined. Three successive flares of the 
margins of the terminal segment confer on it a characteristic outline. 
Reduced spinules are inserted on the apexes of the flares. 

The third legs are nearly identical in configuration with the second, 
with minor differences in proportion and details. The segments of 
the exopodite are absolutely slightly longer. The endopodite is 
somewhat larger. The second segment here is three times as large as 
the first. The sculpturing of the margins of the terminal segments is 
considerably reduced. 

The aspect of the fourth legs is still further modified. The armature 
of the terminal segment of the exopodite is reduced to just two or 
three minute spinules. The endopodite is more distinctive. The 
basal segment is still quadrate, but the terminal portion is a single 
unit representing the coalescence of segments two and three. This 
distal unit is nearly five times as long as the basal segment. It tapers 
slightly apically and the sculpturing of the segments of the anterior 
limb is here represented only by slight undulations of the margins. 
There are two minute apical spinules. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: Fifth legs are lacking. 

The caudal rami are short, stout, and slightly tapered. The length 
is about two and a half times the basal width. The armature consists 
of three short, stout spinules, and a stout setiform element all in- 
serted in an apical row. 

The male has never been described. 

Remarks: This species has been thoroughly illustrated in the 
works of Canu (1892) and G. Sars (1921), and the American specimens 
conform well to these presentations, with some slight modifications, 
as specifically detailed above. The specific name of Claus has pri- 
ority. Since it has never been applied to this species by any author 
since its original proposition, it is regarded as preferable to continue 
here the use of 0. globularis Buchholz. This is in accordance with 



NOTODEI/PHYID COPEPODS> — IJJLG 629 

the developing sentiment in favor of conservation of names of long 
standing which has been expressed in recent deliberations on zoo- 
logical nomenclature. 

Gunenotophorus curvipes, new species 

Figure 17,b,r 

Types: Holotypic female, American Museum of Natural History 
Accession No. 6038 (type locality, Bering Strait, Alaska, in Styela 
coriacea). The other specimens examined are para types. 

Specimens examined: 

Alaska 

From S. coriacea: 

Bering Strait, July 1924, Capt. R. A. Bartlett, holotypic female. 
From ?S. coriacea: 

Exact locality unknown, 1930, 2 females. 

Description: The outline of the body (fig. 17,6) approaches an 
uninterrupted ovoid, due to the marked inflation of the metasome and 
telescoping of the short segments of the urosome to reduce the obvious 
extent of the latter. The mass of the metasome represents the fused 
thoracic somites of the second to fourth legs, much inflated dorsally to 
form a brood cavity. The legs of each pair are well separated from 
each other by a wide midventral interruption, so that the appendages 
protrude laterally to give a mitelike appearance. The segment of the 
first legs is not obvious, and in the limited material available it has not 
been possible to determine if this somite is coalesced with the head or 
whether it is indistinguishably fused in the incubatory complex. 

The urosome (G.g. 17, c) is very short and stout. No segment is 
longer than wide and in the type specimen the segments are much 
telescoped. Similarly the terminal segment (fig. 17 ,d) envelops a 
considerable anterior portion of the caudal rami. 

The rostrum is a well-developed an tero ventral protuberance of the 
head. 

Head appendages: The antennule (fig. 17,e) is modified, with seg- 
mentation suppressed and with a marked terminal taper. A con- 
siderable curvature obscures observation of the details, but it would 
seem that the appendage consists of four weakly setiferous, partially 
fused segments. The basal segment is large and seemingly unorna- 
mented. The second segment participates principally in the curva- 
ture. It bears a number of variously developed setae. The terminal 
segment probably involves fusion of two segments and it approaches 
the normal configuration found in other notodelphyids. It bears 
eight or more setae. 

The trimerous antenna (fig. 17,/) is extremely stout, with a relatively 
weakly developed terminal segment. The basal segment is longest, 



630 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

about half again as long as its greatest width. The second segment is 
massive, as wide as the first, somewhat wider than long, and with a 
relatively slight distal constriction. The distal segment is half as 
wide as the second and its length is roughly twice its width. Articu- 
lated terminally is a stout, tapered, markedly curved hook. Inserted 
at the base of the hook are two or three much-reduced setae. Another 
single seta is inserted a short distance proximal to this group. 

The mandible consists of a bimerous protopodite and two rami. 
The coxopodite is extended medialty as an unusually- highly developed 
masticatory lamella (fig. 17, g). The serrations of the inner margin of 
the lamella are differentiated into several stout toothlike projections 
and a finely denticulate region. The basipodite (fig. I7,h) bears a 
single well-developed seta, inserted distally on the medial margin. 

The endopodite is bimerous; the first segment is much smaller than 
the second. A single seta is inserted on the medial margin of the basal 
segment. The distal segment bears four setae, three distributed along 
the medial margin, one apical. The setae are subequal and the longest 
and stoutest of them are the two more apically placed. 

The exopodite is much larger than the endopodite, stout, and 
somewhat tapered. Only traces of a fundamental segmentation are 
preserved. Four very stout, long setae are regularly spaced in a close- 
set row along the distal two-thirds of the medial margin. A much- 
reduced stub of a setule is inserted at the distolateral corner on the 
rather broadly truncate apex. 

The maxillule (fig. 17, i) is characterized by suppression of the rami 
and distal portion of the protopodite and exaggeration in bulk of the 
proximal portion of the protopodite. The proximal endite is greatly 
produced medially and bears along the inner margin eight or nine 
closely set, stout, stiff masticatory setae. Inserted on the basal por- 
tion of this endite is a second process, bearing a single tapered setiform 
member. The remainder of the appendage is compressed to a palplike 
structure. Laterally at the base is borne a long, proximally directed 
seta representing the epipodite. Just distal to this a projection bear- 
ing four equal setae represents the exopodite in which the articulation 
with the segment has been considerably suppressed. An apical 
prominence bears three terminal setae and one medial seta. The 
anatomical explanation of this structure would assign the medial seta 
to the basipodite and the three terminal setae to the endopodite with 
the articulation again having been suppressed to near obsolescence, 
although faintly apparent. 

The trimerous maxilla (fig. 17j) is marked by great inflation prox- 
imally and some suppression of armature. The basal segment bears 
only three endites, the first one set with three setae, the next one set 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPOBS — ILIiG 631 

with one seta, and the more distal one bearing two approximately 
equal setae. 

The second segment is well developed and produced medially as a 
very stout, heavily sclerotized hook or claw. Basally inserted on the 
claw-process is one equally long, well-developed seta and a reduced 
setule. The reduced third segment bears three well-developed, sub- 
equal apical setae. 

The maxilliped (fig. 17 f k) is a reduced flattened plate with weakly 
sclerotized integument and suppressed segmentation. Five fairly 
stout setae are grouped along the medial margin. Two subequal 
setae are inserted apically. 

Swimming legs: The first legs (fig. 17,1) consist of bimerous pro- 
topodites and trimerous rami. The coxopodites are yoked together 
by an intercoxal plate. Inserted on the medial distal corner of the 
coxopodite is a reduced seta which does not quite reach to the distal 
margin of the basipodite. Inserted at the lateral extent of the 
articulation of coxopodite and exopodite is a seta, of which the 
proximal half consists of a tremendously inflated base, and which is 
unusually long, extending to the proximal forth of the distal segment of 
the exopodite. A stout, tapered spine is articulated on the medial 
distal corner of the basipodite and extends well beyond the distal 
margin of the second segment of the endopodite. 

The segments of the exopodite are much expanded and flattened, 
each somewhat constricted basally. Each of the two proximal seg- 
ments bears laterally a short, stumpy spine. The armature of the 
distal segment consists of three similar spines regularly arranged 
around the broadly curving apex, and of four long, well-developed 
setae, disposed fairly evenly along the medial margin. 

The basipodite is somewhat produced to articulate with the endo- 
podite so that this ramus, although slightly shorter than the exopodite, 
actually extends a short distance beyond it. The two subequal basal 
segments bear each a long medial seta. The terminal segment bears 
three medial setae, two apical and subapical setae, and a lateral seta 
inserted in an emargination at about the midpoint of the segment. 

In the second legs (fig. 17, m) the segmentation of the protopodites 
is obscured and the highly modified rami are trimerous. The proto- 
podite is a massive protuberance upon which the rami are inserted. 
It lacks ornamentation. The mass of the exopodite is several times 
that of the endopodite. The articulations of the rami are such that 
they sprawl away from the central mass of the protopodite, the 
exopodite tending to take a lateral direction, the endopodite curling 
inward toward the midcentral line. 

The two basal segments of the exopodite are roughly rectangular. 
The basal segment is about twice as long as wide. The second seg- 



632 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

ment is more nearly subquadrate. Its width is two-thirds that of the 
basal segment. The length of the third segment is somewhat greater 
than that of the first segment and its width very little less than that 
of the second segment. The margins are parallel and the apex is a 
semicircle. A notable characteristic is the disposition of this segment 
in a 3-dimensional S-curve, the two loops of the curve arranged 
perpendicularly to each other. A few reduced spinules are inserted 
on the apical portion of the segment as the only ornamentation of the 
ramus. 

The endopodite (fig. 17, n) consists of two small, rectangular 
proximal segments and a highly characteristic terminal segment. 
This segment is about three times as long as its basal width and 
features a series of elaborations of the integument. Each of these is 
a flare of the margin, terminating in a spinous projection and support- 
ing a fringe of spinules. There are four of these, more or less alter- 
nated along the segment. A few spinules ornament the truncate apex. 
The segments are about equal in width except for the expansions of the 
terminal segment. 

The third legs (fig. 17, 0) conform very closely to the description of 
the second legs. The two distal segments of the endopodite (fig. 17,2?) 
are proportionately somewhat longer than in the second legs. 

The fourth legs (fig. 17, q) would also conform closely to the descrip- 
tion of the second legs. The ornamentation of the exopodite is 
somewhat more profuse, consisting of six to eight small spinules. 
The endopodite (fig. 17, r) is slightly more distinctive. The two 
terminal segments are subequal and the elaboration of the distal 
segment is reduced. A spinule-like process is inserted subapically 
and the remainder of the ornamentation consists of a couple of spines 
and a row of fine spinules confined to the apex. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami : Fifth legs are lacking. 

The caudal rami seem characteristically to be considerably en- 
veloped anteriorly by the terminal segment of the abdomen. Each 
ramus is gradually tapered, its length about 2% times its greatest 
width. The armature is obsolescent. The only element is a soft- 
textured, short, stout spine or seta inserted at the apex and seemingly 
retractile into a basal invagination. 

No male has yet been found. 

Scolecodes, new genus 

Scolecimorpha Henderson, 1931, p. 224 (part). 

Type species: Scolecimorpha huntsmani Henderson, 1931. 

At the time of the original description of the remarkable parasite 
more fully discussed below, it was assigned to the genus Scolecimorpha 
of G. Sars. Studies of additional specimens and reference to Sars' 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS' — ILLG 633 

description lead me to conclude the form is sufficiently distinct to 
warrant generic status. The absence of the labrum, a well-marked 
and highly characteristic feature of Scolecimorpha, the entirely differ- 
ent pattern of structure of the mouthparts, and the important feature 
in the body habitus of forming the brood sack to include one thoracic 
somite rather than four somites, seem justifiable grounds for this 
distinction. The original description by Henderson and the amplifi- 
cations of detail provided below of the features of the single species 
will also provide the definition of the genus. 

Scolecodes huntsmani (Henderson), new combination 

Figure 18 

Scolecimorpha huntsmani Henderson, 1931, pp. 217-224, figs. 1, 2 (type locality, 
Departure Bay, British Columbia, Canada, in Styela gibbsii (Stimpson)). 

Specimens examined: 

Washington 
From S. gibbsii: 

Off Upright Head, Lopez Island, dredged, Aug. 2, 1948, R. L. Fernald, 2 

females. 
Upright Channel, dredged in 25-35 fms., June 23, 1950, 17 females. 
From Pyura haustor (Stimpson) : 

Indian Cove, Shaw Island, dredged, Aug. 18, 1948, R. L. Fernald, 3 females. 
East of Upright Head, dredged in 25-35 fms., June 23, 1950, 80 females. 

Description: Female (fig. lS,a-g): General features: The body 
(fig. 18, a) is an elongate, tapered cylinder with a more or less dis- 
tinctively marked off head and thoracic region and a sharply articu- 
lated urosome. The cephalothoracic region shows no segmentation. 
A few minor indentations probably are vestiges of the original me- 
tamerism. The head region forms an anterior triangle. Behind it are 
the rather close-set four pairs of swimming legs. The portion of the 
thorax posterior to the swimming legs is about twice as long as the 
anterior sector. The incubatory cavity occupies all of the portion of 
the body posterior to the swimming legs as far as the urosomal 
articulation. A specimen in the adult stadium, but with undeveloped 
incubatorium, is illustrated (fig. 18,6), on the same scale as the above, 
for comparison. The urosome is a single segment bearing the caudal 
rami. The segment is about as wide as long, with markedly convex 
margins, the basal and apical widths being approximately equal. The 
range of size among the available specimens is 5.2 to 14.6 mm. 

Head appendages : In the original description the mouthparts were 
not described. They are particularly difficult to observe since they 
are minute and are crowded into a depressed area of the ventral sur- 
face of the head. Furthermore, the lateral margins of the head are 
flattened and expanded into flaps which fold ventrally and tend to 
enclose the mouth region. In a favorable whole mount of the animal 



634 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 




Figure 18. — Scolecodes huntsmani (Henderson), female: a, large ovigerous individual, 
habit; b, young adult female, nonovigerous; c, ventral view of head of female, illustrat- 
ing the following head appendages, from anterior to posterior: antennules, antennae, 
first mouthparts, paragnaths, second mouthparts, third mouthparts; d, mouthpart of 
first pair; e, mouthpart of second pair; /, mouthpart of third pair; g, another view of 
mouthpart of third pair. The scale, referring to a and b, represents 1.0 mm. 



it sometimes is possible to make out the mouth appendages (fig. 18,c). 
By tedious dissection most can be extricated for further detailed study. 
The apex of the head is produced anteriorly and somewhat ventrally 
as an elongate, rather blunt rostrum with a wide base. The rostrum 
projects between the much-inflated bases of the antennules. 



NOT0DEI.PHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 635 

The antennule is bimerous. The basal segment is inflated to a 
nearly circular outline. The articulation of the second segment is 
not a sharp one. Apically is set a tuft of several setae. 

The antenna might be considered as bimerous. The basal segment 
is considerably longer than wide. The distal unit consists prepon- 
derantly of the usual strongly prehensile hook, in this case with such 
a strongly expanded base as to suggest that this structure represents 
a reduced segment. 

There is no conspicuously developed labrum or labium. The 
mouth opening is situated on a slight prominence and the mouthparts 
are arranged lateral and posterior to this. 

The first pair of mouthparts (fig. 18, d) are roughly rectangular in 
outline. Two sharply acuminate, profusely ciliated prominences are 
set on the broadly truncate apex. Three long plumose setae are closely 
set dis tally on the lateral margin. 

Posteriorly and medially to the bases of the first pah' of mouthparts 
is set a pair of large paragnaths. These are long, inflated, and of 
roughly rectangular outline. The integument is so thin that all 
attempts to dissect them free from their site of insertion have failed. 
There is no armature (except for a fine ciliation) nor any indication 
of an articulation at the base. 

The second pair of mouthparts (fig. 18,6) is very like the first pair. 
The outline is rectangular. At the center of the apex, on the distal 
medial corner, and far distally on the medial margin are set a close- 
spaced trio of markedly tapered, short, stout setae. These are pro- 
fusely plumose. Equally heavily ciliated are three much longer setae 
inserted in a close-spaced row on the distal half of the lateral margin. 

The complications of the integument of the third pair of mouth- 
parts (fig. 18 ./, g) suggest a partially suppressed bimerous condition. 
A long, stout plumose seta is inserted on the medial margin of the 
probable basal segment. On the truncated apex of the appendage are 
inserted three closely set, short setae. 

Swimming legs: The four pairs of swimming legs are practically 
identical in construction. The protopodites are bimerous with a 
tendency to suppression of the segmentation, and the flattened rami 
are monomerous. The coxopodites are much inflated, knoblike pro- 
tuberances. Reduced but distinctly observable intercoxal plates con- 
nect the members of each pair. The basipodite is of much smaller 
dimensions, furnishing little more than a common base for the in- 
sertion of the rami. There is no ornamentation of either segment of 
the protopodite. 

The rami also are of practically identical construction throughout. 
The exopodite is a flattened ovoid plate with a widely transverse base 
and tapers to a rather narrow apex. The length is about half again 



636 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 107 

as great as the width. The whole external margin supports a compact 
row of short, stout spinules, usually eight or more in number. Apically 
and along the medial margin are set much larger, similarly propor- 
tioned spines, with bases adjacent, to the number of three to six. 

Illustration and representative counts of the ornamentation of the 
limb series are presented in the original description of the species. 
These are representative as applying to the specific features of a 
given individual: First leg, exopodite, seven small lateral spines; 
three large terminal and medial spines; endopodite, eight small 
lateral spines, five large terminal and medial spines. 

Second leg, exopodite, ten small lateral spines, six large apical and 
medial spines; endopodite, ten small lateral spines, six large apical 
and medial spines. 

Third leg, exopodite, eleven small lateral spines, five large terminal 
and medial spines; endopodite, nine small lateral spines, six large 
terminal and medial spines. 

Fourth leg, exopodite, eleven small lateral spines, four large terminal 
and medial spines; exopodite, ten small lateral spines, eight large 
terminal and medial spines. All the spines of this ramus show a 
tendency to form an irregularly double row. 

Vestigial legs and caudal rami: Fifth legs are lacking. 

The caudal rami are short, regular, markedly tapered, and termi- 
nally bear a row of four subequal setae. The length of the ramus is 
about 2Y 2 times its basal width. The apical width is slightly more 
than half that at the base. The setae are about half again as long as 
the basal width. 

No male has yet been found. 

Remarks: The outstanding features of the biology of this copepod 
as it is so far known were discussed in the original description. All 
the specimens of the original lot were taken in association with Styela 
gibbsii (Stimpson) . Pyura haustor (Stimpson), in the present findings, 
is recognized as an equally susceptible host. The association was 
noted in the first published notice of the species (Huntsman, 1912, p. 
117) in which it simply was indicated as a parasite of the endostylar 
vessel in both known hosts. The tendency to multiple infection was 
noted by Henderson. In one specimen of P. haustor collected for the 
present study, 23 specimens of the copepod, of various sizes, were 
obtained from the endostylar vessel. No noticeable effect on the 
host of this massive invasion, other than the mere physical intrusion, 
was observed. The nauplius was described by Henderson. The 
smallest females taken are not ovigerous but they are identical 
anatomically with the largest. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 637 

The color of the examples here studied in life was a pale, semi- 
opaque yellowish flesh color, with some pale orange markings. The 
eggs were white. 

Pholeterides, new genus 

The genus is monotypic, with Pholeterides furtiva, new species, 
described below, the type species. The specific description will also 
serve for the characterization of the genus, as it is so far known. 

Pholeterides furtiva, new species 

Figure 19 

Types: Holotypic female, USNM 92809 (type locality, Washington 
Sound, Wash., in Amaroucium californicum Ritter and Forsyth), and 
paratypic females. 

Specimens examined: 

Washington 

From A. californicum: 

West of Lopez Island, dredged, July 13, 1950, holotypic female and four 

female paratypes. 
North of Upright Head, Lopez Island, dredged in 40 fms., Aug. 4, 1953, 
R. L. Fernald, 1 female. 

Description: Female (fig. 19, a-ri): General features: The body 
(fig. 19, a) is delimited sharply into a sausage-like metasome with 
segmentation obsolete and a markedly segmented urosome. The incu- 
batorium occupies about half the mass of the metasome and extends 
from the level of the first swimming legs to the posterior margin of the 
tagma. There is no sign of segmentation of the metasome. The 
integument is thin and profusely haired. The head appendages are 
more or less vestigial and their placement is well anterior in the area 
corresponding to the mouth region. The first three pairs of swimming 
legs are fairly regularly spaced so that the thud pair is inserted just 
slightly anterior to the midpoint of the metasome. The distance to 
the fourth pair of legs is somewhat more than double the interval be- 
tween the preceding pairs. A fourth of the mass of the metasome 
extends posterior to the level of insertion of the fourth legs. 

The urosome (fig. 19,6) is trimerous with apically inserted caudal 
rami of most distinctive aspect (fig. 19,c). The rami are mammiform, 
the length of each approximating about half the diameter of the 
expanded base. Each has a curved, acuminate apex, directed ven- 
trally. The segment bearing the caudal rami is of about the same 
length but of slightly lesser diameter than the preceding segment. 
The first segment is twice as long as the combined second and third 
segments and slightly greater in diameter than the second somite. 



638 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 




Figure 19. — Pholeterides furtiva, new species, female: a, habit, lateral view; b, urosome; 
c, caudal rami; d, head, lateral view; e, head, apical view; /, antennule; g, antenna; 
k, distal segment of antenna; i, mouthpart of first pair; /, mouthpart of second pair; 
k, mouthpart of third pair; /, another view of mouthpart of third pair; m, first leg; 
n, fourth leg. The scale, referring to a, represents 1.0 mm. 



NOTODEEPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 639 

Head appendages: The most striking feature of the head is the 
complication of the oral region (fig. 19,d,e). I could find no mouth 
opening. At the expected level of the mouth an inflated cylinder 
curves transversely across the ventral side of the head. This struc- 
ture must represent a much modified labrum or labium. Reaching 
posteriorly and ventrally to come in close approximation to this 
structure is the nearly equally inflated rostrum. All the head ap- 
pendages are reduced and much displaced laterally, forming mere 
protruding lappets rather than elements of any obvious functional 
significance. 

The antennules (fig. 19,/) are inserted laterally and curve outwards 
and upwards somewhat like ram horns. They are very wide at the 
base and taper rapidly to the curved apex. The segmentation is 
obsolete but indications seem to remain in sutures or sulci in the 
integument. There is no differentiated armature. 

The bimerous antenna (fig. 19,g) preserves the greatest degree of 
indication of structural affinities with less aberrant notodelphyids. 
The proximal segment is long and slightly curved. It is unorna- 
mented. The length of the distal segment (fig. 19, h) is about twice 
its greatest width. It tapers to an articulation with a stout curved 
hook. Two reduced setae are inserted at about equal intervals on 
one of the margins. 

The mouthparts are much reduced and anomalous. The presence 
of only three pairs, with no available distinguishing features, makes 
it impossible to homologize them with the usual notodelphyid ap- 
pendages. 

The most anterior pair of mouthparts (fig. 19,-0 are reduced to 
small setiferous prominences situated far laterally on the head just 
caudal to the articulations of the antennae. Three close-set subequal 
setules constitute the armature. 

The second pair of mouthparts (fig. 19, j) seem to be obscurely 
bimerous. The terminal portion bears four stout, much-tapered 
members of neither markedly spiniform nor setiform aspect. 

The third pair of mouthparts (fig. 19,k,l) are the most complicated. 
They are seemingly trimerous, with enlarged basal portions. There 
is one seta inserted distally on the basal segment. The second seg- 
ment is short and bears two setae, inserted oppositely on the segment. 
The terminal segment is about twice as long as wide and bears three 
setae. 

Swimming legs: The segmentation of the biramous swimming legs 
is completely suppressed. The element on either side of any of the 
first three pairs (fig. 19,m) is a bilobed couple of elongate conical pro- 
tuberances. They taper from a common base to narrowly rounded 

422202—58 12 



640 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

apexes. There is no armature. The fourth pair (fig. 19, n) is still 
more reduced in proportions than the preceding pairs but can only 
be characterized as shorter, somewhat thicker protuberances. 

Fifth legs are lacking. 

The male of the species is not known. 

Kemarks: Few details of the biology of this interesting species 
could be ascertained. The individuals all lie separately in small, 
cystlike cavities in the matrix of the ascidian, with no particular 
reference to the position of the tunicate zooids. 

Indeterminable Genera 

Genus Salpicola Richiardi 

Salpicola Richiardi, 1880, p. 147 (type species, by monotypy, Salpicola ialina 
Richiardi, 1880). 

Salpicola ialina Richiardi 

Salpicola ialina Richiardi, 1880, p. 147 (type locality, Italian coast in Salpa 

mucronata-democratica Forsk) . 
Salpicola hyalina Cams, 1885, p. 43. 

Genus Ophioseidus Bate 

Ophioseide Hesse, 1864, pp. 354, 358 (type species, by monotypy, Ophioseide 
cardiociphale Hesse, p. 354 (nomen nudum)). — Marschall, 1873, p. 415. — 
Scudder, 1882, p. 221.— Schulze, Kukenthal, and Heider, 1933, p. 2361 — 
Neave, 1939, vol. 3, p. 437. 

Ophioseidus Bate, 1864, p. 309.— Schulze, Kukenthal, and Heider, 1933, p. 2361. 

Ophioseides Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, p. 719.— Wilson, 1932, pp. 600-601. 

This genus is here restricted to the following indeterminable species. 

Ophioseidus cardiocephalus Bate 

Ophioseide cardiocSphale Hesse, 1864, pp. 354-356, pi. 12, figs. 33-42 (type lo- 
cality, northern coast of France, in "Botrylle" (nomen nudum)). — Giard, 
1873, pp. 498-499. 

Ophioseidus cardiocephalus Bate, 1864, p. 309. 

Ophioseides cardiocephalus Gerstaecker, 1870-1871, pp. 774, 801. 

Ophioseides cardiocephalus Chatton, 1909a, pp. 11, 18-19. — Hartmeyer, 1911, p. 
1734. 

Literature cited 

Allen, E. J., and Todd, R. A. 

1902. The fauna of the Exe Estuary. Journ. Mar. Biol. Assoc. United 
Kingdom, new. ser., vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 295-335. 
Allman, George James 

1847a. Description of a new genus and species of Entomostraca. Ann. Mag. 
Nat. Hist., ser. 1, vol. 20, pp. 1-9, pi. 1, figs. 1-14; pi. 2, figs. 15-22. 
1847b. On the development of Notodelphys Allman, a new genus of Entomo- 
straca. Rep. Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sci. 17th Meeting, Trans., p. 74. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS ILLG 641 

Aurivillius, Carl Wilhelm Samuel 

1882a. Bidrag till kannedomen om krustaceer, som lefva hos mollusker och 

tunikater. I, II. Of v. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Forh., No. 3, pp. 

31-67, pis. 5-7. 
1882b. Bidrag till kannedomen om krustaceer, som lefva hos mollusker och 

tunikater. III. Ofv. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Forh., No. 8, pp. 41-117, 

pis. 13-16. 
1883. Bidrag till kannedomen om krustaceer, som lefva hos molusker och 

tunikater. Akad. Afhandl. Vidtb. Filos. Fakult. Upsala, Mat. -Nat. 

Sekt. Filosof. Grad., Stockholm, [2] + 126 pp., 7 pis. 
1885a. Krustaceer hos arktiska tunikater. Vega-Expeditionens Vetensk. 

Iakttag., Stockholm, vol. 4, pp. 223-254, pis. 7-9. 
1885b. Crustaces parasites des tuniciers arctiques. Bull. Soc. Zool. France, 

vol. 10, pp. 281-282. 
1SS6. Eafsevertebrater fran nordligaste Troms0 amt och Vestfinmarken. 

Bihar g K. Svenska Vet.-Akad., Handl., vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 1-56, 

pis. 1-2. 
Baird, William 

1850. The natural history of the British Entromostraca. viii+364 pp., 

36 pis. Ray Societ}^ London. 
Bate, C. Spence 

1864. Crustacea. Zoological Record, vol. 1, pp. 257-311. 
Bexeden, Pierre Joseph van 

1861. Recherches sur la faune littorale de Belgique. Crustaces. Mem. 

Acad. Belgique, vol. 33, pp. 1-3 74, pis. 1-21. 
1876. Animal parasites and messmates. Internat. Sci. Ser., vol. 19, xxviii 

+ 274 pp., 83 illus. 
Blake, Charles H. 

1933. Arthropoda, in Procter, A report of the organization . . . and station 

lists together with a list of the Maine fauna with descriptions and 

places of capture . . . Biological Survey of the Mount Desert 

region, Part 5, pp. 214-282. 
Brady, George Stewardson 

1878. A monograph of the free and semi-parasitic Copepoda of the British 

Islands, vol. 1, 148 pp., 33 pis. Ray Society, London. 
1910. Die Marinen Copepoden der deutschen Siidpolar-Expedition 1901- 

1903. I. tiber die Copepoden der Stamme Harpacticoida, Cyclo- 

poida, Notodelphyoida und Caligoida. Deutsche Siidpolar- 
Expedition 1901-1903. Bd. 11, Heft 5, pp. 497-593, 12 Taf. 
Brehm, Vincenz 

1927. Ordnung der Crustacea. (Dritte Ordnung der Crustacea Entomos- 

traca): Copepoda. Handbuch der Zoologie, Bd. 3, Heft 1, Lfg. 4, 

Bogen 25-31, pp. 435-496, figs. 378-454. 
BrIment, Ernest 

1909. Contribution a l'etude des Copepodes ascidicoles du Golf du Lion. 

Arch. Zool. Exper. Geri., ser. 5, vol. 1, Notes et Rev., pp. lxi-lxxxix, 

figs. 1-14. 
Brian, Alessandro 

1898. Catalogo di Copepodi parassiti dei pesci della Liguria. Atti Soc. 

Ligustica Sci. Nat. Geogr., vol. 9, pp. 5-31, pis. 1-4. 
1905. Sui Copepodi raccolti nel Golfo di Napoli da Oronzio G. ed Achille 

Costa. Ann. Mus. Zool. Univ. Napoli, new ser., vol. 1, No. 24, 

pp. 1-11, pis. 3-4. 



642 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. jot 

1906. Copepodi parassiti dei pesci d'ltalia. 187 + 2 pp., 21 pis. 

1924. Parasitologia Mauri tanica. Materiaux pour la faune parasitologique 

en Mauritanie. Arthropoda (l re Partie) Copepoda. Bull. Com. 

Etud. Hist. Sci. Afrique Occidentale Frangaise, Jufy-Sept. 1924, 

pp. 4-66, 67 figs. 

BUCHHOLZ, REINHOLD 

1869. Beitrage zur Kenntniss der innerhalb der Ascidien lebenden parasitis- 
chen Crustaceen des Mittelmeeres. Zeitschr. Wiss. ZooL, vol. 19, 
pp. 99-155, pis. 5-11. 
Calman, William Thomas 

1909. Crustacea, in Lankester, Treatise on Zoology, part 7, Fasc. 3, viii 
+ 346 pp., 194 figs. 
Canu, Eugene 

1890. Sur le dimorphisme sexuel des Copepodes ascidicoles. Compt. Rend. 

Acad. Sci. Paris, vol. Ill, pp. 757-759. 

1891. Les copepodes marin du Boulonnais. V. Les semiparasites. Bull. Sci. 

France Belgique, vol. 23, pp. 467-487. 

1892. Les copepodes du Boulonnais: Morphologie, embryologie, taxonomie. 

Trav. Lab. Zool. Marit. Wimereux-Ambleteuse, vol. 6, pp. 1-354, 

pis. 1-30. 
Carus, Julius Victor 

1885. Prodromus faunae mediterraneae sine descriptio animalium maris 

Mediterranei incolarum quam comparata silva rerum quatenus 

innotuit adiectis locis et nominibus vulgaribus. Vol. 1, xi-f 524 + [1] 

pp. 
Chatton, Edouard 

1909a. Sur le genre Ophioseides Hesse et sur YOphioseides joubini n. sp. 

Copepode parasite de Microcosmus Sabattieri Roule. Bull. Soc. 

Zool. France, vol. 34, pp. 11-19, figs. 1-8. 
1909b. Sur un nauplius double anadydyne d : 'Ophioseides joubini Chatton. 

Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol. Paris, vol. 47, pp. 482-484, 1 fig. 
Chatton, Edouard, and Brement, Ernest 

1911. Sur un ascidicole nouveau du genre Ophioseides Hesse, Ophioseides 

abdominalis, parasite des Aplidiens. Bull. Soc. Zool. France, vol. 36, 

pp. 29-33, 1 fig. 
1915a. Brementia balneolensis n. g., n. sp., nouveau copepode ascidicole 

incubateur, parasite des Leptoclinum. Bull. Soc. Zool. France, 

vol. 40, pp. 129-134, figs. 1-2. 
1915b. Sur un nouveau copepode ascidicole incubateur Ooneides amela n. g., 

n. sp. parasite des Leptoclinum. Bull. Soc. Zool. France, vol. 40, 

pp. 135-143, figs. 1-4. 
1915c. Les oostegites, les pterostegites et la cavite" incuba trice des Ascidicoli- 

dae. Developpement, homologies, valeur phylogenetique et taxono- 

mique. Bull. Soc. Zool. France, vol. 40, pp. 143-155, figs. 1-4. 
Claus, Carl 

1860. Uber den Bau von Notodelphys ascidicola Allm. Wiirzb. Nat. Zeitschr, 

vol 1, pp. 226-233, Taf. 6. 
1864. Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Schmarotzerkrebse. Zeitschr. Wiss. 

Zool., vol. 14, pp. 365-383, pis. 33-36. 
1875. Neue Beitrage zur Kenntniss parasitischer Copepoden nebst Bemer- 

kungen liber das System derselben. Zeitschr. Wiss. Zool., vol. 25, 

pp. 327-360, pis. 22-24. 
1880. Grundzuge der Zoologie, 4 Aufl., Bd. 1, vii + 822 pp. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS ILLG 643 

Costa, Oronzio Gabrielle 

1840. Catalogo dei Crostacei, pp. 1-7. Plates, Entomostraca 1-4: 2-3 
[pub. 1852] in: Fauna del Regno di Napoli ossia enumerazione di 
tutti gli animali che abitano le diverse regione di questo regno e le 
acque che le bagnono, contenente la descrizione de' nuovi o poco 
esattemente conosciuti. Naples, 1829-1886. 19 sections in 11 vols, 
(many pis.). 
Dalla Torre, Karl Wilhelm von 

1889. Die Fauna van Helgoland. Zool. Jahrb. Syst., Bd. 4, suppl.-Band, 
Nr. 2, pp. 1-99. 
Dana, James Dwight 

1853. On the classification and geographical distribution of Crustacea. The 
Report on Crustacea of the United States Exploring Expedition 
under Capt. Charles Wilkes, U. S. N., during the years 1838-1842. 
[1 p.] + pp. 1395-1592. 
Della Valle, Antonio 

1883. Sui copepodi che vivono nelle Ascidie composte del Golfo di Napoli. 
Mem. Atti Ace. Lincei, CI. Sci. Fis., ser. 3, vol. 15, pp. 242-253, 1 pi. 
Gerstaecker, Carl Eduard Adolf 

1863. Arthropoda, in Gerstaecker and Carus, Handbuch der Zoologie, Bd. 

2, pp. 1-421. 
1870-71. Zweite Ordnung. Spaltf ussier: Copepoda. In Bronn, Die Klas- 
sen und Ordnungen des Thier-Reichs . . . , Bd. 5, Abt. 1, Lfg. 
16-26, pp. 590-806, pis. 7-15. 
Giarb, Alfred 

1873. Contribution a Thistoire naturelle des Synascidies. Arch. Zool. 
Exp., ser. 1, vol. 2, pp. 481-514, pi. 19. 

GlESBRECHT, WlLHELM 

1882a. Beitrage zur Kenntniss einiger Notodelphyiden. Mitt. Zool. Stat. 

Neapel, vol. 3, pp. 292-372, pis. 22-24. 
1882b. Die freilebenden Copepoden der Kieler Foehrde. Vierter Ber. der 

Kommis. Wiss. Untersuch. Deutsch. Meere in Kiel, fur die Jahre 

1877 bis 81, Jahrg. 7-11, Abt. 1, pp. 87-168, 12 pis. 
1892. Systematik und Faunistik der pelagischen Copepoden des Golfes von 

Neapel und der angrenzenden Meeres-Abschnitte. Fauna u. Flora 

Golf. Neapel, Monogr. 19, Text, ix+831 pp. 
Gourret, Paul 

1887. Sur quelques crustac6s parasites des Phallusies. Compt. Rend. 

Acad. Sci. Paris, vol. 104, pp. 185-187. 

1888. fitudes zoologiques sur quelques crustac^s parasites des Ascidies. 

Bibl. l'Ecole Haut. fitud., Sci. Nat., vol. 36, No. 3, pp. 1-64, pis. 

1-4. 
Graeffe, Eduard 

1902. Ubersicht der Fauna des Golfes von Triest nebst Notizen liber 

Vorkommen, Lebensweise, Erscheinungs-und Laichzeit der einzel- 

nen Arten. Arb. Zool. Inst. Univ. Wien, vol. 13, pp. 33-80. 
Gray, Peter 

1933. The nauplii of Notodelphys agilis Thorell and Doropygus porcicauda 

Brady. Journ. Mar. Biol. Assoc. United Kingdom, new ser., vol. 

18, No. 2, pp. 519-522, 1 fig. 
1938. Doropygus curvatus n. sp., a notodelphyoid copepod commensal in 

Styela partita (Stps.) from the Wood's Hole region, Massachusetts. 

Zool. Anz., vol. 124, pp. 261-269 ; figs. 1-10. 



644 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSIEUM vol. 107 

Grebnitskii, Nikola! Aleksandrovich 

1873-74. Predvaritel'noe soobschchenie o srodstvie fauny Chernago moria. 
Zapiski Novorossifekoe Obshchestvo Estestvoispytatelel, Odessa, 
vol. 2, pp. 207-272, pis. 1-4. 
Gurney, Robert 

1927. R-eport on the Crustacea: Copepoda (Littoral and Semi-Parasitic). 
Trans. Zool. Soc. London, vol. 22, pt. 4, No. 6, pp. 451-577, figs. 
108-168, 1 table. 
1933. Notes on some Copepoda from Plymouth. Journ. Mar. Biol. Assoc. 
United Kingdom, new ser., vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 299-304. 
Hansen, Hans Jacob 

1923. Crustacea Copepoda, II. Copepoda parasita and hemiparasita. 
The Danish Ingolf -Expedition, vol. 3, No. 7, pp. [2] + 92 4- [2], 5 pis. 
Harant, Herve 1 

1931. Les ascidies et leurs parasites. Ann. Inst. Oceanogr., vol. 8, No. 3, 
pp. 67-375. 
Hartmeyer, Robert 

1911. Tunicata (Manteltiere). In Bronn, Die Klassen und Ordnungen des 
Their-Reichs . . . , Bd. 3, Suppl. 1, Lief. 95-98, pp. 1681-1773. 
Heller, Camil 

1866. Carcinologische Beitrage zur Fauna des adriatischen Meeres. Verh. 
Zool.-Bot. Ges., Wien, vol. 16, pp. 723-760. 
Henderson, Jean T. 

1931. A new parasitic copepod (Scolecimorpha huntsmani n. sp.). Contr. 
Canadian Biol. Fish., new ser., vol. 6, pp. 217-224, figs. 1-12. 
Herdman, William 

1889. Second report upon the Tunicata of the L. M. B. C. district. Proc. 

Liverpool Biol. Soc, vol. 3, pp. 240-260, 1 pi. 
1891. The biological results of the cruise of Mr. A. Holt's S. Y. Argo round 
the west coast of Ireland during August 1890. Proc. Liverpool 
Biol. Soc, vol. 5, pp. 181-212. 
1898. Description of some simple ascidians collected in Puget Sound, Pacific 
Coast. Trans. Liverpool Biol. Soc, vol. 12, pp. 248-267, pis. 11-14. 
Hesse, Eugene 

1864. Observations sur des crustaces rares ou nouveaux des cotes de France. 

(3 me article). Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 5, t. 1, pp. 333-358, pis. 11-12. 

1865. Recherches sur les crustaces rares ou nouveaux des cotes de France. 

Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 5, t. 3, pp. 220-242, pi. 4. 

1866. Observations sur des crustaces rares ou nouveaux des cotes de France. 

(9 me article). Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 5, t. 6, pp. 51-87, pi. 2. 

1869. Observations sur des crustaces rares ou nouveaux des cotes de France. 
(17 me article). Description d'un nouveau crustace type d'une 
nouvelle familie des Annelidicoles; du genre des Chelonidiformis; 
du nouveau genre Aplopode et de plusieurs autres crustaces encore 
inedits, appartenant aux genres Polychlinophile, Cryptopode, 
Botryllophile, Botachus, Adranesius, Lygephile et Doropygus. Ann. 
Sci. Nat., ser. 5, t. 11, pp. 275-308, pi. 1. 

1871. Observations sur des crustaces rares ou nouveaux des cotes de France. 
(19 me article). Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 5, t, 15, No. 2, pp. 1-50, pis. 1-2. 
Hope, Frederick William 

1851. Catalogo dei Crostacei Italiani e di molti altri del Mediterraneo 
Napoli. 48 pp., 1 pi. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 645 

Huntsman, Archibald Gowanlock 

1912. Ascidians from the coasts of Canada. Trans. Canadian Inst., vol. 9, 
pp. 111-148. 
Illg, Paul L. 

1951. A new genus and species of Notodelphyoid copepod from Japan. 
Journ. Washington Acad. Sci., vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 30-34, fig. 1. 
Kerschner, Ludwig 

1879. tlber zwei neue Notodelphyiden nebst Bemerkungen iiber einige 
Organisationsverhaltnisse dieser Familie. Denkschr. Math.- 
Naturw. CI. K. Akad. Wiss., Wien, vol. 41, pp. 155-196, 6 pis. 
Klie, Walter 

1933. Halbparasitische Copepoden aus der Kieler Bucht. Schrift. Naturw. 

Ver. Schleswig-Holstein, Bd. 20, Heft 1, pp. 12-17. 
Koehler, Rene 

1890. Les crustaces parasites des ascidies. Le Naturaliste, ser. 2, ann. 12, 
No. 78, pp. 131-134, figs. 1-8; No. 79, pp. 137-138, figs. 9-12. 
Lang, Karl 

1946. A contribution to the question of the mouth parts of the Copepoda. 
Ark. Zool., Bd. 38a, No. 5, pp. 1-24, 25 figs. 

1948. Copepoda "Notodelphyoida" from the Swedish west-coast with an 

outline on the systematics of the copepods. Ark. Zool., Bd. 40a, 
No. 14, pp. 1-36, 17 figs., 1 pi. 

1949. On a new copepod family related to Notodelphyidae and on two new 

copepod species from South Georgia. Ark. Zool., Bd. 42b, No. 4, 
pp. 1-7, figs. 1-16. 
1951. On the nature of the so-called sternal furca in the Caligidae. Ark. 
Zool., ser. 2, Bd. 1, No. 32, pp. 499-502, 6 figs., 1 pi. 
Leigh-Sharpe, W. Harold 

1934. The Copepoda of the Siboga Expedition. Part II. Commensal and 

parasitic Copepoda. Siboga-Expeditie, Monogr. 29b, Leiden, 43 
pp., 39 figs. 
19 55. A list of British invertebrates with their characteristic parasitic and 
commensal copepoda. Journ. Mar. Biol. Assoc. United Kingdon, 
new ser., vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 47-48. 
Leuckart, Rudolph 

1859. Notopterophorus Costa. Wiegmann's Archiv. Naturg., Jahrg. 25, Bd. 
1, pp. 241-247, pi. 6, figs. 2-8. 
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 

1931. Plymouth Marine Fauna. Ed. 2, 371 pp. 
Marschall, August de 

1873. Nomenclator zoologicus continens nomina systematica generum 
animalium tam viventium quam fossilium, secundum ordinem 
alphabeticum disposita. Vindobonae. iv-f-482 pp. 
Martens, Eduard von 

1879. Crustacea. Zool. Rec, vol. 16, 45 pp. 
Mobius, Karl 

1873. Die wirbellosen Thiere der Ostsee, IV, A. Crustacea. Jahresber. 
Komm. Wiss. Untersuch. Deutsch. Meere Kiel Jahr 1871, Jahrg. 1, 
pp. 115-126. 
1875. Zoologische Ergebnisse der Nordsee Fahrt vom 21. Juli bis 9. Sep- 
tember, 1872. IX. Copepoda und Cladocera. Jahresber. 
Komm. Wiss. Untersuch. Deutsch. Meere Kiel, Jahrg. 2-3, pp. 
269-276, pis. 7-8. 



646 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Neave, Sheffield Airey 

1939. Nomenclator zoologicus. A list of the names of genera and subgenera 
in zoology from the tenth edition of Linnaeus 1758 to the end of 
1935. 4 vols. 
Nicholls, Aubrey G. 

1944. Littoral Copepoda from South Australia (11) Calanoida, Cyclopoida, 
Notodelphyoida, Monstrilloida and Caligoida. Rec. South Aus- 
tralian Mus., vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 1-62. 
Norman, Alfred Merle 

1869. Shetland final dredging report. Part II. On the Crustacea, Tuni- 
cata, Polyzoa, Echinodermata, Actinozoa, Hydrozoa and Porifera. 
Rep. British Assoc. Adv. Sci., 38th meeting, 1868, pp. 247-336. 

1905. Museum Normanianum, or a catalogue of the invertebrates of the 

Arctic and North Atlantic temperate ocean and palearctic region, 

which are contained in the collection of the Rev. Canon A. M. 

Norman. Ill, Crustacea. Ed. 2, vi-f47 pp. 
Norman, Alfred Merle, and Brady, George Stewardson 

1909. The Crustacea of Northumberland and Durham. Trans. Nat. Hist. 

Soc. Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle, new ser., vol. 3, 

pt. 2, pp. 252-417, pis. 8-10. 
Norman, Alfred Merle, and Scott, Thomas 

1906. The Crustacea of Devon and Cornwall, xv+232 pp., pis. 1-24. 
Oorde-de-Lint, G. M. van, and Schuurmans Stekhoven, Jacobus Hermanus, 

Jr. 

1936. Copepoda (X. c 2 : Copepoda parasitica). Die Tierwelt Nord- u. 
Ostsee, Lfg. 31, Tl. X. c 2 , pp. 73-198, figs. 1-192. 
Pearse, Arthur Sperry 

1947. Parasitic copepods from Beaufort, North Carolina. Journ. Elisha 

Mitchell Sci. Soc, vol. 63, No. 1, pp. 1-16, 51 figs. 
1952. Parasitic crustaceans from Alligator Harbor, Florida. Quart. Journ. 
Florida Acad. Sci., vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 187-243, 143 figs. 
Pest a, Otto 

1909. Beitrage zur Kenntnis parasitischer Copepoden. Denkschr. Akad. 

Wiss. Wien, vol. 84, pp. 257-267, pis. 1-3. 
1934. Krebstiere oder Crustacea I: Ruderfiisser oder Copepoda (4. Mon- 
strilloida, 5. Notodelphyoida, 6. Caligoida, 7. Lernaeoida). Tierw. 
Deutschlands, Tl. 29, [4] + 68 pp., 42 figs. 
Redi, Francesco 

1684. Osservazioni di Francesco Redi intorno agli animali videnti che si 
trovano negli animali viventi. 253 pp., 26 pis. 

RlCHIARDI, SEBASTIANO 

1880. Catalogo sistematico dei Crostacei che vivono sul corpo degli animali 
acquatici in Italia. Catalogo degli Espositori-Esposizione inter- 
nazionale di Pesca in Berlino, pp. 147-152. 
Sars, Georg Ossian 

1921. An account of the Crustacea of Norway with short descriptions and 
figures of all the species. Vol. 8. Copepoda. Monstrilloida and 
Notodelphyoida. Pts. 1-6, pp. 1-91, pis. 1-37. 






NOTODELPHTID COPEPODS — ILLG 647 

1926. Description of Scolecimorpha insignis, G. 0. Sars a remarkable new 
asidicole parasit. K. Norske Vidensk. Selsk. Skrifter, 1925, No. 2, 
pp. 1-12, pis. 1-2. 
Sars, M. 

1861. Beskrivelse med Afbildinnger af fire nye parasitiske Copepoder. 
Vidensk. Selsk. Forhandl. Christiania, 1861, pp. 134-143. 

SCHELLENBERG, ADOLF 

1921. Neue norwegische Notodelphyiden. K. Norske Vidensk. Selsk 

Skrifter, 1921, No. 3, pp. 3-11, figs. 1-9. 

1922. Neue Notodelphyiden des Berliner und Hamburger Museums mit 

ein tTbersicht der ascidienbewohnenden Gattungen und Arten. 
Mitt. Zool. Mus. Berlin, vol. 10, pp. 219-274, figs. 1-43; pp. 277- 
298, figs. 1-12. 

SCHIMKEWITSCH, WlADIMIR 

1893. Sur les premiers stades du developpement du Nolopterophorus. Rev. 
Sci. Nat. St. Petersbourg, vol. 4, pp. 200-203, 1 fig.; pp. 200-202, 
Russian, pp. 202-203, French resume. 

1896. Studien uber parasitische Copepoden. Zeitschr. Wiss. Zool., Bd. 61, 

Heft 3, pp. 339-362, pis. 14-16, 1 fig. 

SCHULZE, F. E., KtJKENTHAL, W., AND HEIDER, H. 

1933. Nomenclator animalium generum et subgenerum. Bd. 4, Lfg. 17, 

pp. 2249-2408. 
Scott, Thomas 

1888. A revised list of the Crustacea of the Firth of Forth. 6th Ann. Rep. 

Fish. Bd. Scotland, appendices, pp. 235-262. 
1891. Additions to the fauna of the Firth of Forth. 9th Ann. Rep. Fish. 

Bd. Scotland, pp. 300-310. 

1897. The marine fishes and invertebrates of Loch Fyne. 15th Ann. Rep. 

Fish. Bd. Scotland, pp. 107-174, pis. 1-3. 

1900. Notes on some gatherings of Crustacea collected for the most part 

on board of the fishery steamer Garland and examined during the 
past year (1899). 18th Ann. Rep. Fish. Bd. Scotland, pp. 382- 
406, pis. 13-14. 

1901. Land, fresh-water and marine Crustacea. British Association Hand- 

book on the natural history of Glasgow and the west of Scotland, 
pp. 328-358. 

1902. Notes on gatherings of Crustacea collected by the fishery steamer 

Garland and the steam trawlers Star of Peace and Star of Hope, of 
Aberdeen, during the year 1901. 20th Ann. Rep. Fish. Bd. 
Scotland, pp. 447-485, pis. 22-25. 

1906. A catalogue of land, fresh-water, and marine Crustacea found in the 

basin of the River Forth and its estuary. The Ostracoda, Cope- 
pods, and Cirripedia. Pt. II, Proc. Roy. Phys. Soc. Edinburgh, 
vol. 16, No. 7, pp. 267-386. 

1907. Observations on some Copepoda that live as messmates or com- 

mensals with ascidians. Trans. Edinburgh Field Nat. Micros. Soc, 
Session 1906-1907, vol. 5, pp. 357-372. 

1908. Some additional notes on Copepoda from the Scottish seas. 25th 

Ann. Rep. Fish. Bd. Scotland, pp. 209-220, pis. 13-15. 



648 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. iot 

Scudder, Samuel H. 

1882. Nomenclator Zoologicus. An alphabetical list of all generic names 
that have been employed by naturalists for recent and fossil 
animals from the earliest times to the close of the year 1879. 
U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 19, pts. 1 and 2, xxi + 376 + 340 pp. 

Sewell, Robert Beresford Seymour 

1949. The littoral and semi-parasitic Cyclopoida, the Monstrilloida and 

Notodelphyoida. John Murray Exped. 1933-34, Sci. Rep., vol. 9, 
No. 2, pp. 17-199, 41 figs., 1 chart. 
Smith, Geoffrey 

1909. Crustacea. The Cambridge Natural History, vol. 4, London, pp. 

xviii-r-566, 287 figs. 
Stebbing, Thomas Roscoe Rede 

1910. General catalogue of South African Crustacea. (Part V of S. A. 

Crustacea, for the Marine Investigations in South Africa.) Ann. 

South African Mus., Cape Town, vol. 6, pt. 4, pp. 281-593, pis. 

15-22. 
Stephen sen, Knud 

1913. Gr0nlands krebsdyr og pycnogonider (Conspectus crustaceorum et 

pycnogonidorum Groenlandiae) . Medd. Gr0nland, vol. 22, 479 pp. 
1927. Crustacea from the Auckland and Campbell Islands. Papers from 

Dr. Th. Mortensen's Pacific Exped. 1914-16, XL. Vidensk. 

Medd. Dansk Naturh. Foren., vol. 83, pp. 289-390, 33 figs. 
1929. Marine parasitic, semiparasitic, and nonpelagic Crustacea Copepoda. 

Zoology of the Faroes, vol. 30, pp. 1-18. 
1932. Copepoda, found in ascidians from the Siberian Arctic Ocean. Nor- 
wegian North Polar Expedition with the Maud 1918-1925, Sci. 

Res., vol. 5, No. 14, pp. 3-4. 
1940. Parasitic and semiparasitic Copepoda. The Zoology of Iceland, vol. 

3, pt. 34, pp. 1-24. 
Stock, J. H. 

1950. Parasite or commensal? Notodelphys weberi, a new South African 

ascidicole copepod. The Amsterdam Naturalist, vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 
37-42, figs. 1-3. 

1951. Some notes on Notodelphys rufescens Thorell, 1860, new to the Dutch 

fauna. Beaufortia (Misc. ser., Amsterdam Mus.), No. 6, pp. 1-4, 

figs. 1-7. 
Stossich, Michele 

1S81. Prospetto della Fauna del mare Adriatico. Parte III. Classe V. 

Crustacea. Boll. Soc. Adriatica Sci. Nat. Trieste, vol. 6, pp. 

178-271. 
Thompson, Isaac Cooke 

1889. Third report on the Copepoda of Liverpool Bay (the L. M. B. C. dis- 
trict). Proc. Liverpool Biol. Soc, vol. 3, pp. 181-191, pi. 8. 
1893. Revised report on the Copepoda of Liverpool Bay. Trans. Liverpool 

Biol. Soc, vol. 7, pp. 175-230, pis. 15-35. 
Thompson, Isaac Cooke, and Scott, Andrew 

1903. Report of Copepoda collected by Professor Herdman at Ceylon in 

1902. Ceylon Pearl Oyster Fisheries, Suppl. Rep., No. 7; Rep. to 

Colonial Govt., pt. 1, pp. 227-307, pis. 1-20. 



NOTODELPHYID COPEPODS — ILLG 649 

Thorell, Tord Tamerlan Teodor 

1859a. Bidrag till kannedomen om krustaceer som lefva i arter af slagtet 

Ascidia L. K. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl., Bd. 3, No. 8, pp. 1-84, 

pis. 1-14. 
1859b. Till Kannedomen om vissa parasitiskt lefvande Entomostraceer. 

Ofv. K. Svenska Vet.-Akad. F6rh., Arg. 16, No. 8, pp. 335-362. 
1860. Beitrag zur Kenntnis von Crustaceen, welche in Arten der Gattung 

Ascidia L. leben. (Trans, by Dr. Creplin). Zeitschr. Gesammt. 

Naturw., vol. 15, pp. 114-143. 
Timm, Rudolf 

1894. Fauna der sudostlichen und ostlichen Nordsee. IV. Copepoden und 

Cladoceren. Wiss. Meer., Komm. Unters. Deutsch. Meere Kiel 

Biol.-Anst. Helgoland. N. F., Bd. 1, pp. 363-402, pis. 5-6. 
Vanhoffen, Ernst 

1897. Die Fauna und Flora Gronlands. In von Drygalski, Gronland- 

Expedition der Gesellschaft fiir Erdkunde zu Berlin, 1891-1893. 

vol. 2, pt. 1, pp. 1-383, pis. 1-8, 1 map. 
1917. Lonchidiopsis hartmeyeri, ein neuer Ascidienparasit. Sitz. Ges. 

Nat. Freunde, Berlin, Jahrg. 1917, No. 3, pp. 224-229, 7 figs., 1 pi. 
Vosseler, Julius 

1894. Copepoda, pp. 355-358. In Hilgendorf, Berichte iiber die Leistungen 

in der Carcinologie wakrend des Jahres 1891. Arch. Naturg., vol. 

60, pt. 2, pp. 277-359. 
Wilson, Charles Branch 

1920. Report on the parasitic Copepoda collected during the Canadian 

Arctic Expedition, 1913-18. Rep. Canadian Arctic Exp. 1913-18, 

vol. 7, pt. l, pp. 3-16. 
1924. New North American parasitic copepods, new hosts, and notes on 

copepod nomenclature. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 64, art. 17, 

pp. 1-22, pis. 1-3. 
1927. Copepoda Parasitica. Bijdragen tot de Kennis der Fauna van 

Curacao. Resultat eener Reis van Dr. C. J. Van der Horst in 1920. 

Bijdr. Dierk., Aufl. 25, p. 162. 
1932. The copepods of the Woods Hole region, Massachusetts. U. S. Nat. 

Mus. Bull. 158, 635 pp., 316 figs., 41 pis. 
1935a. Parasitic copepods from the Pacific Coast. American Mid. Nat., vol. 

16, No. 5, pp. 776-797, pis. 25-30, figs. 1-88. 
1935b. Order 2. Copepoda, pp. 389-409, figs. 533-557, in Pratt, A manual of 

the common invertebrate animals exclusive of insects, xviii + 854 

pp., 974 illus. 
1936. Copepods from the far north collected by Capt. R. A. Bartlett. 

Journ. Washington Acad. Sci., vol. 26, No. 9, pp. 365-376, 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1958 



INDEX 



(New genera, species, 



etc., are printed in italics. 
entries also in italics) 



Page numbers of principal 



Abantennarius, 54, 55, 66 

analis, 54, 56, 67, 68 (fig.) 

duescus, 54, 55, 66, 67 
abdominalis, Ophioseides, 480 

Prophioseides, 480 
Abrela, 134, 240 

robusta, 241 (fig.) 
Acer campestre, 140 
aciculatus, Apanteles, 431 

Urogaster, 431 
acollaris, Bonnierella, 480 

Bonnierilla, 480 
Acrocercops dives, 433 
Acrodelphis, 316 

letochae, 316, 319 
acuta, Mysidopsis, 6 
acutus, Doropygus, 586 
adenophorum, Eupatorium, 267, 269, 

410, 460 
aegeriae, Dasylagon, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.), 

424, 425 
affinis, Ascidia, 493 

affinis, Notodelphys, 491, 503, 507 (fig.) 
Afralebra, subg., 128 
agilis, Notodelphis, 496 

Notodelphys, 490, 491, 496 
Agnathaner, 474, 479 

minutus, 479 

typicus, 479 
Agnathener, 479 
agresta, Alebra albostriella, 138, 139, 

140 
agrifolia, Quercus, 118 
Alabama argillacea, 446 
alba, Quercus, 120 
Albera, 128, 132, 143 

picea, 144 (fig.) 
albidula, Dikraneura, 183 
albidus, Doropygus, 586 
albomarginatus, Antennarius, 100 
albostriella, Alebra, 185, 137 (fig.), 139, 
141 

Alebra albostriella. 135, 138, 140 

Cicada, 134, 135 
aldrichi, Opius, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.), 452 
Alebra, 128, 132, 184, 135 (key), 142 

albostriella, 185, 137 (fig.), 139, 141 

albostriella agresta, 138, 139, 140 

albostriella albostriella, 135, 138, 
140 

albostriella costatella, 136 



Alebra, albostriella diluta, 136 

albostriella discicollis, 139, 140 

albostriella dufouri, 136, 138 

albostriella fulveola, 138, 140 

albostriella fumida, 140 

albostriella insigita, 136 

albostriella insignita, 136, 138 

albostriella rubrafrons, 138, 139 

albostriella scopa, 139, 140 

albostriella tincta, 138, 139 

albostriella viridis, 135 

aurea, 135, 188, 141 

aureovittatus, 226 

bicincta, 138, 139 

bifasciata, 196, 198 

curvilinea, 166, 167 

eburnea, 138, 139 

flavocephala, 135 

fumida, 135, 140 

interrogate, 250 

robusta, 240, 241 

sanguinolinea, 247, 248 

sorbi, 135 

terminalis, 194 

trimaculata, 193 

wahlbergi, 138 

wahlbergi brunnea, 136 

wahlbergi pallescens, 136 
Alebrini, ; Leafhopper tribe (Homoptera: 

Cicadellidae), 127 
Alebrini, 132 (key), 145, 274 (check-list) 
aletiae, Apanteles, 446 
alius, Apanteles, 420 (fig.), 434 
alliodora, Cordia, 205 
alliodorae, Habralebra, 184, 185, 189, 
190 (fig.) 

Protalebra, 189 
allmani, Notodelphis, 493 

Notodelphys, 473, 490, 492 
allmanni, Notodelphys, 492 
Alloeocarpa emilionis, 623 

thilesii, 525 
altipinnis, Antennarius, 54, 62. 99 
Amaroecium sp., 484, 485 
Amaroucium areolatum, 485 

californicum, 637 

densum, 480 

gibbulosum, 485 

mediterraneum, 485 

punctum, 485 
amela, Ooneides, 487 

651 



652 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



americana, Calanopia, 39, 40, 43 (fig.), 

44 
amoena, Habralebra, 186, 190 (fig.), 191 

Protalebra, 191 
Amphibolips, 111 

murata, 111 
Ampulloides, Molgula, 496, 610, 624 
analis, Abantennarius, 54, 56, 67, 68 

(fig.) 
Anastrepha fraterculus, 455 

mombinpraeoptans, 458 

montei, 451 

pickeli, 451 

serpentina, 454 

striata, 455 

sp., 451, 458 
anastrephae, Phaenocarpa, 417 (fig.), 

419 (fig.), 457 
Anatifa truncata, 27 
Ancylocentms, 411 
Ancylus, 411 

cuspidatus, 411 

excrucians, 411 
Andricus, 112 

mendocinensis, 112 
reniformis, 109 
angusta, Mysidopsis, 6 
annulatus, Antennarius, 94, 95 
anormalis, Asciodes, 439 
antarctica, Notodelphys, 510 

Pygodelphys, 599 
antarcticus, Doropygus, 520, 599 
Antennariidae, 62, 50, 53 (key), 54 
(table), 86 

phylogeny, 53 (fig.) 

The frogfishes of the family, 47 
Antennariinae, subfam., 62 
Antennarius, 54, 58, 85, 86, 93, 98 

albomarginatus, 100 

altipinnis, 54, 62, 99 

annulatus, 94, 95 

argus, 93 

asper, 54, 59, 89 

astroscopus, 89, 94 

avalonis, 54, 58, 64, 87, 88 (fig.) 

bermudensis, 54, 59, 61, 98 

bigibbus, 80 

biocellatus, 99 

bivertex, 80 

campylacanthus, 85 

caudimaculatus, 82 

chironectes, 54, 60, 85, 93 

coccineus, 54, 61, 97, 99 

commersoni, 93, 95 

commersoni niger, 93 

commersoni nigromaculatus, 93, 94 

commersoni rubrofuscus, 93 

commersonii, 76, 84 

corallinus, 94 

cryptacanthus, 81, 82 

cubensis, 73 

cunninghami, 74, 76 

dorehensis, 54, 61, 97 

drombus, 54, 61, 96, 99 

duescus, 66 



Antennarius, fuliginosus, 78 
glauerti, 94 
goramensis, 91 
guntheri, 72 
hispidus, 54, 59, 90, 91 
horridus, 72, 83, 84 
inops, 104 
lacepedei, 71 
lateralis, 84 
laysanius, 93, 94 
leopardinus, 95 
leprosus, 94 
leucas, 97 

leucosoma, 54, 60, 92 
lindgreeni, 82 
lithinostomus, 82 
lutescens, 84 
melas, 72 
mitchelli, 65 
moluccensis, 54, 60, 91 
multiocellatus, 54, 59, 60, 73, 84, 

94, 102 
multiocellatus leucosoma, 92 
nexilis, 96 
nigromaculatus, 93 
niveus, 100 

notophthalmus, 54, 61, 99 
nox, 78 

nummifer, 54, 62, 102, 103 (fig.) 
nuttingi, 72 

ocellatus, 54, 58, 64, 86, 89, 95, 102 
oligospilos, 54, 60, 95 
pardalis, 54, 59, 92 
pauciradiatus, 54, 62, 100, 101 (fig.) 
phymatodes, 54, 59, 72, 90, 95 
pinnaceps, 71, 75 
pinnaceps fasciata, 71 
pinniceps bleekeri, 79 
pleurophthalmus, 89, 100 
polyophthalmus, 93, 94 
punctatissimus, 97 
radiosus, 54, 58, 64, 86, 87, 102 
reticularis, 81 
sanguifluus, 102 
sanguineus, 54, 61, 87, 88, 95 
sarasa, 54, 58, 64, 88 
scaber, 73, 84 
scriptissimus, 91 
stellifer, 94 
stigmaticus, 97 
striatus, 71 
strigatus, 80, 81 
striolatus, 75 
subteres, 66 
tagus, 95 
teleplanus, 73 
tenebrosus, 73, 74 
tenuifilis, 81 
tigris, 73, 74 
tridens, 75, 78, 91 
urophthalmus, 82 
verrucosus, 54, 61, 99 
vulgaris, 52 
ziesenhennei, 81 
subg., 54, 59, 90 



INDEX 



653 



Antennatus, 54, 55, 57, 80 

bigibbus, 54, 57, 80, 81 

cryptacanthus, 54, 55, 82 

strigatus, 54, 57, 81 

subg., 54, 57, 80 
Antron, 115 

magdalenae, 116 

nubila, 116 

tepicana, 115 
Apanteles, 406, 412, 414, 428, 431 

aciculatus, 481 

aletiae, 446 

alius, 420 (fig.), 434 

areolaris, 414 

balthazari, 431 

carpatus, 431 

cofeellae, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.), 481 

concinnus, 418 (fig.), 440 

concordalis, 441 

conformis, 444 

croceicornis, 438 

dentatus, 44® 

disputabilis, 444 

glomeratus, 434, 435 

hedyleptae, 443 

igae, 431 

impiger, 437 

kraussi, 449 

laevicoxis, 431 

leucochiloneae, 432 

lipomeringis, 483 

lunatus, 449 

malthacae, 420 (fig.), 439 

megastidis, 445 

muesebecki, 440 

opsiphanis, 434 

ornatricis, 485 

orobenae, 435 

paleacritae, 448 

paradoxus, 418 (fig.), 446 

parallelis, 443 

piceoventris, 431 

politiventris, 436 

pseudoglossae, 437 

sancti-vincenti, 431 

sarrothripae, 439 

schini, 420 (fig.), 448 

sordidus, 427 

stenomae, 441 

talidicida, 444 

thoracicus, 431 

thurberiae, 445 
Alphanalebra, 129, 132, 163, 164 

unipuncta, 163 (fig.), 164 
apicalis, Leiophron, 410, 412 
Aplidium cristallinum, 485 

gibbulosum, 485 
apoda, Ophioseides, 487 
appeli, Tathicarpus, 64 
acquilonaris, Pygodelphys, 599, 600, 602 

(fig.), 603 (fig.) 
Araeodelphis 312, 313 

natator, 313 

498059—59 2 



arcticus, Chironectes, 104 

Doropygus, 587 
arcuata, Bonnierilla, 481 
areolaris, Apanteles, 414 
areolata, Parascidia, 485 
areolatum, Amaroucium, 485 

Fragarium, 485 
argillacea, Alabama, 446 
argus, Antennarius, 93 

Morchellium, 485 
Argyrodelphis, 286 

arizonica, Quercus, 109, 113, 114, 115 
armadillo, Notopterophoroides, 486 
armata, Bonierilla, 431 
Ascidia affinis, 493 

aspersa, 495, 496, 525, 589, 591 

callosa, 503, 592, 593, 598 

canaliculata, 495 

canelata, 487, 494, 586 

canina, 482, 485, 486, 492, 493, 494, 
495, 496, 525, 587, 588, 610 

clementea, 512, 616 

communis, 510 

conchilega, 495, 624 

cristata, 495 

fumigata, 591 

gemmata, 494, 486, 512 

glabra, 480, 610 

interrupta, 496 

intestinalis, 485, 493, 494, 586, 587, 
610 

latesiphonica, 486 

malaca, 480, 484 

mammillata, 483, 493, 495 

mentula, 482, 483, 485, 492, 493, 
495, 496, 525 

obliqua, 495, 496, 591 

parallelogramma, 493, 496, 525, 
590 591 

paratropa, 503, 593, 603, 608 

plebeia, 485, 525, 610 

prunum, 537, 592, 593, 624 

rhabdophora, 510 

sanguinolenta, 483 

sordida, 496 

sydneiensis, 485, 493 

+p-ppj*Q 4-Q4 

venosa, 493, 525, 587, 588, 589, 610 

virginea, 493, 496, 590 

sp., 592 
ascidicola, Notodelphys, 488, 492, 510, 

525 
Ascidiella aspersa, 483, 484, 493, 495, 
496 

latesiphonica, 484 

opalina, 493, 496, 525 

pa'ula, 496 

scabra, 495, 525 
Asciodes anormalis, 439 
asper, Antennarius, 54, 59, 89 
aspersa, Ascidia, 495, 496, 525, 589, 591 

Ascidiella, 483, 484, 493, 495, 496 
Astellium perspicuum, 487 
astroscopus, Antennarius, 89, 94 
asymmetrica, Styela, 510 
ater, Leiophron, 410 



654 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



atomaria, Polycarpa, 525 

atra, Phrynelox, 54, 57, 76, 77 (table), 

78 (fig.) 
attenuata, Dikraneura, 182, 183 

Elabra, 183 
attenuatus, Lawsonellus, 183 (fig.) 
audax, Microctonus, 406, 407, 417 (fig.), 

420 (fig.) 
aurantium, Halocynthia, 600, 603, 608 

Polyclinum, 485 
aurata, Typhlocyba, 138 
aurea, Alebra, 135, 138, 141 

Typhlocyba, 138 
aureocosta, Barela, 265, 267, 268 (fig.), 

269 
aureovittata, Elabra, 221, 225 (fig.), 226 
aureovittatus, Alebra, 226 
auripennis, Opius, 4-53, 454 
auritus, Doropygus, 482 

Doropygus elongatus, 482 

Notopterophorus, 482 

Notopterophorus elongatus, 482 
aurivillii, Calanopia, 39 
australis, Rabela, 215, 216, 217 (fig.) 
australis, Microcosmus exasperatus, 525 
avalonis, Antennarius, 54, 58, 64, 87, 88 
(fig.) 

balanella, Callirhytis, 117 

Balanus squamosa, 33 

Balera, 133, 171, 172 (key), 174, 181 
caraguatae, 172, 173 (fig.), 174 
emarginata, 172, 175 (fig.) 
pellucida, 172, 173 (fig.) 
pusilla, 172, 174, 175 (fig.) 

billi, Trypanalebra, 154, 155 (fig.), 156 

balloui, Fornicia, 417 (fig.), 420 (fig.), 428 
Omegalebra, 200, 206, 209 (fig.) 

balneolensis, Brementia, 487 

balthazeri, Apanteles, 4&1 
Urogaster, 431 

Bamboo, Formosan cossonine weevils 
of, 13 

Bambusa stenostachyta, 13, 18, 20 

bambusae, Rhinanisus, 14, 16 (fig.), 17 
(fig.) 

barbata, Omegelebra, 200, 211 (fig.) 

barbatulus, Chironectes, 52 

Barela, 134, 248, 264, 265' (key) 

Barela aureocosta, 265, 267, 268 (fig.), 
269 
decorata, 265, 268 (fig.), 269 
parvisaccata, 265, 268 (fig.), 269 
sobrina, 265, 270, 271 (fig.) 

Barnacles, Littoral, from the Tuamotu, 
Marshall, and Caroline Islands, 
25 

Basilosaurus cetoides, 296 

Bathypera ovoidia, 569 

Batrachopus, 85 

bayeri, Doropygus, 519, 524, 544, 547 
(fig.) 
Halyphysema, 123, 125 

beameri, Beamerulus, 242, 243, 244t 245 
(fig.), 246, 247 



Beamerulus, 134, 242, 243 (key), 248, 
256, 267 

beameri, 242, 243, 244, 245 (fig.), 
246, 247 

morelosensis, 243, 245 (fig.), 246 

uniceratus, 243, 245 (fig.) 
bermudensis, Antennarius, 54, 59, 61, 98 
berryi, Microctonus, 407 
beutenmuelleri, Loxaulus, 116 
bicincta, Alebra, 138, 139 

Protalebra, 215 
bifasciata, Alebra, 196, 198 

Habralebra, 184, 185, 195 (fig.), 
196, 197, 198 
bifasciatella, Habralebra, 184, 185, 190 

(fig.), 192 
bifurcatus, Chironectes, 68 
bigelowi, Mysidopsis, 1, 3, 5 
bigibbus, Antennarius, 80 

Anetennatus, 54, 57, 80, 81 
biloba, Calanopia, 40, 41 (fig.), 42 (fig.), 

43 (fig.) 
binotata, Typhlocyba, 138, 139 
biocellatus, Antennarius, 99 

Chironectes, 73 
bivertex, Antennarius, 80 
Blacinae, 411 

blanchardi, Microgaster, 413, 414 
blantoni, Omegalebra, 200, 205, 207, 209 

(fig.) 
blantoni, Trypanalebra, 154, 155 (fig.), 

157, 158 
Blarea, 132, 159, 162 

brasiliensis, 159, 160 (fig.) 
bleekeri, Antennarius pinniceps, 79 
bolteni, Boltenia, 610 
Boltenia bolteni, 610 

echinata, 537, 539, 592 

ovifera, 537, 539 

villosa, 600, 603, 608 
bombyx, Notopterophorus, 483 
bonariensis, Solanum, 414 
Bonierilla, 480 

brevipes, 481 
Bonneriella, 480 
Bonnierella, 480 

acollaris, 480 

longipes, 481 
Bonnierilla, 478, 480 

acollaris, 480 

arcuata, 481 

armata, 481 

brevipes, 481 

longipes, 481 

scolaris, 480 
borealis, Quercus, 117, 121 
bossi, Eurhinodelphis, 293, 297, 310 
Bostrichobranchus digonas, 531 
Botachus, 472, 473, 478, 485 

cylindratus, 485 

fulvus, 486 

fusiformis, 485 

macroone, 486 
Botrylloides sp., 485 
Botryllus violatinctus, 485 



INDEX 



655 



bougainvilli, Chironectes, 69 

Histiophryne, 54, 56, 69, 70 
Bowman, Thomas E.; A new species of 
Calanopia (Copepoda: Cala- 
noida) from the Caribbean Sea, 
39 
A new species of Mysidopsis (Crus- 
tacea: Mysidacea) from the 
southeastern coast of the United 
States, 1 
brachiata, Vernonia, 227 
brachypus, Pseudocossonus, 22 
Braconidae, New Neotropical wasps of 

the family, 405 
Braconidae, 405, 450 
brasiliensis, Blarea, 159, 160 (fig.) 
brasiliensis, Microctonus, 406, 407 
Perilitus, 406 
Protalebra, 255, 257 
Protalebrella, 256, 257, 258, 259 
(fig.), 260, 261 
Brementia, 477, 479, 487 

balneolensis, 487 
brevipes, Bonnierilla, 481 
brevitarsis, Pseudocossonus, 21, 22 
broomensis, Lophiocharon, 82 
Brunerella, 133, 176, 111 (key), 181 
magnifica, 176, 177, 178, 179 (fig.) 
scriptozona, 177, 178, 179 (£g.) 
brunnea, Alebra wahlbergi, 136 
Protalebra, 237 
Rhabdotalebra, 228, 229, 237, 239 

(fig.) 
Rhabdotalebra brunnea, 229, 287, 
240 
butleri, Tathicarpus, 54, 55, 64, 93 

caerulea, Notodelphys, 492, 493 
Caesalpina sp., 461 
Caesira socialis, 496 

Calanopia (Copepoda: Calanoida) from 
the Caribbean Sea, new species 
of, 39 
Calanopia, 39, 44 

americana, 39, 40, 43 (fig.), 44 

aurivillii, 39 

biloba, 40, 41 (fig.), 42 (fig.), 43 
(fig.) 

elliptica, 39, 40, 43 (fig.), 44 

herdmani, 39 

media, 39, 40 

minor, 40 

sar3i, 39, 40 

thompsoni, 39 
calcareobasis, Chthamalus, 26, 28, 29 
caldwelli, Diceratalebra, 248, 253 (fig.), 
254 

Protalebra, 254 
californica, Mysidopsis, 6 
californicum, Amaroucium, 673 
callipygus, Doropvgus, 587 
Callirhytis, 117, 121 

balanella, 117 

carmelensis, 118, 119 

floridana, 120 

floripara, 118 



Callirhytis, glomerosa, 119 

inter sita, 119 

lapillula, 120 

manni, 120 

marginata, 122 

medularis, 121 

perobscura, 122 

suttoni, 120 
callosa, Ascidia, 503, 592, 593, 598 
Calocarpum mammosum, 454 
camara, Lantana, 231, 269 
camelina, Mysidopsis, 6 
campestre, Acer, 140 
Campopera, 478, 480 

michaelseni, 480 
Campsus, 134 
campylacanthus, Antennarius, 85 

Lophiocharon, 54, 57, 85 
canaliculata, Ascidia, 495 
canelata, Ascidia, 487, 494, 586 
canina, Ascidia, 482, 485, 486, 492, 493, 
494, 495, 496, 525, 587, 588, 610 

Ciona, 482, 493 

Phallusia, 482 
Canna indica, 445 
canopus, Styela, 592 
Capellaria, 85 

capetillensis, Epicaerus, 412 
capsicola, Opius, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.), 450 
caraguatae, Balera, 172, 173 (fig.), 174 
cardioc6phale, Ophios£ide, 640 
cardiacephalus, Ophioseides, 640 
cardiocephalus, Ophioseides, 640 

Ophioseidus, 640 
carinata, Microplitis, 427 
carmelensis, Callirhytis, 118, 119 
carpatus, Apanteles, 431 

Microgaster, 431 
cassiae, Opsiphanes cassiae, 435 
Catolethromorphus, 21 

nigripes, 21 
caudimaculatus, Antennarius, 

Chironectes, 82, 89 

Lophiocharon, 54, 57, 82 
cauta, Lithotrya, 26 
Centistes, 410, 412 

edentatus, 411 

epicaeri, 411, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.) 
cerea, Cnemidocarpa, 488 
cereus, Opius, 450, 453 
Ceroptres, 108 

montensis, 108 
cerulaea, Notodelphys, 493 
cetoides, Basilosaurus, 296 
ChamDsodelphis dationum, 319 

lophogenius, 316, 318, 319 

ombonii, 319 
Chaunax, 86 
Chelyosoma macleavanum, 587 

productum, 579, 600 
chironectes, Antennarius, 54, 60, 85, 93 

Lophius, 85 
Chironectes, 85 

arcticus, 104 

barbatulus, 52 

bifurcatus, 68 



656 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



Chironectes, biocellatus, 73 

bougainvilli, 69 

caudimaculatus, 82, 89 

chlorostygma, 52 

coccineus, 97 

commersoni, 91 

filamentosus, 68 

fuscipilis, 73 

hispidus, 90 

laevigatas, 103 

leprosus, 80 

lophotes, 90 

mentzelii, 94 

multiocellatus, 94 

Chironectes niger, 93 

nummifer, 102 

ocellatus, 89 

pardalis, 92 

pavoninus, 52 

peravok, 93 

pictus, 104 

pictus vittatus, 104 

principis, 94 

reticulata s, 80 

rubrofuscus, 93 

scaber, 73 

sonntagii, 104 

subrotundatus, 80 

tenebrosus, 73, 74, 83, 84 

tigris, 73 

tridens, 79 

trisignatus, 82, 83 

tuberosum, 80 

tumidus, 104 

variegatus, 93 
chlorostygma, Chironectes, 52 
chrysolepis, Quercus, 108, 109 
Chthamalus, 25, 29, 30 

calcareobasis, 26, 28, SO 

hembeli, 26, 29, 32, 33 

intertextus, 32 

stellatus, 29 
Cicada albostriella, 134, 135 
Cicadula elegentula, 135 
ciliata, Notodelphys, 491, 493 
cinerea, Quercus, 112 
Ciona canina, 482, 493 

intestinalis, 483, 485, 493, 494, 495, 
496, 525 

papillosa, 493 
Circinalium concrescens, 479 
claripennis, Euphoridea, 411 
clarki, Salmo, 49 

Ustina, 486 
clathrata, Fornicia, 428, 429, 430 
Clavelina lepadiformis, 481, 483, 525, 

610, sp. 610 
clementea, Ascidia, 512, 616 
clitellaria, Protalebra, 271, 272 (fig.) 
Cnemidocarpa cerea, 488 

finmarkiensis, 600, 603, 608 

novae-seelandiae, 599 
coccinea, Polyzoa, 623 

Quercus, 119, 121 



coccineus, Antennarius, 54, 61, 97, 99 

Chironectes, 97 

Doropygus, 587 
cocheteuxii, Eurhinodelphis, 296 
cocinsinensis, Lophius, 104 
coerulea, Notodelphys, 493 
coeruleus, Doropygus, 589 
coffeella, Leucoptera, 433 
cofieellae, Apanteles, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.), 

481 
colorata, Rhabdotalebra brunnea, 229, 

288, 239 (fig.) 
comata, Polycarpa, 496, 610, 624 
commersoni, Antennarius, 93, 95 

Chironectes, 91 

Lophius, 85, 93 

Antennarius, 76, 84 
commune, Leptoclinum, 487, 488 
communis, Ascidia, 510 
Conarthrus, 22 

cylindricus, 14, 16 (fig.), 17 (fig.), 23 

ferrugineus, 14, 16 (fig.), 17 (fig.), 
22 

ferruginineus, 14 

vicinus, 23 
conchilega, Ascidia, 495, 624 

Phallusia, 493, 495, 525 
Conchotrya valentiana, 27 
concinnus, Apanteles, 4; 8 (fig.), 440 
concordalis, Apanteles, 441 
concrescens, Circinalium, 479 
conformis, Apanteles, 444 
congener, Eutornus, 22 
conica, Lithotrya, 26 

Protalebra, 258 

Protalebrella, 256, 258, 259 (fig.) 
conicus, Doropygus, 587 
Cooke, C. Wythe; Rhynobrissus cuneus, 
a new echinoid from North Caro- 
lina, 9 
cookei, Verruca, 25, 26, 28, 30 
Copepods, North American, of the fam- 
ily Notodelphyidae 463 
corallinus, Antennarius, 94 
Cordia alliodora, 205 

sulcata, 226 
cordiae, Omegalebra, 201, 203 (fig.), 204 

Protalebra, 204 
Corella parallelogramma, 493, 496 

willmeriana, 504, 525 
coriacea, Styela, 624, 629 
"Cornutia cymosa," 227 
Cossonine weevils of bamboo, Formosan, 

13 
costaricensis, Elabra, 218, 221, 225 

(fig.), *26 
costatella, Alebra albostriella, 136 
crassangulum, Schizodelphis, 311 
crassispina, Echinophryne, 54, 56, 69, 70 
Crataegus sp., 140 
crawfordi, Opius, 451 
cristallinum, Aplidium, 485 
cristata, Ascidia, 495 
Phallusia, 493, 610 



INDEX 



657 



cristatus, Doropygus, 587 

Cristivomer, 49, 50 

croceicornis, Apanteles, 438 

cruciata, Habralebra, 185, 197 (fig.), 198 

cryptacanthiis, Antennarius, 81, 82 

Antennatus, 54, 55, 82 
cubana, Protalebra, 248 
cubensis, Antennarius, 73. 
cuneus, Rhynobrissus, 10 
cunninghami, Antennarius, 74, 76 

Phrynelox, 54, 57, 74, 80 
curculio, Doropygus, 587 
curvatus, Doropygus, 521, 524 
curvicauda, Toxotrypana, 452 
curvilinea, Alebra, 166, 167 

Protalebra, 167, 168, 169 (fig.), 1.70 
curvipes, Gunenotophorus, 623, 625 

(fig.), 629 
cuspidatus, Ancylus, 411 
Cyclopinidae, 475 
Cyclops, 475 

cylindratus, Botachus, $85 
cylindricus, Conarthrus, 14, 16 (fig.), 

17 (fig.), 23 
cylindriformis, Doropygus, 479, 520, 586 
cymosa, Cornutia, 227 
Cynthia echinata, 537 

lurida, 481, 525, 624 

microcosmus, 587, 589, 610, 623 

morus, 525 

papillosa, 590 

rustica, 479 

sp., 481, 590 

Dasylagon, 4®4 (key) 

aegeriae, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.), 4H, 
425 

simulans, 424, $25 
dationum, Champsodelphis, 319 
decorata, Barela, 265, 268 (fig.), 269 

Protalebra, 264, 265 
decurvata, Paralebra, 146, 151 (fig.), 152 
deflexus, Doropygus, 587 
Delphinodon, 286, 311, 312, 318 

dividum, 286, 287, 312, 320, 321, 
324, 325, 330 

leidyi, 286 

mento, 286, 287 
demissus, Doropygus, 521, 523, 537, 

540 (fig.) 
Dendrodoa grossularia, 624 
Dendronina, 124 
densiflora, Lithocarpus, 112 

Quercus, 112 
densum, Amaroucium, 480 
dentata, Notodelphys, 491, 493 
dentatum, Didemnum, 487 

Leptoclinum, 487 
dentatus, Apanteles, 442 
des apoda, Ophios, 487 
Diaphania hyalinata, 438 

nitadalis, 415, 416 
diaphaniae, Microgaster, 413, 414 
Diazona violacea, 485 



Diceratalebra, 134, 181, 184, 185, 243 
247, 248 (key), 265 
caldwelli, 248, 253 (fig.), 254 
interrogate 142, 248, 250, 251 

(fig.) 

pusilla, 248, 252, 253 (fig.) 

quadricerata, 248, 253 (fig.), 254 

rubusta, 241 

sanguinolinea, 248, 250, 251 (fig.) 

sola, 248, 249, 251 (fig.), 254 
didelphys, Mysidopsis, 6 
Didemnum dentatum, 487 

fulgens, 488 
digona, Bostrichobranchus, 531 
Dikraneura, 132 

albidula, 183 

attenuata, 182, 183 

laticeps, 132 

parallela, 221 

parana, 222 

pellucida, 171, 172 

quadrifasciata, 165, 166 

sarana, 224 
Dikraneurini, 128, 131 
diluta, Alebra albostriella, 136 
dimidiatus, Pseudocossonus, 22 
Diochotichus, 286 
diolacea, Diazona, 485 
Diplosoma spongiforme, 481 
discicollis, Alebra albostriella, 139, 140 

Typhlocyba, 135, 136 
Disholeaspis, 113, 115 

edura, 118, 115 

mamillana, 115 

prehensa, 113 

spissa, 114 

truekeensis, 108, 109 
disputabilis, Apanteles, 444 
divergens, Opius, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.), 456 
dives, Acrocercops, 433 
dividum, Delphinodon, 286, 287, 312, 

320, 321, 324, 325, 330 
dorehensis, Antennarius, 54, 61, 97 
Doroixys, 468, 478, 484 

uncinata, 484 
Doropygeiia, 590 

thorellii, 591 
Doropygeiia, 473, 478, 523, 590 (key) 

normani, 590 

porcicauda, 590 

psyllus, 590, 591 

thorelli, 590, 591 

thorellii, 591 
Doropygopsis, 473, 474, 478, 519, 523, 
591, 592 (key) 

longicauda, 503, 591, 592 

novemsetiferus, 592 
Doropygus, 465, 469, 473, 474, 478, 481, 
518, 523 (key), 590, 591, 592, 
598, 599, 608, 609, 616, 620, 621 

acurus, 586 

albidus, 586 

antarcticus, 520, 599 

arcticus, 587 



658 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



Doropygus, auritus, 482 
auritus elongatus, 483 
bayeri, 519, 524, 544, 547 (fig.) 
callipygus, 587 
coccineus, 587 
coeruleus, 589 
conicus, 587 
cristatus, 587 
curculio, 587 
curvatus, 521, 524 
cylindriformis, 479, 520, 586 
deflexus, 587 

demissus, 521, 523, 537, 540 (fig.) 
elatus, 483 
elongatus, 483 
elongatus auritus, 482 
elongatus elatus, 483 
elongatus elongatus, 483 
elongatus maculatus, 483 
fernaldi, 524, 551, 553 (fig.) 
gibber, 608, 610 
gibbosa, 589 
gibbosus, 587 
globosipherus, 588 
hummi, 524, 557, 560 (fig.) 
kerguelensis, 524 
lamellipes, 520, 599 
laticornis, 520, 521, 524, 530, 534 

(fig.) 
longicauda, 522, 523, 592 
longimatrix, 521, 522, 523, 524 
macroon, 588 

mohri, 519, 523, 562, 565 (fig.) 
molgulensis, 588 
normani, 523, 590 
novaesealandicus, 599 
novae seelandius, 520, 599 
novemsetiferus, 522, 523 
oblongus, 588 
papilio, 482 

papilio massiliensis, 482 
ponticus, 588 
procicauda, 523, 590 
postremoglobosus, 588 
profundus, 524, 569, 571 (fig.) 
propinquus, 588 
psyltus, 523, 591 

pulex, 465, 518, 519, 521, 523, 525 
pullus, 525 
refiexus, 588 
robustus, 624 
rotundus, 589 
rufescens, 589 

schellenbergi, 524, 574, 577 (fig.) 
seclusus, 523, 579, 582 (fig.) 
sphaerasipherus, 589 
spiniferus, 521, 523, 524 
thorelli, 522, 523, 590, 591 
trisetosus, 521, 524 
tumefactus, 589 
verrucosus, 589 
viridis, 589 
sp., 589 
subg., 608, 610 



Doroyxes, 484 

dorsalis, Lithotrya, 26 
douglasii, Quercus, 111, 115 
drombus, Antennarius, 54, 61, 96, 99 

Dryocosmus piperoides, 117 

duescus, Abantennarius, 54, 55, 66, 67 
Antennarius, 66 

dufouri, Alebra albostriella, 136, 138 

dumosa, Quercus, 110, 111, 113 

dumosae, Liodora, 111 

Dysgenopsyllus, 477, 479, 487 
reevesbyensis, 4%7 

Eacles magnifica, 409 

eaclidis, Meteorus, 408, 417 (fig.), 418 

(fig.) 
eburnea, Alebra, 138, 139 
eburneola, Elabra, 219 (fig.), 220, 221, 

222, 223, 224 
Protalebra, 218, 221 

ecdytolophae, Microgaster, 412, 418 
echinata, Boltinia, 537, 539, 592 

Cynthia, 537 
Echinophryne, 54, 56, 70 

crassispina, 54, 56, 69, 70 

glauerti, 54, 56, 70 
edentatus, Centistes, 411 
edura, Disholcaspis, 113, 115 
ehrenbergi, Morpheis, 450 

Polycarpa, 494 
Elabra, 133, 218, 220 (Key), 273 

attenuata, 183 

aureovittata, 221, 225 (fig.), 226 

costaricensis, 218, 221, 225 (fig.), 
226 

eburneola, 219 (fig.), 220, 221, 222, 

223, 224 

morrisoni, 219 (fig.), 220, 223 
morrisoni isthmusi, 219 (fig.), 221, 

224, 225 (fig.) 
morrisoni morrisoni, 221, 223 
parallela, 219 (fig.), 220, 221, 223 
parana, 219 (fig.), 220, 222, 
quadrifasciata, 166 

sarana, 220, 224, 225 (fig.) 

elatus, Doropygus, 483 

Doropygus elongatus, 483 
Notopterophorus, 483, 621 
Notopterophorus elongatus, 483 

elegans, Notodelphys, 490, 492, 493 

elegentula, Cicadula, 135 

elliptica, Calanopia, 39, 40, 43 (fig.), 44 

elongatus, Doropygus, 483 
Doropygus auritus, 483 
Doropygus elongatus, 483 
Notopterophorus, 483, 621 
Notopterophorus elongatus, 493 

emarginata, Balera, 172, 175 (fig.) 
Empoasca, 175 

emilionis, Alloeocarpa, 623 

emoryi, Quercus, 117 

Empoasca emarginata, 175 

Entocrypta huntsmani, 469 

epicaeri, Centistes, 411, 417 (fig.), 419 
(fig.) 



INDEX 



659 



Epicaerus capetillensis, 412 
Erabla, 133, 212 

lineola, 213 (fig.), 214 
Erythroneura sublunata, 273 
Erythroneurini, 131 
erythroptera, Plagiodera, 408 
esculenta, Manihot, 451 
Eugyra sp., 592, 601 
Eupatorium adenophorum, 267, 269, 

410, 460 
Euphoridea, 411 

claripennis, 411 
Euphorinae, 411 
Euphorus, 410, 412 

pallicornis, 412 
Eupteryx fasciata, 135 
Euraphia hembeli, 29 
Eurhinodelphis, 297, 310, 311, 312 

bossi, 293, 297, 310 

cocheteuxii, 296 
Eutornicus, 22 
Eutornus, 22 

congener, 22 

ferrugineus, 22 

jansoni, 23 

planatus, 21 
exasperatus, Microcosmus, 611 
excrucians, Ancylus, 411 
eximia, Typhlocyba, 135 

fabianii, Squalodelphis, 281, 286 
falciferus, Notodelphyopsis, 511, 512 
fasciata, Antennarius pinnaceps, 71 

Eupteryx, 135 
fendleri, Quercus, 114, 115 
fernaldi, Doropygus, 524, 551 , 553 (fig.) 
ferrifusalis, Jocara, 414 
ferrugineus, Conarthrus, 14, 16 (fig.), 
17 (fig.), 22 

Eutornus, 22 
ferruginineus Conarthrus, 14 
filamentosus, Chironectes, 68 

Rhycherus, 54, 55, 68 
filholi, Paramolgula, 599 
filum, Leurostenus, 18 

Pseudostenotrupis, 21 
finmarkiensis, Cnemidocarpa, 600, 603, 

608 
flagellator, Zarhachis, 291, 292, 293 
flavocephala, Alebra, 135 
floricola, Neuroterus, 110 
floricomus, Neuroterus, 109 
floridana, Callirhytis, 120 
floridanus, Fowlerichthys, 86, 87 
floripara, Callirhytis, 118 
fiorulentus, Neuroterus, 110 
fluminensis, Opius, 450 
Fomes sp., 423 
Fornicia, 427, 428 (key) 

bailout, 417 (fig.), 420 (fig.), 428 

clathrata, 428, 429, 430 

pilosa, 428, 429 

surinamensis, 428, 430 
Fowlerichthys floridanus, 86, 87 

subg., 54, 58, 64, 86 



Fragarium areolatum, 485 
fraterculus, Anastrepha, 455 
Frogfishes of the family Antennariidae, 

47 
fulgens, Didemnum, 488 
fuliginosus, Antennarius, 78 
fulveola, Alegra albostriella, 138, 140 
fulvus, Botachus, 4S6 
fumida, Alebra, 135, 140 

Alebra albostriella, 140 
fumigata, Ascidia, 591 

Phallusia, 493, 610 
furca, Mysidopsis, 1, 2 (fig.), 4 (fig.), 6 
furtiva, Phloeterides, 637 
fuscipilis, Chironectes, 73 
fusiformis, Botachus, 485 
fuveola, Typhlocyba, 135 

gabbii, Tretosphys, 286, 312 

gairdneri, Salmo, 49 

gangelion, Pyura, 592 

garryana, Quercus, 110, 111 

gelatinosa, Phallusia, 483 

Gelechiidae, 414 

gemmata, Ascidia, 484, 486, 512 

geographicus, Lophius, 104 

gibba, Histrio, 104 

gibber, Doropygus, 608, 610 

Notopterophorus, 610 

Pachypygus, 609, 610, 615 
gibbosa, Doropygus, 589 

Mysidopsis, 6 
gibbosus, Doropygus, 587 
gibbsii, Styela, 526, 562, 600, 603, 608, 

633, 636 
gibbulosum, Amaroucium, 485 

Aplidium, 485 
gibbus, Lophius, 204 
gigantea, Paramolgula, 480, 599 
giganteus, Gunenotophorus, 623 

Gunenotophorus globularis, 622, 
623 
gillettei, Habralebra, 185, 196, 197 

(fig.), 198 
glabra, Ascidia, 480, 610 
glauerti, Antennarius, 94 

Echinophryne, 54, 56, 70 
globosipherus, Doropygus, 588 
globularis, Guenenotophorus, 624 

Gunenotophorus, 623, 624, 625 
(fig.), 628 

Gunenthophorus, 624 

Gunentophorus, 621, 622, 623 

Gunetotrophus, 624, 
glomeratus, Apanteles, 434, 435 
glomerosa, Callirhytis, 119 
Glossoforum luteum, 485 
Gnaptodon, 450 

minutus, 450 
Goniodelphys, 478, 486 

trigona, 486 
Gonodonta nutrix, 446 
goramensis, Antennarius, 91 

Lophiocharon, 84 
goreensis, Polycarpa, 481, 525 



660 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



gracilis, Paranotodelphys, 484 

Pelodelphis, 283 

Polycarpa, 496, 610 
grossularia, Dendrodoa, 624 

Styelopsis, 479, 526 
guajava, Psidium, 455 
guarisana, Rhobondo, 413 
Guenenotophorus, 621, 622 

globularis, 624 
Gunenotophorus, 478, 620, 621, 623 
(key) 

curvipes, 623, 625 (fig.), 629 

giganteus, 623 

globularis, 623, 624, 625 (fig.), 628 

globularis giganteus, 622, 623 

spinipes, 623 
Gunenthophorus, 621 

globularis, 624 
Gunentopherus, 621 
Gunentophorus, 621 

globularis, 621, 622, 623 
Gunetotrophus, 621 

globularis, 624 
guntheri, Antennarius, 72 
Gynentophorus, 621 
gyrosa, Styela, 526, 624 

Habralebra, 133, 183, 184, 185 (key) 
alliodorae, 184, 185, 189, 190 (fig.) 
amoena, 186, 190 (fig.) 191 
bifasciata, 184, 185, 195 (fig.), 196, 

197 198 
bifasciatella, 184, 185, 190 (fig.), 192 
crutiata, 185, 197 (fig.), 198 
gillettei, 185, 196, 197 (fig.), 198 
nicaraguensis, 186, 187, 188 (fig.), 

189, 191, 192, 193, 197 
panamensis, 186, 187, 188 (fig.), 

189, 197 
terminalis, 184, 185, 194, 195 (fig.) 
trimaculata, 185, 193, 195 (fig.) 
williamsi, 185, 187, 188 (fig.), 191, 

193 
willinki, 184, 185, 192, 195 (fig.) 
Halocynthia aurantium, 600, 603, 608 

igaboja, 593 
Halyphysema, Foraminiferal genus, and 
two new tropical Pacific species, 
123 
Halyphysema, 123 
bayeri, 123, 125 
harryi, 123, 125, 126 
tumanowiczii, 123, 124, 126 
hambletoni, Rhadbotalebra, 228, 229, 

234 (fig.), 285 
harryi, Halyphysema, 123, 125, 126 
hartmeyeri, Lonchidiopsis, 485 
haustor, Pyura, 544, 600, 603, 608, 633, 

636 
havardi, Quercus, 114, 115 
hawaiiensis, Protapanteles, 431 
haywardi, Protalebra, 167, 168, 169 

(fig.) 
Hedylepta indicata, 444 
hedyleptae, Apanteles, 443 



hembeli, Chthamalus, 26, 29, 32, 33 

Euraphia, 29 
hemiasteroides, Rhynobrissus, 10, 12 
Hemiceras sp., 448 

Henderson, Edward P., and Perry, 
Stuart H.; Studies of seven sider- 
ites, 339 
Henry, Dora Priaulx; Some littoral 
barnacles from the Tuamotu, 
Marshall, and Caroline Islands, 
25 
herdmani, Calanopia, 39 
Hippia insularis, 413 
hispidus, Antennarius, 54, 59, 90, 91 

Chironectes, 90 

Lophius, 90 

Histiophryne, 54, 56, 69 

bougainvilli, 54, 56, 69, 70 

scortea, 54, 56, 69, 70 

scortea inconstans, 70 
histrio, Histrio, 51, 62, 103 

Lophius, 79, 103 

Pterophrynoides, 104 
Histrio, 51, 54, 62, 85, 103 

gibba, 104 

histrio, 54, 62, 103 

jagua, 104 
Histrioninae, subfam., 62, 103 
holtiana, Molgula, 496 
Hormiini, 458 
Hormius, 458 
horridus, Antennarius, 72, 83, 84 

Lophiocharon, 54, 58, 83, 84 
hummi, Doropygus, 524, 557, 560 (fig.) 
huntsmani, Entocrypta, 469 

Scolecimorpha, 633 

Scolecodes, 683, 634 (fig.) 
hyalina, Salpicola, 640 
hyalinata, Diaphania, 438 
Hydralebra, 132 
Hyloidea, subg, 132 
Hymenoptera, 405 

ialina, Salpicola, 640 
igaboja, Halocynthia, 593 
igae, Apanteles, 431 

Dig, Paul L.; North American copepods 
of the family Notodelphyidae, 
463 
imitator, Microgaster, 413, 414 

Urogaster, 414 
impiger. Apanteles, 487 
incana, Quercus, 112 
inconstans, Histiophryne scortea, 70 
indica, Canna, 445 

Mysidopsis, 6 
indicata, Hedylepta, 444 
inermis, Mysidopsis, 6 
inflatus, Schizoproctus, 610 
Inga roussoviana, 448 
inguinalis, Pilocrosis, 414 
inops, Antennarius, 104 
insigita, Alebra albostriella, 136 
insignis, Scolecimorpha, 488 
insignita, Alebra albostriella, 136, 138 
insularis, Hippia, 413 



INDEX 



661 



interrogata, Alebra, 250 

Disceratalebra, 142, 248, 250, 251 

(fig.) 
interrupta, Ascidia, 496 
intersita, Callirhytis, 119 
intertextus, Chthamalus, 32 
intestinalis, Ascidia, 485, 493, 494, 586, 

587, 610 
Ciona, 483, 485, 493, 494, 495, 496, 

525 
Phallusia, 493 
iris, Protalebrella, 256, 259 (fig.), 260 
isthmusi, Elabra morrisoni, 219 (fig.), 

221, 221, 225 (fig.) 

jagua, Histrio, 104 

jamaicensis, Rhabdotalebra, 228, 229, 

230 (fig.), 232 
jansoni, Eutornus, 23 
japonica, Pyura, 525 
Jocara ferrifusalis, 414 
jocarae, Microgaster, 412, 413 
joubini, Ophioseides, 488 
joubinis, Scolecimorpha, 488 

KaUebra, 145 

ninettae, 148 

subg., 148 
Kanazawaichthys, 54, 55, 62 

scutatus, 54, 55, 62, 63, 86 
keiferi, Paralebra, 146, 148, 149 (fig.) 
Kellogg, Remington; Two additional 
Miocene porpoises from the Cal- 
vert Cliffs, Maryland, 279 
kempi, Mysidopsis, 5 
Kentriodon, 311, 312, 318 

pernix, 295, 314 
kerguelensis, Doropygus, 524 
kochii, Zygorhiza, 296 
kraussi, Apanteles, 449 

Meteorus, 409, 419 (fig.) 

lacepedei, Antennarius, 71 
laevicoxis, Apanteles, 431 
laevigatus, Chironectes, 103 
lamellae, Neuroterus, 109 
lamellipes, Doropygus, 520, 599 

Pygodelphys, 599, 608 
Lantana camara, 231, 269 
lapillula, Callirhytis, 120 
Lareba, 128, 133, 180 
Lareba variata, 181 (fig.) 
lateralis, Antennarius, 84 
latesiphonica, Ascidia, 486 

Ascidiella, 484 
laticeps, Dikraneura, 132 
laticornis, Doropygus, 520, 521, 524, 

530, 534 (fig.) 
latiradix, Rhabdosteus, 293, 297 
laurifolia, Quercus, 112 
Lawsonellus, 128, 133, 182 

attenuatu9, 183 (fig.) 
laysanius, Antennarius, 93, 94 
letochae, Acrodelphis, 316, 319 
Leaf hopper tribe Alebrini (Homoptera: 
Cicadellidae), 127 



leidyi, Delphinodon, 286 
Leiophron, 410, 411, 412 

apicalis, 410, 412 

ater, 410 

pallipes, 410 
lenticula, Omegalebra, 199, 201, 202, 
203 (fig.), 205 

Protalebra, 202 
leopardinus, Antennarius, 95 
lepadiformis, Clavelina, 481, 483, 525, 

610 
leprosus, Antennarius, 94 

Chironectes, 80 
Leptoclinum commune, 487, 488 

dentatum, 487 
leucas, Antennarius, 97 
leucochiloneae, Apanteles, 432 
Leucoptera coffeella, 433 
leucosoma, Antennarius, 54, 60, 92 

Antennarius multiocellatus, 92 
Leurinion, 458 

primum, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.), 419 
(fig.), 458 
Leurostenus filum, 18 
Lichomolgus, 469 
lindgreeni, Antennarius, 82 
lineatella, Protalebra, 228 
lineola, Erabla, 213 (fig.), 214 

Protalabra, 212, 214 
Liodora, 111 

dumosae, 111 
Liophron minutus, 450 
Liosigalphus, 411 

politus, 411 
lipomeringis, Apanteles, 433 
Lipomerinx prismatica, 433 
listeri, Perophora, 485 
Listroderes, sp., 407 
lithinostomus, Antennarius, 82 
Lithocarpus densiflora, 112 
Lithothamnion, 30 
Lithotrya, 26 

cauta, 26 

conica, 26 

dorsalis, 26 

dorsalis maldivensis, 26 1 j 

dorsalis rugata, 26 

nicobarica, 25, 26, 28, 30 

pacifica, 25, 26 

rhodiopus, 26 

truncata, 26, 28 

truncata longicaudata, 28 

valentiana, 25, 26, 27 
lobata, Quercus, 110, 111 
Loeblich, Alfred R., Jr; The Foraminif- 
eral genus Halyphysema and two 
new tropical Pacific species, 123 
Lonchidiopsis, 473, 478, 485 

hartmeyeri, 485 
longicauda, Doropygopsis, 503, 591, 592 

Doropygus, 522, 523, 592 

Paranotodelphys, 484 
longicaudata, Lithotrya truncata, 28 
longimatrix, Doropygus, 521 522, 523, 
524 



662 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



longipes, Bonnie rella, 481 

Bonnierilla, 481 

Paryphes, 480, 481 
Lophiocharon, 54, 57, 82 

broomensis, 82 

campylacanthus, 54, 57, 85 

caudimaculatus, 54, 57, 82 

goramensis, 84 

horridus, 54, 58, 83, 84 

tenebrosus, 54, 58, 83 

subg., 54, 57, 82 
Lophius chironectes, 85 

cocinsinensis, 104 

commersoni, 85, 93 

geographicus, 104 

gibbus, 204 

hispidus, 90 

histrio, 79, 103 

histrio marmoratus, 104 

histrio ocellatus, 89 

histrio pictus, 104 

marmoratus, 103 

pictus, 104 

raninus, 104 

sandvicensis, 93 

spectrum, 52 

striatus, 71 
Lophocetus, 311, 312 

pappus, 311 
lophogenius, Champsodelphis, 316, 318, 

319 
lophotes, Chironectes, 90 
loveni, Styela, 526, 624 
Loxaulus, 116 

beutenmuelleri, 116 
lunatus, Apanteles, 449 
lurida, Cynthia, 481, 525, 624 

Pyura, 481, 624 
lutescens, Antennarius, 84 
luteum, Glossoforum, 485 

macer, Pachypygus, 609, 610, 612 (fig.) 
macer, Proeces, 18 
macleayanum, Chelyosoma, 587 
macroon, Doropygus, 688 
macroone, Botachus, 486 
macropetalus, Rhynobrissus, 10 
maculata, Protalebra, 153, 154 

Trypanalebra, 154, 155 (fig.), 156 ; 
157 
maculatus, Doropygus elongatus, 483 
magdalenae, Antron, 116 
ma'gnifica, Brunerella, 176, 177, 178, 
179 (fig.) 

Eacles, 409 
magnificus, Synergus, 107 
major, Mysidopsis, 6 
malaca, Ascidia, 480, 484 
malacodermatus, Notopterophoroides, 

487 
maldivensis, Lithotrya dorsalis, 26 
Malthaca sp., 440 

malthacae, Apanteles, 429 (fig.), 489 
mamillana, Disholcaspis, 115 
mamillata, Phallusia, 483, 485 



mammilata, Phallasia, 495 
mammillaris, Phallusia, 483 
mammillata, Ascidia, 483, 493, 495 
Phallusia, 493 
Phallusiopsis, 483 
Pyura, 624 
mammosum, Calocarpum, 454 
manhattensis, Molgula, 530, 624 
Manihot esculenta, 451 
manni, Callirhytis, 120 
marginata, Callirhytis, 122 
marmoratus, 103 

Lophius histrio, 104 
Maruca testulalis, 444 
massiliensis, Doropygus papilio, 482 
Notopterophorus elongatus, 483 
matogrossana, Omegalebra, 200, 210, 211 

(fig.) 
matronalis, Notodelphys, 510 
media, Calanopia, 39, 40 
mediterranae, Notodelphys, 493 
mediterraneum, Amaroucium, 485 
mediterraneus, Notodelphys, 493 
medularis, Callirhytis, 121 
Megastes sp., 446 
megastidis, Apanteles, 445 
melas, Antennarius, 72 

Phrynelox, 54, 56, 72 
mendocinensis, Andricus, 112 
mento, Delphinodon, 286, 287 
mentula, Ascidia, 482, 483, 485, 492, 
493, 495, 496, 525 
Phallusia, 482, 483, 485, 495, 496, 

591, 592 
Pyura, 624 
mentzelii, Chironectes, 94 
meridionalis, Urogaster, 431 
Metamysidopsis munda, 1 
Meteorite, 352 (fig.), 355 (fig.), 356 
(fig.), 368 (map) 
Aggie Creek, Alaska, 343 (compo- 
sition), 344 
Alt Bela, 386 (composition) 
Angela, Chile, 381, 382 (composi- 
tion) 
Baquedano, Chile, 343 (composi- 
tion), 344 
Boguslavka, Siberia, 345, 346 (fig.) 
Breece, New Mexico, 369, 370, 371 
(table), 372 (composition), 373 
(composition) 
Canvon Diablo, 350, 351, 353, 354, 
357, 358, 359, 361, 362, 390 
(composition) 
Carlton, 386 (composition) 
Chesterville, 380 

Cincinnati, Ohio, 364 (composi- 
tion), 380, 398 
Coolac, Australia, 390 (composi- 
tion) 
Cranbourne, 370 

Drum Mountains, Utah, 343 (com- 
position), 344 
Edmonton, 386 (composition) 



INDEX 



663 



Meteorite, Freda, North Dakota, 351 

Goose Lake, California, 840, 343 
(composition), 347, 348, 349 
(table), 350, 351, 358, 359, 360 
(table), 361, 363 

Illinois Gulch, 386 (composition) 

Karee Kloof, South Africa, 343 
(composition), 344 

Keen Mountain, Virginia, 893, 395 
(table) 

Lanton, Missouri, 343 (composi- 
tion), 345 

La Primitiva, Chile, 381, 382 (com- 
position) 

Maldyak, Siberia, 345, 346 

Mbosi, Tanganyika, 343 (composi- 
tion), 344 

Moorumbunna, Australia, 343 
(composition), 345 

Mount Joy, Adams County, Pa., 
368 (map), 369 (composition) 

Murnpeowie, 398 

New Baltimore, Somerset County, 
Pa., 368 (map), 369 (composi- 
tion) 

Odessa, Texas, 390 (composition) 

Osseo, Canada, 390 (composition) 

Pima County, Arizona, 351 

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 866, 367 
(composition), 368 (map), 369 
(composition) 

Rio Loa, 380 

Shrewsbury, York County, Pa., 
368 (map), 369 (composition) 

Social Circle, Georgia, 353, 398 

Soper, Oklahoma, 381, 382 (com- 
position) 

Soroti, Uganda, Africa, 888, 385 
(composition), 386 (composition), 
387 (tables), 389, 391 

Tombigbee, Alabama, 373, 374, 
375 (composition), 376 (com- 
position), 377 (composition), 378 
(table), 381 (table) 

Wichita County, 390 (composition) 

Willamette, Oregon, 350, 353, 354 

Wooster, Payne County, Ohio, 368 
(map), 369 (composition) 
Meteorus, 406, 408 

eaclidis, 408, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.) 

kraussi, 409, 419 (fig.) 

townsendi, 409 

vulgaris, 409, 410 
mexicanus, Oncophanes, 459 
michaelseni, Campopera, 480 
micrasteroides, Rhynobrissus, 10 
microcosmus, Cynthia, 587, 589, 610, 
623 

Microcosmus, 624 
Microcosmus exasperatus, 611 

exasperatus australis, 525 

microcosmus, 624 

oligophilus, 525 

oligophilus wahlbergi, 525 

papillosa, 525 



Microcosmus exasperatus, sabattieri, 488 

senegalensis, 495 

sulcatus, 488, 624 
Microctonus, 406 

audax, 406, 407, 417 (fig.), 420 (fig.) 

berryi, 407 

brasiliensis, 406, 407 
Microgaster, 412 (key), 414, 424 

blanchardi, 413, 414 

carpatus, 431 

diaphaniae, 413, 414 

ecdytolophae, 412, 413 

imitator, 413, 414 

jocarae, 412, 413 

solitarius, 431 
Microgasterinae, 428 
Microplitis, 426 

carinata, 427 

minutalis, 417 (fig.), 426 

sordidus, 427 
micropterus, Notopterophorus, 48% 
minor, Calanopia, 40 
minutalis, Microplitis, 417 (fig.), 4®6 
minutus, Agnathaner, 479 

Gnaptodon, 450 

Liophron (sic), 450 
miranda, Promicrogaster, 416, 417 (fig.), 

418 (fig.), 421, 422, 423 
mitchelli, Antennarius, 65 

Trichophryne, 54, 55, 65 
mohri, Doropygus, 519, 523, 562, 565 

(fig.) 
Molgula ampulloides, 496, 610, 624 

holtiana, 496 

manhattensis, 530, 624 

nodosa, 524, 525 

occidentalis, 531, 588 

oculata, 525, 610 

reducta, 481 

regularis, 601 

socialis, 496, 610 

tuberifera, 624 

sp., 524, 603, 608 
molgulensis, Doropygus, 588 
moluccensis, Antennarius, 54, 60, 91 
mombinpraeoptans, Anastrepha, 458 
momus, Pyura, 494, 524 
monacha, Phallusia, 485 
monoseta, Notodelphys, 473, 491, 496, 

498 (fig.) 
monrosi, Rhabdotalebra, 228, 229, 232, 

233, 234 (fig.) 
montana, Protalebra, 248 
montei, Anastrepha, 451 
montensis, Ceroptres, 108 
Morchellium argus, 485 
morelosensis, Beamerulus, 243, 245 (fig.)> 

246 
Morpheis ehrenbergi, 450 
morrisoni, Elabra, 219 (fig.), 220, 228 
Elabra morrisoni, 221, 223 
Omegalebra, 200, 206, 207, 209 (fig.) 
mortenseni, Mysidopsis, 1, 6 
morus, Cynthia, 525 
mucosum, Tathicarpus, 64 



664 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Muesebeck, C. F. W.; New Neotropical 
wasps of the family Braconidae 
(Hymenoptera) in the U.S. Na- 
tional Museum, 405 
muesebecki, Apanteles, 440 
multiocellatus, Antennarius, 54, 59, 60, 
73, 84, 94, 102 

Chironectes, 94 
munda, Promicrogaster, 416, 422, 423 
munda, Metamysidopsis, 1 
murata, Amphibolips, 111 
Musa sapientum, 435 
myrtifolia, Quercus, 112 
Mysidopsis, a new species of, from 
southeastern coast of the United 
States, 1 
Mysidopsis, 1, 5 (key) 

acuta, 6 

angusta, 6 

bigelowi, 1, 3, 5 

californica, 6 

camelina, 6 

didelphvs, 6 

furca, 1, 2 (fig.), 4 (fig.), 6 

gibbosa, 6 

indica, 6 

inermis, 6 

kempi, 5 

major, 6 

mortenseni, 1, 6 

schultzei, 6 

similis, 6 

namaycush, Salvelinus, 50 
natator, Araeodelphis, 313 
Neuroterus, 109 

floricola, 110 

floricomus, 109 

fiorulentus, 110 

lamellae, 109 

washingtonensis, 110 
New American cynipid wasps from oak 

galls, 107 
New Neotropical wasps of the family 
Braconidae (Hymenoptera) in 
the U.S. National Museum, 405 
nexa, Protalebra, 167, 169 (fig.), 170 
nexilis, Antennarius, 96 
nicaraguensis, Habralebra, 186, 187, 188 
(fig.), 189, 191, 192, 193, 197 

Protalebra, 184, 186 
nicobarica, Lithotrya, 25, 26, 28, 30 
niger, Antennarius commersoni, 93 

Chironectes, 93 
nigra, Phallusia, 484, 493 
nigrescens, Spondias, 458 
nigripes, Catolethromorphus, 21 

Pseudocossonus, 21, 22 
nigriventris, Oncophanes, 459 
nigromaculatus, Antennarius, 93 

Antennarius commersoni, 93, 94 
ninettae, Kallebra, 148 

Paralebra, 146, U8, 149 (fig.) 

Protalebra, 145, 148 
nitidalis, Diaphania, 415, 416 
niveus, Antennarius, 100 



nodosa, Molgula, 524, 525 
nordgaardi, Rhopalaea, 493 
normani, Doropygella, 590 

Doropygus, 523, 590 
North American copepods of the family 

Notodelphyidae, 463 
Notodelphis, 488 

agilis, 496 

allmani, 493 

prasina, 494 

rufescens, 495 

tenera, 495 
Notodelphyidae, North American cope- 
pods of the family, 463 
Notodelphyidae, 470, 478 (key) 
Notodelphyopsis, 478, 511, 512 (key) 

falciferus, 511, 512 

perplexa, 512, 514 (fig.) 

variabilis, 518 
Notodelphys, 468, 470, 472, 473, 474 
478, 484, 488, 491 (key), 511, 
520, 522, 523, 592, 594, 598, 
599, 601, 604 

affinis, 491, 503, 507 (fig.) 

agilis, 490, 491, 496 

allmani, 473, 490, 492 

allmanni, 492 

antarctica, 510 

ascidicola, 488, 492, 510, 525 

caerulea, 492, 493 

cerulaea, 493 

ciliata, 491, 493 

coerulea, 493 

dentata, 491, 493 

elegans, 490, 492, 493 

matronalis, 510 

mediterranea, 493 

mediterraneus, 493 

monoseta, 473, 491, 496, 498 (fig.) 

pachybrachia, 492, 494 

parva, 491, 494 

patagonica, 492, 494 

prasina, 490, 491, 494 

pusilla, 494 

rufescens, 490, 492, 495 

squamifera, 491, 495 

tenera, 492, 495 

weberi, 490, 492, 495 
notophthalmus, Antennarius, 54, 61, 99 
Notopterophoroides, 478, 486 

armadillo, 486 

malacodermatus, 487 
Notopteropherus, 481 
Notopterophorus, 472, 473, 475, 478, 
481, 608, 621, 622 

auritus, 482 

bombyx, 483 

elatus, 483, 621 

elongatus, 483, 621 

elongatus, auritus, 482 

elongatus elatus, 483 

elongatus elongatus, 483 

elongatus massiliensis, 483 

gibber, 610 

micropterus, 482 

papilio, 482 



INDEX 



665 



Notopterophorus, pupilio 482 

veranyi, 481, 483 

sp., 483 

sub., 481, 482, 608 
novaesealandicus, Doropygus, 599 
novae-seelandiae, Cnemidocarpa, 599 
novaeseelandiae, Pygodelphys, 599 
novae seelandius, Doropj'gus, 520, 599 
novemsetiferus, Doropygopsis, 592 

Doropygus, 522, 523 
nox, Antennarius, 78 

Phrvnelox, 54, 57, 78, 79 (fig.) 
nubila, Antron, 116 
Nudiantennarius, 54, 55, 66 

subteres, 54, 55, 66 
nummifer, Antennarius, 54, 62, 102, 103 

(fig.) 

Chironectes, 102 
nutrix, Gonodonta, 446 
nuttingi, Antennarius, 72 

Phrynelox, 54, 56, 72 

obliqua, Ascidia, 495, 496, 591 

Phallusia, 482, 485, 493, 495, 496, 

525, 592, 610 
Pyura, 624 

oblongifolia, Quercus, 109, 113 

oblongus, Doropygus, 588 

obscura, Polycarpa, 525 

occidentalis, Molgula, 531, 588 

ocellatus, Antennarius, 54, 58, 64, 86 
89, 95, 102 
Chironectes, 89 
Lophius histrio, 89 

octolineata, Protalebra, 229 

Rhabdotalebra, 228, 229, 230 (fig.), 
231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 237 

ocuiata, Molgula, 525, 610 

Odontocete, apparently unrecognized in 
Calvert Miocene of Maryland 
308 

Odontofornica, 427 

ogloblini, Omegalebra, 199, 200, 208, 
209 (fig.) 

oligophilus, Microcosmus, 525 

oligospilos, Antennarius, 54, 60, 95 

ombonii, Champsodelphis, 319 

omega, Protalebra, 200 

Omegalebra, 133, 199. 200 (key) 

Omegalebra balloui, 200, 206, 209 (fig.) 
barbata, 200. 211 (fig.) 
blantoni, 200, 205, 207, 209 (fig.) 
cordiae, 201, 203 (fig.), 204 
lenticula, 199, 201, 202, 203 (fig. 

205 
matogrossana, 200, 210, 211 (fig.) 
morrisoni, 200, 206, 207, 209 (fig.) 
ogloblini, 199, 200, 208, 209 (fig.) 
vexillifera, 201, 203 (fig.), 204, 205, 
206, 207, 208, 210, 211, 212 

Oncophanes, 459 
rnexicanus, 459 
nigriventris, 459 

Oncorhynchus, 49 

Ooneides, 477, 479, 487 

Ooneides amela, 487 



opalina, Ascidiella, 493, 496, 525 
Ophios des apoda, 487 
Ophios&de, 640 

cardioc^phale, 640 
Ophioseides, 477, 479, 480, 487, 488, 640 

abdominalis, 480 

apoda, 487 

cardiacephalus, 640 

cardiocephalus, 640 

joubini, 488 
Ophioseididae, 477 
Ophioseidus, 640 

cardiocephalus, 640 
Opius, 407, 450, 456 

aldrichi, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.), 452 

auripennis, 453, 454 

capsicola, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.), 450 

cereus, 450, 453 

crawfordi, 451 

divergent, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.), 456 

fiuminensis, 450 

toxotrypanae, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.), 
451 

vierecki, 456 

zeteki, 4^4 
Opsiphanes cassiae cassiae, 435 

sp., 435 
opsiphanis, Apanteles, 434 
orientalis, Psendostenotrupis, 14, 16 

(fig.), 17 (fig.), 18 
ornata, Rhabdotelebra, 228, 229, 286, 

239 (fig.) 
ornatricis, Apanteles, 485 
ornatrix, Utetheisa, 436 
orobenae, Apanteles, 435 
Orsalebra, 132, 141 

robusta, 141, 142, 143 (fig.) 
Osbornulus, 133, 164 

quadrifasciatus, 165 (fig.) 166 
ovifera, Boltenia, 537, 539 
ovoidia, Bathypera, 569 
Oxydema planatus, 21 

pachybrachia Notodelphys, 492, 4^4 
Pachypygus, 472, 473, 478, 522, 608, 
609 (key) 

gibber, 609, 610, 615 

m-acer, 609, 610, 612 (fig.) 
pacifica, Lithotrya, 25, 26 

Tetraclita, 26, 83, 36 

Tetraclita wireni, 26, 33, 36 
paessleri, Styela, 599 
paleacritae, Apanteles, 448 
pallescens, Alebra wahlbergi, 136 
pallicornis, Euphorus, 412 
pallida, Protalebra, 226, 252 

Tabebuia, 216 
pallidula, Typhlocyba, 138, 139 
pallipes, Leiophron, 410 
panamensis, Habralebra, 186, 187, 188 
(fig.), 189, 197 

Protalebrella, 256, 263 (fig.) 
papilio, Doropygus, 482 

Notopterophorus, 482 
papillata. Polycarpa. 481 



666 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



papillosa, Ciona, 493 

Cynthia, 590 

Microcosmus, 525 
pappus, Lophocetus, 311 
paradoxus, Apanteles, 418 (fig.), 446 
Parahormius, 458 

Paralebra, 131, 132, 145, 146 (key), 200, 
273 

decurvata, 146, 151 (fig), 152 

keiferi, 146, I48, 149 (fig.) 

ninettae, 146, 148, 149 (fig.) 

similis, 146, 148, 149 (fig.), 152 

singulars, 146, 150, 151 (fig.), 152 

subg., 146, 154 
parallela, Dikraneura, 221 

Elabra, 219 (fig.), 220, 221, 223 
parallelis, Apanteles, 443 
parallelogramma, Ascidia, 493, 496, 525, 
590, 591 

Corella, 493, 496 
Paramolgula filhola, 599 

gigantea, 480, 599 
parana, Protalebrella, 256, 262, 263 (fig.) 
parana, Dikraneura, 222 

Elabra, 219 (fig.), 220, 222 
Paranotodelphys, 478, 484, 511 

gracilis, 484 

longicauda, 484 

phallusiae, 484 

scutiformis, 484 
Parascidia areolata, 485 
paratropa, Ascidia, 503, 593, 603, 608 
pardalis, Antennarius, 54, 59, 92 

Chironectes, 92 

Protalebra, 154, 156 
partita, Styela, 524, 525 
parva, Notodelphys, 491, 494 
parvisaccata, Barela, 265, 268 (fig.), 269 
parvulus, Pseudostenotrupis, 18 
Parvphes, 480 

'longipes, 480, 481 
patagonica, Notodelphys, 492, 494 
patula, Ascidiella, 496 
patula, Phallasia, 525, 591, 610 
pauciradiatiis, Antennarius, 54, 62, 100, 

101 (fig.) 
pavoninus, Chironectes, 52 
pegasi, Polycarpa, 524 
pellucida, Balera, 172, 173 (fig.) 

Dikraneura, 171, 172 
Pelodelphis, 311, 312, 318 

gracilis, 283 
pentaphylla, Tabebuia, 227, 232 
peravok, Cgironectes, 93 
Percnobracon, 460 

secundus, 417 (fig.), 420 (fig.), 460 

stenopterus, 460 
Perilitus, 406 

brasiliensis, 406 
pernix, Kentriodon, 295, 314 
perobscura, Callirhytis, 122 
Perophora listeri, 485 
perplexa, Notodelphyopsis, 512, 514 

(fig.) 
Perry, Stuart H., see Henderson, Ed- 
ward P. and, 339 



perspicuum, Astellium, 487 
Phaenocarpa, 457 

anastrephae, 417 (fig.), 419 (fig.), 
457 
Phallusia canina, 482 

conchilega, 493, 495, 525 

cristata, 493, 610 

fumigata, 493, 610 

gelatinosa, 483 

intestinalis, 493 

mamillata, 483, 485 

mammillaris, 483, 485 

mammilata, 495 

mammillata, 493 

mentula, 482, 483, 485, 495, 496, 
591, 592 

monacha, 485 

nigra, 484, 493 

obliqua, 482, 485, 493, 495, 496, 
525, 592, 610 

patula, 525, 591, 610 

venosa, 482 

vermiformis, 504 

virginea, 493, 525, 591, 610 

sp., 485, 493, 495 
phallusiae, Paranotodelphys, 484 

Pseudonotodelphys, 484 
Phallusiopsis mammillata, 483 
Phocageneus, 281, 286, 309, 312 

venustus, 279, 280, 281, 282 

venustus, Rediscovery of, 279 
Phocodon, 279 

scillae, 279 
Pholeterides, 477, 479, 637 

furtiva, 637 
Phrynelox, 54, 56, 71 

atra, 54, 57, 76, 77 (table), 78 (fig.) 

cunninghami, 54, 57, 74, 80 

melas, 54, 56, 72 

nox, 54, 57, 78, 79 (fig.) 

nuttingi, 54, 56, 72 

scaber, 54, 56, 72, 73 

striatus, 54, 56, 71 

tridens, 54, 57, 71, 79 

zebrinus, 54, 57, 74, 75 (fig.), 77 
(table) 

subg., 54, 56, 71, 74 
phymatodes, Antennarius, 54, 59, 72, 

90, 95 
Physocarpus sp., 138 
picea, Altera, 144 (fig-) 

Protalebra, 143, 144 
piceoventris, Apanteles, 431 
pickeli, Anastrepha, 451 
pictus, Chironectes, 104 

Lophius, 104 

Lophius histrio, 104 
Pilocrosis inguinalis, 414 
pilosa, Fornicia, 428, 429 
pinguis, Pomphopygus, 616, 618 (fig.) 
pinnaceps, Antennarius, 71, 75 
piperoides, Dryocosmus, 117 
placopetalus, Rhynobrissus, 10 
Plagalebra, 145 

subg., 150 
Plagiodera erythroptera, 408 



INDEX 



667 



planatus, Eutornus, 21 

Oxydema, 21 

Pseudocossonus, 14, 16 (fig.), 17 
(fig.), 21, 22 
Platynota rostrana, 443 
plebeia, Ascidia, 485, 525, 610 
pleurophthalmus, Antennarius, 89, 100 
plicata, Styela, 526, 530, 531, 610, 611, 

624 
plicatum, Tethium, 526, 624 
Pluchea purpurascens, 437 
Plumantennatus, subg., 54, 59, 89 
plummeri, Protalebra, 233 

Rhabdotalebra, 228, 229, 233, 234 

(fig.) 
politiventris, Apanteles, 436 
politus, Liosigalphus, 411 
Polj-carpa atomaria, 525 

comata, 496, 610, 624 

ehrenbergi, 494 

gorSensis, 481, 525 

gracilis, 496, 610 

obscura, 525 

papillata, 481 

pegasi, 524 

pomaria, 488, 525, 589, 624 

spongiabilis, 525 

variabilis, 525 
Polyclinum aurantium, 485 

* stellatum, 588 
polyophthalmus, Antennarius, 93, 94 
polyporicola, Promicrogaster, 416 423 
Polyzoa coccinea, 623 
pomaria, Polycarpa, 488, 525, 589, 624 
Pomphopygus, 478, 616 

pinguis, 616, 618 (fig.) 
Pontellidae, 39 
ponticus, Doropygus, 588 
porcicauda, Doropygella, 590 

Doropygus, 523, 590 
Porpoises, Two additional Miocene, 
from the Calvert Cliffs, Mary- 
land, 279 
postremoglobosus, Doropygus, 588 
prasina, Notodelphis, 494 

Notodelphys, 490, 491, 494 
prehensa, Disholcaspia, 113 
primum, Leurinion, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.); 

419 (fig.), 458 
principis, Chironectes, 94 
prismatica, Lipomerinx, 433 
productum, Chelyosoma, 579, 600 
Proeces macer, 18 
profundus, Doropygus, 524, 569, 571 

(fig.) 
Promicrogaster, 416, (key), 424 

miranda, 416, 417 (fig.), 418 (fig.), 
421, 422, 423 

munda, 416, 422, 423 

polyporicola, 416, 428 

terebrator, 116, 421, 423 
Prophioseides, 478, 480 

abdominalis, 480 
propinquus, Doropygus, 588 



Protalebra, 131, 133, 145, 163, 166, 167 
(key), 200 

alliodorae, 189 

amoena, 191 

bicincia, 215 

brasiliensis, 255, 257 

brunnea, 237 

caldwelli, 254 

clitellaria, 271, 272 (fig.) 

conica, 258 

cordiae, 204 

cubana, 248 

curvilinea, 167, 168, 169 (fig.), 170 

decorata, 264, 265 

eburneola, 218, 221 

haywardi, 167, 168, 169 (fig.) 

lenticula, 202 

lineatella, 228 

lineola, 212, 214 

maculata, 153, 154 

montana, 248 

nexa, 167, 169 (fig.), 170 

nicaraguensis, 184, 186 

ninettae, 145/. 148 

octolineata, 229 

octolineata signata, 231 

omega, 200 

pallida, 226, 252 

pardalis, 154, 156 

picea, 143, 144 

plummeri, 233 

sabana, 265 

scriptozona, 178 

similis, 145, 146 

singularis, 145, 150 

sobrina, 270 

sublunata, 278 

tabebuiae, 214, 215 

terminata, 261 

tranversalis, 185 

unipuncta, 163, 164 

variata, ISO, 181 

vexillifera, 199, 201 

ziczac, 158 
Protalebrella, 128, 129, 134, 243, 247, 
248, 255, 256 (key), 265 

brasiliensis, 256, 257, 258, 259 
(fig.), 260, 261 

conica, 256, 258, 259 (fig.) 

iris, 256, 259 (fig.), 260 

panamensis, 256, 263 (fig.) 

parana. 256, 262, 263 (fig.) 

terminata, 256, 261, 263 (fig.) 
Protapanteles hawaiiensis, 431 
prunum, Ascidia, 537, 592, 593, 624 
Pseudapanteies sancti-vincenti, 431 
Pseudocossonus, 21, 22 (key) 

brachypus, 22 

brevitarsis, 21, 22 

dimidiatus, 22 

nigripes, 21, 22 

planatus, 14, 16 (fig.), 17 (fig.), 21, 
22 
pseudoglossae, Apanteles, 437 
Pseudonotodelphys, 484, 521 

phallusiae, 484 



668 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 107 



Pseudostenotrupis, 18 

filum, 21 

orentalis, 14, 16 (fig.), 17 (fig.) 18 

parvulus, 18 
Psidium guajava, 455 
psyllus, Doropygella, 590, 591 

Doropygus, 523, 591 
Pterophryne, 103 
Pterophrynoides, 103 

histrio, 104 
Pterophrynus, 103 
pulex, Doropygus, 465, 518, 519, 521, 

523, 525 
pulla, Pyura, 599 
pullus, Doropygus, 525 
pumila, Quercus, 112 
puncta, Protalebra, 163, 164 
punctatissimus, Antennarius, 97 
punctum, Amaroucium, 485 
pupilio, Notopterophorus, 482 
purpurascens, Pluchea, 437 
pusilla, Balera, 172, 174, 175 (fig.) 

Diceratalebra, 248, 252, 253 (fig.) 
pusilla, Notodelphys, 494 
Pygodelphys, 478, 520, 521, 522, 598, 
599 (key) 

antarctica, 599 

aquilonaris, 599, 600, 602 (fig.), 603 

(fig.) 

lamellipes, 599, 608 

novaeseelandia, 599 
Pygostolus, 411 

pyramidalis, Rhynobrissus, 10, 12 
Pyura gangelion, 592 

haustor, 544, 600, 603, 608, 633, 636 

japonica, 525 

lurida, 481, 624 

mammillata, 624 

mentula, 624 

momus, 494, 524 

obliqua, 624 

pulla, 599 

spinifera, 525 

squamulosa, 525 

stolonifera, 525, 623 

tesselata, 526 

trita, 488, 526 

sp., 481, 544, 545, 624 

quadricerata, Diceratalebra, 248, 253 

(fig.), m 

quadrifasciata, Dikraneura, 165, 166 

Elabra, 166 
quadrifasciatus, Osbornulus, 165, (fig.), 

166 
Quercus agrifolia, 118 

alba, 120 

arizonica, 109, 113, 114, 115 

borealis, 117, 121 

chrysolepis, 108, 109 

cinerea, 112 

coccinea, 119, 121 

densiflora, 112 

douglasii, 111, 115 

dumosa, 110, 111, 113 

emoryi, 117 



Querous agrifolia, fendleri, 114, 115 
garryana, 110, 111 
havardi, 114, 115 
incana, 112 
laurifolia, 112 
lobata, 110, 111 
myrtifolia, 112 
oblongifolia, 109, 113 
pumila, 112 

reticulata, 109, 113. 116 
rubra, 117, 121 

subturbinella, 110, 114, 115, 116 
toumeyi, 109, 113 
turbinella, 110, 114, 115, 116 
undulata, 114, 115 
vaccinifolia, 109 
velutina, 121, 122 

Rabela, 128, 129, 133, 214, 215 (key) 
australis, 215, 216, 217 (fig.) 
tabebuiae, 215, 217 (fig.), 218 

radiosus, Antennarius, 54, 58, 64, 86, 
87, 102 

raninus, Lophius, 104 

reducta, Molgula, 481 

reevesbyensis, Dysgenopsyllus, 487 

reflexus, Doropygus, 588 

regularis, Molgula, 601 

Relaba, 133, 161 

williamsi, 161 (fig.), 162 

reinformis, Andricus, 109 

reticularis, Antennarius, 81 

reticulata, Quercus, 109, 113, 116 

reticulatus, Chironectes, 80 

rhabdophora, Ascidia, 510 

Rhabdosteus, 297, 310, 311, 312 
latiradix, 293, 297 

Rhabdotalebra, 134, 215, 227, 228 (key) 
brunnea, 228, 229, 237, 239 (fig.) 
brunnea brunnea, 229, 287, 240 
brunnea colorata, 229, 238, 239 (fig.) 
hambletoni, 228, 229, 234 (fig.), 285 
jamaicensis, 228, 229, 230 (fig.), 282 
monrosi, 228, 229, 232, 233, 234 

(fig.) 
octolineata, 228, 229, 230 (fig.), 

231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 237 
ornata, 228, 229, 286, 239 (fig.) 
plummeri, 228, 229, 233, 234 (fig.) 
signata, 228, 229, 230 (fig.), 231, 233 

Rhinanisus, 14, 18 

bambusae, 14, 16 (fig.), 17 (fig.) 

Rhobondo guarisana, 413 

rhodiopus, Lithotrya, 26 

Rhodosoma verecundum, 484 

Rhopalaea nordgaardi, 493 

Rhycherus, 54, 55, 68 

filamentosus, 54, 55, 68 
wildi, 68, 69 

Rhynobrissus cuneus, a new echinoid 
from North Carolina, 9 

Rhynobrissus, 9 
cuneus, 10 

hemiasteroides, 10, 12 
macropetalus, 10 
micrasteroides, 10 



INDEX 



669 



Rhynobrissus, placopetalus, 10 

pyramidalis, 10, 12 
robusta, Abrela, 241 (fig.) 

Alebra, 240, 241 

Diceratalebra, 241 

Orsalebra, 141, 142, 143 (fig.) 
robustus, Doropygus, 624 
rosaceus, Trichophryne, 54, 55, 65 
rosea, Tetraclita, 36 
rostrana, Platynota, 443 
rotundus, Doropygus, 589 
roussoviana, Inga, 448 
rubra, Quercus, 117, 121 
rubrafrons, Alebra albostriella, 138, 139 
rubrofuscus, Antennarius commersoni, 
93 

Chironectes, 93 
rufescens, Doropygus, 589 

Notodelphis, 495 

Notodelphys, 490, 492, 495 
rugata, Lithotrya dorsalis, 26 
rustica, Cynthia, 479 

Styela, 590, 624 
rusticum, Tethium, 526 

sabana, Protalebra, 265 
sabattieri, Microcosmus, 488 
salar, Salmo, 49 
Salmo, 49 

clarki, 49 

gairdneri, 49 

salar, 49 
Salpicola, 479, 640 

hyalina, 640 

ialina, 640 
Salvelinus, 49, 50 

namaycush, 50 
sancti-vincenti, Apanteles, 431 

Pseudapanteles, 431 
sandvicensis, Lophius, 93 
sanguifluus, Antennarius, 102 
sanguineus, Antennarius, 54, 61, 87, 88, 

95 
sanguinolenta, Ascidia, 483 
sanguinolinea, Alebra, 247, 248 

Diceratalebra, 248, 250, 251 (fig.) 
sapientum, Musa, 435 
sarana, Dikraneura, 224 

Elabra, 200, 224, 225 (fig.) 
sarasa, Antennarius, 54, 58, 64, 88 
sarrothripae, Apanteles, 439 
sarsi, Calanopia, 39, 40 
scaber, Antennarius, 73, 84 

Chironectes, 73 

Phrynelox, 54, 56, 72, 78 
scabra, Ascidiella, 495, 525 
Scaridae, 73 
schellenbergi, Doropygus, 524, 574, 577 

(fig.) 
schini, Apanteles, 420 (fig.), 448 
Schinus terebinthifolius, 449 
Schizodelphis, 311, 312, 316 

crassangulum, 311 
Schizoproctus inflatus, 610 
Schultz, Leonard P., The frogfishes of 
the family Antennariidae, 47 



schultzei, Mysidopsis, 6 
scillae, Phocodon, 279 
scolaris, Bonnierilla, 480 
Scolecimorpha, 477, 479, 488, 632 

huntsmani, 633 

insignis, 488 

joubinis, 488 
Scolecodes, 477, 479, 682 

huntsmani, 633, 624 (fig.) 
scopa, Alebra albostriella, 139, 140 
scopula, Squamulina, 124 
scortea, Histiophryne, 54, 56, 69, 70 
scriptissimus, Antennarius, 91 
scriptozona, Brunerella, 177, 178. 179 
(fig.) 

Protalebra, 178 
scutatus, Kanazawaichthys, 54, 55, 62, 

63, 86 
scutiformis, Paranotodelphys, 484 
seclusus, Doropygus, 523, 579, 582 (fig.) 
secundus, Percnobracon, 417 (fig.), 420 

(fig.), 460 
senegalensis, Microcosmus, 495 
serpentina, Anastrepha, 454 
Sibine sp., 429 

Siderites, Studies of seven, 339 
Sidnyum turbinatum, 479, 485 
signata, Protalebra octolineata, 231 

Rhabdotalebra, 228, 229, 230 (fig.), 
231, 233 
similis, Mysidopsis, 6 

Paralebra, 146, 148, 149 (fig.), 152 

Protalebra, 145, 146 
simulans, Dasylagon, 424, 425 
singularis, Paralebra, 146, 150, 151 
(fig.), 152 

Protalebra, 145, 150 
sobrina, Barela, 265, 270, 271 (fig.) 

Protalebra, 270 
socialis, Caesira, 496 

Molgula, 496, 610 
sola, Diceratalebra, 248, 249, 251 (fig.), 

254 
Solanum bonariensis, 414 
solitarius, Microgaster, 431 

Urogaster, 431 
sonntagii, Chironectes, 104 
sorbi, Alebra, 135 
sordida, Ascidia, 496 
sordidus, Apanteles, 427 

Micropiitis, 427 
Sotalia, 311 
Spatangidae, 9 
Spatangoida, 9 
spectrum, Lophius, 52 
sphaerasiphaerus, Doropygus, 589 
Sphaeronotus, 621, 622 

thorellii, 621, 622, 623 
spinifera, Pyura, 525 
spiniferus, Doropygus, 521, 523, 524 
spinipes, Gunenotophorus, 623 
spissa, Disholcaspis, 114 
Spondias nigrescens, 458 
spongiabilis, Polycarpa, 525 
spongiforme, Diplosoma, 481 
Squalodelphidae, 286 



670 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Squalodelphis, 286, 309 

fabianii, 284, 286 
Squalodon, 279, 280, 308, 309, 312 
Squalodontidae, 286, 308, 309 
squamifera, Notodelphys, 491, 495 
squamosa, Balanus, 33 

Tetraclita squamosa, 26, S3 
Squamulina, 125 
scopula, 124 
squamulosa, Pyura, 525 
stellatum, Polyclinum, 588 
stellatus, Chthamalus, 29 
stellifer, Antennarius, 94 
Stenoma sp., 442 
stenomae Apanteles, 441 
stenopterus, Percnobracon, 460 
stenostachyta, Bambusa, 13, 18, 20 
stigmaticus, Antennarius, 97 
stolonifera, Pyura, 525, 623 
striata, Anastrepha, 455 
striatus, Antennarius, 71 
Lophius, 71 
Phrynelox, 54, 56, 71 
strigatus, Antennarius, 80, 81 

Antennatus, 54, 57, 81 
striolatus, Antennarius, 75 
Styela asymmetrica, 510 
canopus, 592 
coriacea, 624, 629 
gibbsii, 526, 562, 600, 603, 608, 633, 

636 
gyrosa, 526, 624 
loveni, 526, 624 
paessleri, 599 
partita, 524, 525 

plicata, 526, 530, 531, 610, 611, 624 
rustica, 590, 624 
Styelopsis grossularia, 479, 526 
sublunata, Erythroneura, 273 

Protalebra, 273 
subrotundatus, Chironectes, 80 
subteres, Antennarius, 66 

Nudiantennarius, 54, 55, 66 
subturbinella, Quercus, 110, 114, 115 : 

116 
sulcata, Cordia, 226 
sulcatus, Microcosmus, 488, 624 
surinamensis, Fornicia, 428, 430 
suttoni, Callirhytis, 120 
sydneiensis, Ascidia, 485, 493 
Synergus, 107 

magnificus, 107 

Tabebuia pallida, 216 

pentaphylla, 227, 232 
tabebuiae,~Rabela, 215, 217 (fig.), 218 
tabuliae, Protalebra, 214, 215 
tagus, Antennarius, 95 
talidicida, Apanteles, 444 
Tathicarpus, 54, 55, 64 

appeli, 64 

butleri, 54, 55, 65, 93 

mucosum, 64 
teleplanus, Antennarius, 73 



tenebrosus, Antennarius, 73, 74 
Chironectes, 73, 74, 83, 84 
Lophiocharon, 54, 58, 83 
tenera, Ascidia, 494 
Notodelphis, 495 
Notodelphys, 492, 495 
tenuifilis, Antennarius, 81 
tepicana, Antron, 115 
terebinthifolius, Schinus, 449 
terebrator, Promicrogaster, 416, 421, 423 
terminalis, Alebra, 194 

Habralebra, 184, 185, 194, 195 (fig.) 
terminata, Protalebra, 261 

Protalebrella, 256, 261, 263 (fig.) 
tesselata, Pyura, 526 
Tesseropora, subgenus, 36 
testulalis, Maruca, 444 
Tethium plicatum, 526, 624 

rusticum, 526 
Tetraclita, 33 

pacifica, 26, 83, 36 
porosa viriclis, 33 
rosea, 36 

squamosa squamosa, 26, S3 
squamosa viridis, 33 
wireni, 36 

wireni pacifica, 26, 33, 36 
subg., 36 
thilesii, Alloeocarpa, 525 
thompsoni, Calanopia, 39 
thoracicus, Apanteles, 431 
thorelli, Doropygella, 590, 591 

Doropvgus, 522, 523, 590, 591 
thorellii, Doropygelia, 591 
Doropygella, 591 
Sphaeronotus, 621, 622, 623 
thurberiae, Apanteles, 445 
tigris, Antennarius, 73, 74 

Chironectes, 73 
tincta, Alebra albostriella, 138, 139 
toumeyi, Quercus, 109, 113 
townsendi, Meteorus, 409 
Toxotrypana curvicauda, 452 
toxotrypanae, Opius, 417 (fig.), 41& 

(fig.), 451 
transversalis, Protalebra, 185 
Tretosphvs, 312 

gabbii, 286, 312 
Triantennatus, subgen., 54, 56, 71, 74 
Trichophryne, 54, 55, 65 
mitchelli, 54, 55, 65 
rosaceus, 54, 55, 65 
tridens, Antennarius, 75, 78, 91 
Chironectes, 79 
Phrynelox, 54, 57, 71, 79 
trigona, Goniodelphys, 486 
trimaculata, Alebra, 193 

Habralebra, 185, 193, 195 (fig.) 
trisetosus, Doropygus, 521, 52 A 
trisignatus, Chironectes, 82, 83 
trita, Pyura, 488, 526 
truckeensis, Disholcaspis, 108, 109 
truncata, Anatifa, 27 
Lithotrya, 26, 28 



INDEX 



671 



Trypanalebra, 131, 132, 142, 158, 154 
(key), 160, 162 
balli, 154, 155 (fig.), 156 

blantoni, 154, 155 (fig.), 157, 158 

maculata, 15 A, 155 (fig.), 156, 157 

ziczac, 154, 155 (fig.), 158 

sp., 154 
tuberifera, Molgula, 624 
tuberosus, Chironectes, 80 
tumanowiczii, Halvphysema, 123 124, 

126 
tumefactus, Doropygus, 589 
tumidus, Chironectes, 104 
turbinatum, Sidnyum, 479, 485 
turbinella, Quercus, 110, 114, 115, 116 
Typhlocyba aurata, 138 

aurea, 138 

binotata, 138, 139 

discicollis, 135, 136 

eximia, 135 

fuveola, 135 

pallidula, 138, 139 

wahlbergi, 135 
Typhlocybinae, subf., 128 
typicus, /gnathaner, 479 

uncinata, Doroixys, 484 
undulata, Quercus, 114, 115 
Uniantennatus, subg., 54, 57, 88 
uniceratus, B earner ulus, 248, 245 (fig.) 
unipuncta, Aphanalebra, 163 (fig.), 164 
Urogaster aciculatus, 431 

balthazeri, 431 

imitator, 414 

meridionalis, 431 

soiitarius, 431 
urophthalmus, Antennarius, 82 
Ustina, 478, 486 

clarki, 486 
Utetheisa ornatrix, 436 

vaccinifolia, Quercus, 109 
valentiana, Conchotrya, 27 

Lithotrya, 25, 26, 27 
variabilis, Notodelphyopsis, 518 

Polycarpa, 525 
variata, Lareba, 181 (fig.) 

Protalebra, 180, 181 
variegatus, Chironectes, 93 
velutina, Quercus, 121, 122 
vexillifera, Omegalebra, 201, 203 (fig.), 
204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 210, 211, 
212 

Protalebra, 199, 201 
venosa, Ascidia, 493, 525, 587, 588, 589, 
610 

Phallusia, 482 
venustus, Phocageneus, 279, 280, 281, 

282 
veranyi, Notopterophorus, 481, 483 
verecundum, Rhodosoma, 484 
vermiformis, Phallusia, 504 



Vernonia brachiata, 227 
Verruca, 28 

cookei, 25, 26, 28, 30 
verrucosus, Antennarius, 54, 61, 99 

Doropygus, 589 
vicinus, Conarthrus, 23 
vierecki, Opius, 456 
villosa, Boltenia, 600, 603, 608 
violatinctus, Botryllus, 485 
virginea, Ascidia, 493, 496, 590 

Phallusia, 493, 525, 591, 610 
viridis, Albera albostriella, 135 

Doropygus, 589 

Tetraclita porosa, 33 
viridis, Tetraclita squamosa, 33 
vittatus, Chironectes pictus, 104 
vulgaris, Antennarius, 52 

Meteorus, 409, 410 

wahlbergi, Alebra, 138 

Microcosmus oligophilus, 525 
Typhlocyba, 135 
washingtonensis, Neuroterus, 110 
Wasps, New American cynipid, from 

oak galls, 107 
Wasps, New neotropical of the family 

Braconidae (Hymenoptera) in 

the U. S. National Museum, 405 
weberi, Notodelphys, 490, 492, 495 
Weld, Lewis H.; New American cynipid 

wasps from oak galls, 107 
wildi, Rhycherus, 68, 69 
williamsi, Habralebra, 185, 187, 188 

(fig.), 191, 193 
Relaba, 161 (fig.), 162 
willinki, Habralebra, 184, 185, 192, 195 

(fig.) 
willmeriana, Corella, 504, 525 
wireni, Tetraclita, 36 

Xenophrynichthys, subg., 54, 55, 81 

Xestocephalus, 145 

Young, David A., Jr; The leaf hopper 

tribe Alebrini (Homoptera, Cic- 

adellidae), 127 
Zarhachis, 309, 312 

flagellator, 291, 292, 293 
zebrinus, Phrynelox, 54, 57, 74, 75 (fig.), 

77 (table) 
zetehi, Opius, 454 
ziczac, Protalebra, 158 

Trypanalebra, 154, 155 (fig.), 158 
ziesenhennei, Antennarius, 81 
Zimmerman, Elwood C; Formosan cos- 

sonine weevils of bamboo (Cole- 

optera: Curculionidae: Cosso- 

ninae), 13 
Ziphiidae, 286, 309 
Zygina, 131 
Zyginini, 131 
Zygorhiza kockii, 296 





3 9088 01003 8339 



