^€Sx^ 













^ 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 
UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOLUME 80 




UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

WASHINGTON : 1932 



ADVERTISEMENT 

The scientific publications of the National Museum include two 
series, known, respectively, as Proceedings and Bulletin. 

The Proceedings series, begun in 1878, is intended primarily as a 
medium for the publication of original papers, based on the collections 
of the National Museum, that set forth newly acquired facts in biology, 
anthropology, and geology, with descriptions of new forms and revi- 
sions of limited groups. Copies of each paper, in pamphlet form, are 
distributed as published to libraries and scientific organizations and 
to specialists and others interested in the different subjects. The 
dates at which these separate papers are published are recorded in 
the table of contents of each of the volumes. 

The present volume is the eightieth of this series. 

The series of Bulletins, the first of which was issued in 1875, con- 
tains separate publications comprising monographs of large zoological 
groups and other general systematic treatises (occasionally in several 
volumes), faunal works, reports of expeditions, catalogues of type 
specimens and special collections, and other material of similar nature. 
The majority of the volumes are octavo in size, but a quarto size has 
been adopted in a few instances in which large plates were regarded as 
indispensable. In the Bulletin series appear volumes under the head- 
ing Contributions from the United States National Herbarium, in octavo 
form, published by the National Museum siace 1902, wliich contain 
papers relating to the botanical collections of the Museum. 

Alexander Wetmore, 
Assistant Secretary, Smithsonian Institution. 

Washington, D. C, September 21, 1932. 

136711—32 nr 



CONTENTS 

Article 

Aldrich, J. M. Notes on Francis Walker's types of North 
American flies of the family Tachinidae. No. 2910, pp. 
1-16. November 10, 1931 1 10 

. North American two-winged flies of the genus 

Spathimeigenia, with descriptions of five new species. No. 
2911, pp. 1-10. December 31, 1931 ^ 11 

New species: Spathimeigenia mexicana, S. obscura, S. ereda, 
S. bridwelli, S. lexensis. 

. Records of dipterous insects of the family Tachinidae 

reared by the late George Dimmock, with description of one 
new species and notes on the genus Anetia Robineau- 
Desvoidy. No. 2920, pp. 1-8. March 31, 1932 ^ 20 

New species: Anetia dimmocki. 

Bartsch, Paul. The West American mollusks of the genus 

Acar. No. 2909, pp. 1-4. November 23, 1931 ' 9 

New species: Acar bailyi, A. panamensis. 

. A new marine shell of tiie genus Xenophora from 

Florida. No. 2917, pp. 1, 2. December 31, 1931 ' 17 

New species: Xenophora longleyi. 

Caudell, a. N. Insects of the order Orthoptera of the Pinchot 

Expedition of 1929. No. 2921, pp. 1-7. August 10, 1932 L 21 

New species: Patanga pinchoti. 

Chitwood, B. G. a review of the nematodes of the genus 
Hastospiculum, with descriptions of two new species. No. 
2919, pp. 1-9. April 28, 1932 1 19 

New species: Hastospiculum setiferum, H. onchocercum. 

Clark, Austin H. Echinoderms from the islands of Niuafoou 
and Nukualofa, Tonga Arcliipelago, with the description of 
a new genus and two new species. No. 2905, pp. 1-12. 
January 30, 1932 ' 5 

New genus: Zenocentrotus. 

New species: Zenocentrotus kellersi, Z. paradoxus. 

• Date of publication. 

V 



VI PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

Article 

CusHMAN, Joseph A., and Jar vis, P. W. Upper Cretaceous 
foraminifera from Trinidad. No. 2914, pp. 1-60. March 
10, 1932' 14 

New species: Cydammina elegans, Clavulina chitinosa, Robulus 
trinitatensis, Planularia advena, Pseudopolymorphina ozawana, 
Nonion cretaceum, Operculina catenula. 

New varieties: Clavulina aspera Cushman whitei, Nodosaria 
limbata d'Orbigny tumidaia, N. limbata d'Orbigny basiornafa. 

Cushman, Joseph A., and Parker, Frances L. Recent 
foraminifera from the Atlantic coast of South America. 
No. 2903, pp. 1-24. November 19, 1931 ' 3 

New species: Elphidium australis, Buliminella parallela. 
New variety: Elphidium alvarezianum (d'Orbigny) serrulaturn. 

DoBZHANSKY, Th. The North American beetles of the genus 

Coccinella. No. 2904, pp. 1-32. November 10, 1931 ' 4 

New subspecies: Coccinella prolongata Crotch sequoiae. 

EwiNG, H. E. A catalogue of the Trombiculinae, or chigger 
mites, of the New World, with new genera and species and a 
key to the geaera. No. 2908, pp. 1-19. November 19, 1931 ^- 8 

New genera: Walchia, Endotrombicula. 

New species: Trombicula blarinae, T. dunni, T. cervulicola, T. 
piercei, T. cavicola, Neoschongastia signator, N. scelopori, 
N. brevipes, Endotrombicula penetrans, Hannemania hirsuta, 
H. penetrans. 

New name: Hannemania samboni. 

Fisher, W. S. New West Indian cerambycid beetles. No. 

2922, pp. 1-93. June?, 1932 1 22 

New genera: Pseudoeme, Brittonella, Calliclytus, Lamproclytus. 

New species: Xixuthrus domingoensis, Monodesmus atratus, 
Pseudoeme poolei, Methia pallida, Brittonella chardoni, Eburia 
longicornis, E. bahamicae, E. cinereopilosa, E. ramsdeni, E. 
portoricensis, E. cubae, E. elongata, Elaphidion splendidum, E. 
manni, E. rotundipenne, E. cayamae, E. tuber culicolle, E. cubae, 
E. fasciatum, E. hispaniolae, E. confusum, E. portoricensis, E. 
compressipenne, E. pilosum, E. dozieri, E. costipenne, E. jamai- 
censis, E. antillarum, E. gracilis, Protosphaerion testaceum, 
Stizocera vanzwaluwenburgi, Heterachtes fulgens, Cylindera 
fasciata, C. puncticollis, C. glabra, Merostenus asperatus, M. 
similis, M. elongatus, Pentomacrus punctalus, Ophistomis in- 
sularis, Neoclytus pallidicornis, N. pubicollis, Tilloclytus bruneri, 
T. minutus, T. cubae, Pentanodes albofasciaius, Calliclytus 
schwarzi, Lamproclytus elegans, Trichrous vittatus, T. bicolor, 
Heterops hispaniolae, Ataxia haitiensis, Acrepidopterum pilosum, 
Ecyrus insularis, E. hoffmanni, E. nanus, E. flavus, Dor- 
casta gracilis, Leptostylus milleri, Leiopus infuscatus, L. dozieri, 
Frobatius unicolor, Calocosrnus magnificus. 

> Date of publication. 



CONTENTS VII 

Article 

Fowler, Henry "W. The fishes obtained by the Pinchot South 
Seas Expedition of 1929, with description of one new genus 
and three new species. No. 2906, pp. 1-16. Februar}^ 16, 
1932 ' 6 

New genus: Giffordella. 

New species: Benthosema pinchoti, Ophioblennius pinchoti, Gif- 
fordella corneliae. 

Friedmann, Herbert. Observations on the growth rate of 
the foot in the mound birds of tiie genus Megajjodius. No. 
2901, pp. 1-4. October 28, 1931 ' 1 

— . Tlie birds of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea. No. 

2912, pp. 1-31. February 13, 1932 1 12 

. The parasitic habit in the ducks, a theoretical con- 
sideration. No. 2918, pp. 1-7. March 4, 1932 ^ 18 

Graham, David Crockett. The ancient caves of Szechwan 

Province, China. No. 2916, pp. 1-13. March 23, 1932 K. 16 

Howell, A. Brazier, and Straus, William L., jr. The 
brachial flexor muscles in primates. No. 2913, pp. 1-31. 
November 21, 1931 ^ 13 

Jarvis, p. W. (See Cushman, Joseph A.) 

Muesebeck, C. F. W. Revision of the nearctic ichneumonfhes 
belonging to the genus Macrocentrus. No. 2923, pp. 1-55. 
August 3, 1932 ' 23 

New species: Macrocentrus incojnplehis, M. crassipes, M. peroneae, 
M. crocidophorae, M. airatus, M. impressus, M. reliculaius, M. 
canarsiae, M. insularis, M. clypeatus, M. robustus, M. nigripec- 
ius, M. inslabilis, M. utilis, M. laspeyresiae, M. pulchripennis, 
M. seminiger, M. affinis, M. fuscipennis, M. texanus. 

New combination: Macrocentrus terminalis (Ashmead). 

Parker, Frances L. (See Cushman, Joseph A.) 

Riley, J. H. A second collection of birds from the Provinces 
of Yunnan and Szechwan, China, made for the National 
Geographic .Society by Dr. Joseph F. Rock. No. 2907, 
pp. 1-91. December 31, 1931 ' 7 

Straus, William L., jr. (See Howell, A. Brazier.) 

Treadwell, Aaron L. Three new species of polychaetous 

annelids in the collections of the United States National 

Museum. No. 2902, pp. 1-5. November 10, 1931 ^ 2 

New species: Nereis heterocirrata, Lumbrinereis elongata, Eupo- 
matus decoruft. 

1 Date of publication. 



VIII PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

Article 

Wilson, Charles Branch. The copepod crustaceans of 

Chesapeake Bay. No. 2915, pp. 1-54. March 31, 1932 '_ 15 

New species: Pontella pennata, Canuella elongata, Robertsonia 
chesapeakensis, Cryptopontius gracilis, Hemicyclops americanus. 

•Date of publication. 



ILLUSTRATIONS 



PLATES 

The West American Mollusks of the Genus Acar 

By Paul Bartsch 

Facing page 

1 . Mollusks of the genus Acar 1 

A New Marine Shell of the Genus Xenophora from Florida 

By Paul Bartsch 
1. Xenophora longleyi, new species 2 

A Review of the Nematodes of the Genus Hastospiculum, 
with Descriptions of Two New Species 

By B. G. Chitwood 

1. Hastospiculum seiiferum, new species, and H. spinigerum 9 

2. Hastospiculum onchocercum, new species 9 

8. Species of Hastospiculum 9 

Echinoderms from the Islands of Niuafoou and Nukualofa, 
Tonga Archipelago, with the Description of a New Genus 
and Two New Species 

By Austin H. Clark 

1-3. Zenocentrotus kellersi 12 

4. Zenocentrotus kellersi and Heterocentrotus trigonarius 12 

5. Zenocentrotus kellersi, Z. paradoxus, and Echinomelra oblonga 12 

6. Zenocentrotus paradoxus and Z. kellersi 12 

7. Zenocentrotus paradoxus and Echinometra oblonga 12 

8. Heterocentrotus trigonarius 12 

Upper Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

By Joseph A. Cushman and P. W. Jarvis 

1-16. Cretaceous foraminifera from Trinidad 60 

Recent Foraminifera from the Atlantic Coast of South 

America 

By Joseph A. Cushman and Frances L. Parker 
1-4. Recent Atlantic foraminifera from South America 24 

TX 



IC PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

A Catalogue of the Trombiculinae, or Chigger Mites, op 
THE New World, with New Genera and Species and a 
Ket to the Genera 

By H. E. Ewing 

Facing page 

1. New species of Tr ombicula Berlese 19 

2. New species of Neoschongastia Ewing 19 

3. Endotr ombicula -penetrans, new genus and species, and new species of 

Hannemania Oudemans 19 

The Birds of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea 
By Herbert Friedmann 

1. Interior of St. Lawrence Island. Cape Kialegak 1 

2. Gambell, northwest end of St. Lawrence Island. The mountain back 

of Gambell 4 

3. Two views of the cape at Gambell 5 

4. Nest and young of raven (Corvus corax principalis) . View at GambelL 8 

5. Cormorants nesting on Punuk Island 9 

6. Eskimo netting auklets near Gambell 28 

The Ancient Caves of Szechwan Province, China 
By David Crockett Graham 

1. Fragments of a horse's head, an elephant's foot, and a horse's foot 13 

2. Fragments of a clay bottle and a bell 13 

3. Clay images of barnyard fowls 13 

4. Fragments of dog effigies 13 

5. Hand resting on lute and fish 13 

6. Figure of a man playing a flute 13 

7. 8. Heads from clay figures 13 

9. Head from the clay image of a woman 13 

10. Servant with broom and dustpan 13 

11. Fragment of a male figure with hands in sleeves 13 

12. Fragments of earthenware vessels 13 

13. Shards showing type of decoration 13 

14. Roof fragments from miniature clay houses 13 

15. Modern Chinese costumes 13 

16. Ancient Chinese cave tombs 13 

The Brachial Flexor Muscles in Primates 
By A. Brazier Howell and William L. Straus, jr. 

1. Muscles of primates 31 

J2. Muscles of primates and opossum 31 



ILLUSTRATIONS XI 

The Copepod Crustaceans op Chesapeake Bay 

By Charles Branch Wilson 

Facing page 

1 . Pontella pennaia 54 

2. Pseudodiaptomns coronatus 54 

3. Canuella elongata and Oithona brevicornis 54 

4. Robertsonia chesapeakensis and Cryptopontius gracilis 54 

5. Hemicyclops americanus and Oithona brevicornis 54 



TEXT FIGURES 

The North American Beetles of the Genus Coccinella 

By Th. Dobzhansky 

Page 

1. Male genitalia of Coccinella novemnotat a Herbst 3 

2-9. Male genitalia of the different species of Coccinella 5 

10-12. Male genitalia of Coccinella trifasciata, C. hieroglyphica, and C. un- 

decimpunclata 9 

13-20. Sipho of the different species of Coccinella 9 

21-29. Receptaculum seminis and infundibulum of the different species of 

the genus Coccinella 12 

30. Right elytron of Coccinella undecimpunctata, representing the spots 

constituting the typical pattern of the genus Coccinella 27 

The Fishes Obtained by the Pinchot South Seas Expedition op 
1929, WITH Description of One New Genus and Three New 

Species 

By Henry W. Fowler 

1. Benthosema pinchoti, new species o 

2. Coelonoius platyrhynchus (Dum^ril) 7 

3. Ophioblennius pinchoti, new species 14 

4. Giffordella corneliae, new species 15 

The Birds of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea 
By Herbert Friedmann 

1. Map of the Bering Sea region, showing the location of St. Lawrence 

Island with reference to Asia and North America 2 

2. Map of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea 3 

The Ancient Caves of Szechwan Province, China 
By David Crockett Graham 

1. Floor plant of a six-chamber cave, carved from the stone cliffs near 

Kiating 1 

2. Plan of cave near Kiating 2 

3. Plan of double cave near Kiating 2 



XII PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

Page 

4. Schematic drawing of the soiith side of a Han dynasty memorial arch 

near Yachow 3 

5. A tile roof edge forming a decorative motif frequently found in caves 

throughout Szechwan Province 4 

6. Carving on the wall of a cave-tomb near Kiating, portraying the side 

of a tile-roofed house 4 

7. Schematic drawing from a cave near Kiating, showing the type of 

half brace frequently seen in later Chinese buildings and memorial 

arches 5 

8. A simple type of ancient Chinese brace ^_ 5 

9. Carved entrance to the double cave near Kiating 5 

10. Diagram of a brace made of bricks G 

11. Brace found at each side of a cave ten li west of Kiating 6 

12. Representation of a house chiseled on the wall of a cave near Kiating. _ 7 

13. Representation of a house roof, carved on a stone pillar in a cave- 

tomb near Kiating 7 

14. Head from a small figurine 10' 

Three New Species of Polychaetous Annelids in the Collec- 
tions or THE United States National Museum 

By Aaron L. Treadwell 

1. Nereis heterocirrata, new species 2 

2. Lumbrinereis elongata, new species 3 

3. Eupomaius decorus, new species 4 

The Copepod Crustaceans of Chesapeake Bay 

By Charles Branch Wilson 

1. Chesapealie Bay biological and hydrographic stations, 1915-16 and 

1920-21 (map) .' 3 

o 



OBSERVATIONS ON THE GROWTH RATE OF THE FOOT 
IN THE MOUND BIRDS OF THE GENUS MEGAPODIUS 



By Herbert Friedmann 
Curator, Division of Birds, United States National Museum 



Among terrestrial birds the feet are generally relatively larger or 
more powerfully developed than in comparable arboreal forms, but 
there are few carinate birds with larger, more powerful feet than 
the megapodes. The uimsual development of the feet in this group 
has been assumed to be correlated with their scratching habits, 
especially in making the mounds of decaying matter or in excavat- 
ing the holes in the sand, as the case may be, in which they lay their 
eggs. Certainly few birds, even those that burrow in the ground, 
have more need of large, strong feet than the megapodes. In this 
family of birds, however, the case is somewhat different from that 
obtaining in other groups in that not only do the adults use their 
feet in digging, but the young have to dig their way up to the surface 
on hatching. In no other group of birds do the newly hatched young 
have such immediate need of strong feet. Consequently it seemed 
that a study of the feet of young and adult birds might show some- 
thing of interest in helping to understand some fragment of the 
puzzles that the life histories of the megapodes present. 

Recently the United States National Museum received a fine series 
of alcoholic specimens of Megapodius pritcJiardl collected by Lieut. 
Henry C. Kellers, United States Navy, on Niuafou Island, one of 
the Tonga group. Among these there were two chicks and one em- 
bryo nearly ready to hatch, as well as a large number of adults of 
both sexes. The embryo is remarkable in that while it is in a stage 
of development close to hatching and has the pennaceous ju venal 
plumage well developed, although still encased in sheaths like the 
trichoptiles of cuculiform birds, it has no sign of an egg tooth. Inci- 
dentally, it seems that the extent of prehatching development in 
the megapodes is not generally appreciated. Whereas in most pre- 
cocial birds, such as pheasants and ducks, the young are hatched 
fully covered with natal down, in the megapodes this plumage stage 
seems to be entirely telescoped into the period before hatching, and 

No. 2901.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. I. 

67977—31 J 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

the young birds when emerging from the egg are in the first pen- 
naceous, or juvenal, plumage. Pycraft^ has noted this, but his 
paper has been largely overlooked by ornithologists. 

The embryo has the following dimensions, in millimeters (the sizes 
of the culmen and wings are included as a scale by which to compare 
the embryo, the chicks, and the adults): Culmen, 11; wing, 74; 
tarsus, 28; first toe (without claw), 16; claw, 8; second toe, 1G.5; 
claM^, 8 ; third toe, 14.5 ; claw, 8 ; fourth toe, 11 ; claw, 7.5. 

The two chicks are alike in their dimensions (millimeters) : Cul- 
men, 11 ; wing, 82 ; tarsus, 28 ; first toe, 16 ; claw, 8.5 ; second toe, 17 ; 
claw, 8.5 ; third toe, 15 ; claw, 8.5 ; fourth toe, 11 ; claw, 8. 

Adults vary as follows (millimeters) : Culmen, 22-26 (average, 
24); wing, 178-192 (185); tarsus, 56-60 (58); first toe, 30; claw, 
18 ; second toe, 31.5 ; claw, 19 ; third toe, 30 ; ciaw, 18 ; fourth toe, 23 ; 
claw, 18.5. 

To summarize these data : The wing increases from 82 to 185 mm., 
an increase of approximately 126 per cent ; the culmen grovv's from 11 
to 24 mm., an increase of 118 per cent; the tarsus increases from 28 
to 58 mm., a growth of 107 per cent ; the first toe from 16 to 30 mm., 
an increase of 87.5 per cent; claw from 8 to 18 mm., an increase of 
125 per cent; second toe from 16.5 to 31.5 mm., an increase of 91 per 
cent; claw from 8 to 19 mm., an increase of 137.5 per cent; third 
toe from 14.6 to 30 mm., an increase of 107 per cent ; claw from 8 to 
18 mm., an increase of 125 per cent; fourth toe from 11 to 23 mm.,* an 
increase of 109 per cent ; claw from 7.5 to 18.5 mm., an increase of 
147 per cent. 

As a matter of comparison, chicks and adults of Gallus sonnerati, 
as an example of the pheasants, and of Tinamus rohustus, as a repre- 
sentative of the tiuamous (two fairly related groups), were examined, 
with the following results: In Gallus sonnerati, the culmen was 
found to increase by 56 per cent ; the wings of the young chicks being 
unfortunately in poor condition, the wing growth could not be esti- 
mated; the tarsus increased by 114 per cent; the first toe by 26 per 
cent; the second toe by 37 per cent; the third toe by 32.5 per cent; 
the fourth toe by 13 per cent; the claws by 10 to 25 per cent. In 
Tinamus rohustus again no wing data could be obtained; the culmen 
increased by 130 per cent; the tarsus by 129 per cent; the first toe 
by 95 jDer cent ; the second toe by 85 per cent ; the third toe by 85 per 
cent; the fourth toe by only 35 per cent. The claws increased by 
about 300 per cent. 

On looking over these figures we may note that the megapodes show 
a much greater postnatal development of the claws than Gallus and 
much less than Tinamus; they show a greater growth of the toes 

iProc. Fourth Internat. Ornith. Congr., p. 458, 1907. 



ART. 1 GROWTH OF THE FOOT OF MEGAPODIUS FRIEDMANN S 

generally than does Gallus and slightly more than in Tinamus; they 
show less postnatal development of the tarsus than in either of the 
latter two. To put it another way : The young megapode, on hatch- 
ing, has a rather unusually strong, well-developed tarsus, but not 
particularly large or heavily built toes or claws relative to its size as 
compared with adult birds. It has larger claws at all stages than do 
the pheasants or tinamous. The inference to be drawn from these 
few data (it is hoped they will be greatly extended by others with 
more abundant material) seems to be as follows: Adult megapodes 
are built for digging and excavating with their feet ; young ones are 
not structurally adapted to digging themselves out except in having 
the tarsus unusually large. In other words, the digging is a matter 
of the tarsus in the young, while in the adults it seems to be more a 
matter of toes and claws. The mechanical advantage is greatly in 
favor of the adults. 

This appears to be correlated with the difference in the sort of dig- 
ging the young and old birds have to do. In digging down from 
the surface the old birds can scratch and shovel away the dirt, ash, 
or sand in all directions, and in such digging large, strong toes with 
big, heavy claws are of great service. The young birds, however, 
interred in the ash, sand, or mound, have to dig their way out ; here 
the type of digging is more like an upward boring without the wide 
lateral spread possible in the adults' digging. For this type of work 
large toes with long, strong claws would be more of a hindrance than 
a help. The final conclusion to be drawn from the meager data 
available is that the premature development of the tarsus in the 
young bird up to the point of hatching is a feature that may readily 
be correlated with the peculiar breeding habits of the megapodes. 

I have dissected the legs of young and old megapodes and find 
there is no diiference in the arrangement or relative strength of the 
tendons and muscles working the toes. 

The suggestion that the manner in which the young megapode 
digs itself out is like an upward boring is substantiated indirectly 
by Ashby's notes on the Australian megapode Leipoa ocelUta? 

He writes of a newly hatched chick as follows : 

It had hatched out and alter being dried by the hot sand surrounding it, 
had scrambled up through the mound ; by the mark where it had emerged the 
course taken was ahnost perpendicular. 

Inasmuch as MegopodiiLS pritchardi is confined to the small and 
seldom visited island of Niuafou and has been collected only a few 
times, little has been recorded of it. It is one of the species that 
buries its eggs in the sand and volcanic ash and does not make laro-e 



^'Auk, vol. 46, pp. 299, 300, 1929. 



2 



PKOCEEDINGS OF THE I!TATIONAL. MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



In the fifteenth parapodium the dorsal and ventral cirri are 
relatively much smaller and more slender, and the parapodial lobe 
is heavy and blunt pointed. (Fig. 1, c.) The dorsal lobe is now 
double and the seta tuft arises between the two parts. A single 
large acicula occurs in each part of the parapodium. In parapodia 
from the posterior part of the body the dorsal half of the upper 
parapodial lobe is, relatively to the others, much larger and bears 
the slender dorsal cirrus near its apex. The ventral cirrus is small 
and inconspicuous. (Fig. 1, d.) In the first parajDodium the setae 




Figure 1. — Nereis heterocirrata, new species : o. Head, X 7.5 ; h, first 
parapodium, X 18 ; c, flf teentli parapodium, X 36 ; d, posterior 
parapodium, X 27.5 ; e, seta from first parapodium, X 250 

on the ventral part of the seta tuft have short terminal joints that 
carry long, heavy spines on the inner margins (fig. 1, e) ; those of 
the dorsal tuft have long and slender terminal joints, and these are 
finely toothed along one margin. In the posterior portions of the 
body the seta are badly broken, but so far as it is possible to tell 
both of the above varieties occur there. In addition are some with 
much more slender, noticeably " camerated " shafts, the terminal 
joints flat, elongated triangular in outline, with prominent marginal 
spines. 

Type.—U.S.l!iM. No. 19323. 



AHT. 



THREE NEW POLYCHAETOUS ANNELIDS — TEEADWELL 



LUMBRINEREIS ELONGATA, new species 

Figure 2 

In one bottle are a number of pieces of Luvibrlnereis^ one carrying 
the head and another the anal portion, and there are a number of 
other fragments. It is not possible to tell whether these all belong 
to the same individual, but they probably do, and in this case it is 
unusually long for this genus, measuring more than 300 mm. but 
with a body width of not more than 1 mm. No color appears in 
the preserved specimen. The prostomium (fig. 2, a) is sugar-loaf in 
outline, a trifle longer than wide, as long as the first three somites. 
There are two achaetous somites of which the first is a little longer 
than the second, the constriction between them being indistinct. 
Together thev are about one-third longer than the third somite. 
The first parapodia are very short, but there is a gradual increase 
in length in later ones, fu.U size be- 
ing reached at about the fiftieth 
somite. Toward the posterior end 
there is a gradual decrease in the 
width of the somites but little change 
in the size of the parapodia. Three 
blunt, conical cirri and a fragment of 
a fourth are attached to the anal 
somite. 

The para])odia have the form usual 
in this genus, with no notopodium 
and a prominent postsetal ]obe. The 
two kinds of setae characteristic of 
Lvmhrinereis are both present (fig. 
2, J). (?), the hooded form being much 
the more numerous. Tliese have a 

large subapical tooth VA'ith a series of five or six apical ones beyond it. 
Of these the largest is near the subapical, and the others decrease in 
size toward the upper part, so that at the very end it is difficult to 
determine the exact number. 

In the javv' (fig. 2, d) the forceps have a prominent carrier and a 
slender terminal portion. The left paired plate has a slender ter- 
minal tooth followed by three much heavier ones, and a basal hump 
that may be the remnant of a tooth. The second paired plate has 
two teeth, the terminal plate only one. The jaw was badly broken 
in removing and only the left side is intact, but so far as could be 
determined the plates are symmetrical on the two sides. All plates 
are dark brown. The mandible was too badly broken for description. 

Holotype.—V.^.'^M. No. 10622, from Grande Isle, La. 





FiGDEB 2. — Lumbrineieis elongata, 
new species : a. Head, X 10 ; 6, 
hooded seta, X 250 ; c, simple 
seta, X 250 ; d, part of jaw, X 45 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



EUPOMATUS DKCORLfS, new species 




FiGUHE 3 

An average-sized specimen has a length of 18 mm. from the collar 
margin to the end of the pygidium and a width at the collar margin 
of 1.5 mm. The branchial filaments are about 18 on a side, their 
length in a well-expanded specimen being 3 mm. The operculum 
and its stalk are large as compared with the filaments and extend 
considerably beyond them. In the 11 specimens in the collection, 5 
have the operculum on the left side with a small and inconspicuous 
pseudoperculum on the right. In five others these relations are 
reversed, and in one there is a fully developed operculum on either 

side. The radioles are very short at the 
base of the branchia but soon become 
longer and at the end have a length foui' 
times the diameter of the branchia. 
There is a smooth tip, as long as the 
longest radiole, at the end of each 
branchia. The operculum stalk broadens 
into a funnel, which carries approxi- 
mately 40 teeth on its margin. The ter- 
minal hooks on the operculum are 12 in 
number, long, slender, and gently curv- 
ing to very sharp points. 

The branchia arise from a conmion 
base, which is about as high as the collar. 
The collar has four lobes, the doi'sal 
ones at their dorsal ends overlapping the 
bases of the opercular stalks and sepa- 
rated from one another by a considerable 
space. A deep depression on each side 
separates the dorsal from the ventral 
lobe of the collar, the two latter ones 
overlapping on the ventral surface and 
extending farther over the bases of the gills than do the dorsal. 
The fii-st seta tuft lies in the dorsal collar lobe. 

In preserved material the general body color is pale straw, marked 
as follows with dark-brown pigment : A median stripe in each ter- 
minal tooth of the opercular margin ; a narrow band on each side of 
the opercular spine, in some cases spread more diffusely over the base 
of the spine ; a heavy band on the ventral surface, covering each torus 
of the last six thoracic somites; and a very much narrower band on 
the ventral margin of each abdominal somite, marking the region of 
the torus with a minute but still prominent spot at the location of 
the seta tuft. 



/ 



ic 



b 

Figure 3. — Evpomatus decorus, 
new species : a. Dorsal abdom- 
inal seta, X 250 ; h, stout seta 
from first bundle, X 165 ; c, dor- 
sal tlioracic seta, X 250 ; d, 
uncinus. X 250 



ABT. 2 THREE NEW POLYCHAETOUS ANNELIDS TEEADWELL 5 

At the dorsal end of the setal row in abdominal somites is i tiitt 
of setae, as shown in Figure 3, a. Each has a heavy stalk, the inner 
end terminating bluntly, the outer end asymmetrically widened and 
concavo-convex in form, its margin denticulated. Fine lines extend 
down over the stalk from these denticulations. The first seta tuft 
(which lies in the dorsal collar lobe) contains two rows of setae with 
six or seven in a row. The first are slender, long, and sharp pointed 
and lie across the others at an angle of about 45°. The basal part of 
the second kind is much heavier, having four or five times the 
diameter of the slender ones. Near the apex their stalk divider into 
three spines, one of which is long, slender, and sharp-pointed, the 
other two short and conical. (Fig. 3, h.) In the rest of the thoracic 
somites the dorsal setae are moderately stout, curved, and sharp- 
pointed and have a fin along the convex margin. (Fig. 3, o.) The 
uncini are similar throughout the body, each (fig. 3, d) having a 
rounded base and six teeth, which decrease gradually in size from the 
basal to the terminal of the series. 

A fragment of the limestone tube remains attached to the hoLotype. 
This is heavy and has marked longitudinal ridges. 

Hoioiype—JJ.S.l^M. No. 19621, collected at Grand Isle, La 



0. f . •STHimeHT raiiTiia atrtcti tMi 



EECENT FORAMINIFEEA FROM THE ATLANTIC COAST 

OF SOUTH AMERICA 



By Joseph A. Cushman and Frances L. Parker 

Ciishman Laboratory for Foraminiferal Research, Sharon, Mass. 



This is the third of a series of papers on the recent foraminifera 
from the collections made by Dr. Waldo L. Schmitt, of the United 
States National Museum, on his trip about South America under the 
auspices of the Walter Rathbone Bacon scholarship of the Smith- 
sonian Institution. Those from Juan Fernandez have already been 
studied and the results published,^ as well as those from the west 
coast of South America.^ 

D'Orbigny's memoir on the foraminifera of his voyage around 
South America, published in 1839, contained figures and descrip- 
tions of many new species that have not been recorded or referred 
to since that date. Very little has been added to the knowledge of 
the foraminiferal fauna of the South American coast, including the 
Falkland Islands. The Challenge?' occupied a few stations along the 
eastern coast of South America, but mostly in the offshore waters. 
The paper by Brady, Parker, and Jones on the foraminifera of the 
Abrohlos Bank, together with the records given by Pearcey, furnished 
most of the few additional records from the region. Flint studied 
a very few of the Alhatross collections made on the trip around South 
America, and Heron-Allen and Earland are now publishing papers 
on the fauna of the Falkland Islands collected by the Discovery 
Expedition. 

The relations of the fauna are interesting. Our stations from off 
Brazil, especially the harbor of Rio de Janeiro, show that the fauna 
at that point is essentially a West Indian one, and most of the 
species are to be found in d'Orbigny's work of 1839 on the West 
Indies, or in more recent works on the fauna of the same region. The 
stations to the south along the coast of Argentina and the shallow 
water of the Falklands give a cold-water fauna, which is not closely 

' Cushman and Wickendon, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, art. 9, 1929. 
2 Cushman and Kellett, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, art. 25, 1929. 



No. 2903.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80. Art. 3 

68198—31 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

related to that of Brazil, but which has numerous species recorded 
by d'Orbigny in 1839 from this same region, and others evidently 
extending around Cape Horn. These are identical with species de- 
scribed by d'Orbigny from the west coast. The faunas of the two 
sides of South America are, however, for the most part quite different. 
In order to avoid repetition, reference is given to the various parts 
of United States National Museum Bulletin 104 on the Atlantic 
foraminifera, where complete description and synonymy of the vari- 
ous species will be found. Nearly all the species are already known 
from earlier works, but three of the forms are here described as new. 
In order that workers may have a visual record of the forms of this 
region, nearly all the species are illustrated. Most of those not fig- 
ured here, such as the species of Elfhidium^ are already figured in 
Bulletin 104, some of them from this same material. The figures 
are from drawings made by Miss Margaret S. Moore. The data for 
the stations represented are as follows : 

Station 1. Ilha Paqueta, Rio de Janeiro Harbor, Brazil, August 17, 1925; tidal 
flats. 
2. Nictheroy, Rio de Janeiro Harbor, Brazil, August 22, 1925. 
8. Off Ilha Govenador, Rio de Janeiro Harbor, Brazil, August 2, 1925; 
boat dredge, 3 fathoms, muddy, shelly bottom. 
SO. Port Stanley, Falklands, February 23, 1927; boat dredge, 1 to 2 

fathoms, mud and broken shell bottom. 
85. Below Port Darwin, Choisel Sound, Falklands, March 2, 1927; bot- 
tom sampler, 4 fathoms. 
87. Ofe lower jetty. Port Howard, Falklands, March 4, 1927; bottom 

sampler, 4 fathoms. 
95. Narrows between Port Stanley and Port William, Falklands, March 

20, 1927; bottom sampler, 3 to 4 fathoms, sandy bottom. 
97. Port William, Falklands, March 20, 1927; oyster dredge, 8 to 10 

fathoms, weedy bottom. 
105. Off light, north shore Port William, Falklands, April 9, 1927, oyster 
dredge, 14 to 15 fathoms, weedy, shelly bottom. 

123. Anchorage, St. Julian, Argentina, May 6, 1927; bottom sampler. 

124. Anchorage, Puerto Deseado, Argentina, May 7, 1927 ; bottom sampler. 

Family SACCAMMINIDAE 
Genus PROTEONINA Williamson, 1858 

PROTEONINA DIFFLUGIFORMIS (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 1, Figure 1 

Proteonina difflugiformis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 48, 1918. 

The specimens of this species are very common at station 85 only, 
in 4 fathoms, Choisel Sound, Falklands. They are typical, however, 
and one of them is here figured. 



ABT. 3 SOUTH AMERICAN FOEAMINIFERA CUSHMAN AND PARKER 3 

Family AMMODISCIDAE 
Genus GLOMOSPIRA Rzehak, 1888 

GLOMOSPIRA GORDIALIS (Jones and Parker) 
Plate 1, Fiqukb 2 
Glomospira gordialis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 99, 1918. 
This species is common only about the Falkland Islands in our 
material and was not found at any of the stations along the eastern 
coast of South America. It is subject to the usual variations, espe- 
cially in the plane of coiling of the chambers. 

Genus TOLYPAMMINA Rhumbler, 1895 

TOLYPAMMINA VAGANS (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 1, Figure 3 
Tolypammina vagans Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 91, 1918. 
There are a few specimens in the shallow water from the Falkland 
region, but the species does not occur at any of the stations to the 
north. 

Family LITUOLIDAE 

Genus HAPLOPHRAGMOIDES Cushman, 1910 

HAPLOPHRAGMOIDES CANARIENSIS (d'Orbigny) 

Plate 1, Figubes 4 a, & 

Haplophragmoides canariensis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 2, p. 38, 
1920. 

At some of the stations about the Falklands this species is very 

common and seems to be typical of the species as figured by 

d'Orbigny. It is much closer to his type figures than are many of 

the later figures given by other authors and referred to his species. 

Family MILIOLIDAE 
Genus QUINQUELOCULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

QUINQUELOCULINA FUSCA H. B. Brady 

Piath 1, Figures 9 a-c 

QuinquelocuUna fusca Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 23, 1929. 

It might be supposed that this arenaceous species would be most 
abundant in the cold water toward the south, but the only specimens 
of arenaceous Miliolidae found belong to this species, which occurs 
only at station 1, in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. None of the other are- 
naceous species so common in the West Indian region occurs here, so 
far as our material shows. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

QUINQUELOCULINA CANDEIANA d'Orbigny 

Plate 1, Figxxkes 10 a-c 

QumquelocuUna candeiana Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 27, 1929. 
The only previous records for this species are those by d'Orbigny, 
from the West Indian region, and later from the Tortugas and Porto 
Rico. It is not surprising, therefore, to find the species in its typical 
form at stations 1 and 2 in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 

QUINQUELOCULINA LAMARCKIANA d'Orbigny 

Plate 1, Figures 7 a-c 

QuiiiquelocuUna lamarckiana Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 26, 
1929. 

This species was found only at stations 1 and 8. It is common in 
the West Indian region but is also widely distributed elsewhere. 
Our specimens fit d'Orbigny's species, and it is apparent that his 
Quinqueloculina Tnagellmiica is also a synonym of this species, prob- 
ably representing a southward expansion of it into colder water. 

QUINQUELOCULINA ISABELLEI d'Orbigny 

Plate 1, Figures 11 a^c; Plate 2, Figures 2 a-c 

Quinqueloculina isabellei d'Orbigny, Voyage dans I'Am^rique M6rldionale, vol. 
5, pt. 5, " Foraminferes," p. 74, pi. 4, figs. 17-19, 1839. 

Test about twice as long as broad but compressed, in end view the 
lateral chambers projecting only slightly beyond the two outer 
chambers, which are more or less in one plane; chambers distinct, 
inflated; sutures distinct, depressed; wall smooth and glossy; aper- 
ture large, with a slight lip and a very large tooth, which in side 
view projects well above the outline of the chamber and in end view 
nearly fills the opening. 

D'Orbigny's original material of this species was from the coast 
of Patagonia. It occurs very well developed in the region of the 
Falklands and also along the Argentine (Patagonian) coast. There 
are much smaller specimens, which may possibly be variants of this 
species, from the stations off the coast of Brazil, but the species is 
only well developed in the colder waters to the south. The peculiar 
ivory-white color, the glossy surface, and the contour of the chambers 
will distinguish this species, which is apparently localized about the 
southern coast of South America. 



AHT. 3 SOUTH AMERICAlSr FORAMINIFEEA — CUSHMAN" AND PARKER 5 

QUINQUELOCULINA LAEVIGATA d'Orbigny 

Plate 1, Figures 5, 6 

QuinquelocuUna laevigata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 30, 1929. 
There are numerous specimens from the stations along the Brazil- 
ian coast that are referable to this species, which is a typically West 
Indian one. 

QUINQUELOCULINA COSTATA d'Orblgny 

Plate 1, Figures 8 (i-c 

QuinquelocuUna costata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 31, 1929. 
As might be expected, this species, which is a common West Indian 
one, occurs only in our material from Rio de Janeiro Harbor, and 
there it is rather rare. 

Genus TRILOCULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

TRILOCULINA CIRCULARIS Bornemann 

Plate 1, Figures 12 a-c 

TrilocuUna circularis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 58, 1929. 

This species, which is very widely distributed, occurs in consider- 
able numbers at the stations off the Falklands and northward along 
the coast of Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 

Genus PYRGO Defrance, 1824 

PYRGO SUBSPHAERICA (d'Orbigny) 

Plate 1, Figures 13 a, 6 

Pyrgo sulsphaerica Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 68, 1929. 

This species, which is so abundant in shallow water in the West 
Indian region, appears to be very rare along the coast of South 
America. There are specimens from Rio de Janeiro Harbor, which 
may possibly be assigned to it, and also from station 8. 

Family OPHTHALMIDIIDAE 
Genus CORNUSPIRA Schultze, 1854 

CORNUSPIRA INVOLVENS Reuss 
Plate 2, Figure 1 

Cornuspira involvens Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 80, 1929. 

A large proportion of our stations have this species present in few 
numbers. The only one at which it could be considered common is 
station 105, Port William, Falklands. 



6 PEOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. SO 

Genus PLANISPIRINA Seguenza, 1880 

PLANISPIRINA AURICULATA Egger 
Plate 2, FiGtrRE 3 

Planispirina auriculata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 93, 1929. 
There is a single specimen, which is like those found in the West 
Indian region and also in the Indo-Pacific, from station 8. This ex- 
tends the western-Atlantic range of the species from the region of 
Beaufort, S. C, on the north, to this station on the south. It is never 
found apparently in any great numbers in the Atlantic, and its small 
size also makes it rather easily overlooked. 

Family TROCHAMMINIDAE 
Genus TROCHAMMINA Parker and Jones, 1860 

TROCHAMMINA GLOBIGERINIFORMIS (Parker and Jones) 

Plate 2, Figures 4 Or-c 

Trochammina gloMgeriniformis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 2, 
p. 78, 1920. 

There are numerous specimens that may be referred to this species, 
but, like the figured one, they are mostly compressed, and while the 
chambers themselves are more or less globular, the entire test does 
not have the high spire often characteristic of the species. The 
figured specimen is from off St. Julian, Argentina, and we have 
other specimens from the northward at stations 8 and 2. 

TROCHAMMINA ROTALIFORMIS J. Wright 

Plate 2, Figures 5 a-c 

Trochammina rotaliformis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 2, p. 77, 1920. 

A few specimens similar to that here figured, composed of several 
coils with four or five chambers in each, are referred to this species. 
They are from off the Falkland Islands. 

TROCHAMMINA PERUVIANA Cushman and Kcllett 

Plate 2, Figures 7 a-c 

Trochammina peruviana Cushman and KEaLLETT, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, 
art. 25, p. 4, pi. 1, figs. 8a, ft, 1929. 

Test trochoid, spire greatly flattened, dorsally very slightly con- 
vex, ventrally slightly concave, consisting of three or four whorls; 
chambers numerous, 10 or more in the last-formed whorl, of rather 
uniform size and shape, increasing slowly in size as added ; sutures on 



ABT. S SOUTH AMERICAN FORAMINIPERA CUSHMAN AND PARKER / 

the dorsal side gently curved, very slightly depressed, only those of 
the last-formed whorl distinct, on the ventral side gently curved or 
with a sinuous, lobed condition, especially in later portions, distinct ; 
wall finely arenaceous with much chitin, thin, very flexible when wet ;, 
aperture ventral, along the margin of the last-formed chamber. 

The above description, which is copied from the original, applies 
equally well to our specimens from station 2, off Ilha Paqueta, Rio 
de Janeiro Harbor. The jDeculiar sinuous arrangement of the ventral 
side is perhaps not quite so marked as in the types from off Peru, 
but otherwise the specimens agree very well with the types. 

Family LAGENIDAE 
Genus NODOSARIA Lamarck, 1812 

NODOSARIA CALOMORPHA Reuss(?) 

Plate 3, Figukes 1, 2 

Nodosaria calomorpha Reuss, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 25, p. 129, 
pi. 1, figs. 15-19, 1885. 

At numerous stations from station 8 southward to the Falklands 
there occur numerous fragmentary specimens, never consisting of 
more than three chambers, which may be referred with some question 
to this species of Reuss. The chambers, as shown in the figured ones, 
are somewhat longer than broad, and the sides are broadest in 
the middle. The one with three chambers shows that it comes from 
a specimen that had at least two other chambers, and it is probable 
that this does not represent very closely Reuss's species from the 
Tertiary of Europe, but it is not sufficiently complete for full descrip- 
tion. Our specimens are exactly identical with those figured by 
Brady in the Challenger report under this name. 

NODOSARIA CATESBYI d'Orbigny 

Plate 3, Figures 3, 4 

Nodosaria cateshyi d'Orbigny, in De la Sagra, Hist. Fis. Pol. Nat. Cuba, " For- 
aminiferes," p. 16, pi. 1, figs. 8-10, 1839. — Cushman, Florida State Geol. 
Surv. Bull. 4, p. 28, pi. 5, fig. 4, 1930. 

Nodosaria sp. (?) Cushman, Carnegie lust. Washington Publ. 311, p. 32, pi. 4, 
fig. 2, 1922. 

Test composed of two chambers, the proloculum subglobular, with a 
short basal spine, the second chamber more pyriform, apertural 
end somewhat prolonged; suture distinct and depressed; wall orna- 
mented with numerous, very distinct costae, which extend the entire 
length of the two chambers to the aperture. 



8 PEOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

This species, described by d'Orbigny from the West Indian region, 
has been found to be common in that area, and also is found in the 
Miocene of Florida. In the present collections it occurred in con- 
siderable numbers at station 8 but was not seen elsewhere. 

Genus LAGENA Walker and Jacob, 1798 

LAGENA ASPERA Rcoss 

Plate 3, Figtjbe 7 

Lagena aspera Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 4, p. 8, 1923. 
This species is rare at station 97, Port William, Falklands. 

LAGENA CAUDATA (d'Orbigrny) 

Plate 3, Figure 9 

Oolina caudata d'Orbigny, Voyage dans rAmerique M^rldionale, vol. 5, pt. 5, 

" Foraminlf^res," p. 19, pi. 5, fig. 6, 1839. 
Lagena caudata Reuss, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 325, pi. 6, 

fig. 29, 1862. 

D'Orbigny's original specimens came from the Falkland Islands 
and the coast of Patagonia. His figure shows a pyriform specimen 
with numerous costae and with the base ending in a definite spine. 
Our figured specimen, which is from station 8 off the South American 
coast, resembles d' Orbigny's in the longitudinal costae and the basal 
spine, but the shape of the test is quite different. This is the only 
material in the collection that at all approaches this species. 

LAGENA PERLUCIDA (Montagu) 

Plate 3, Figure 6 

Lagena perlucida Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 4, p. 46, 1923. 

This is by far the commonest species of the genus in the present 
collections, occurring in considerable numbers at Port Stanley, Falk- 
lands, and as scattered specimens at other stations in that region, 
as well as stations 8 and 2 to the northward. As usual there is con- 
siderable variation in the shape and costae in this species. 

LAGENA LYELLI (Segwenza) 
Plate 3, Figure 8 

Lagena lyelli Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 4, p. 34, 1923. 

At station 8 there are numerous specimens of the form here figured 
that may be referred to Seguenza's species. There is a slight basal 



ART. 3 SOUTH AMEEICAN FOEAMINIFEEA GUSH MAN AND PARKER 9 

spine. The main body of the test is globular, and there are a few 
faint, longitudinal costae. 

LAGENA VILARDEBOANA (d'Orbieny) 

Plate 3, Figure 5 

Oolina vilardeboana d'Orbigny, Voyage daus TAinerique M6ridionale, vol. 5, pt. 

5, " Foraminifeies," p. 19, pi. 5, figs. 4, 5, 1839. 
Laffcna vilardeboana Retjss, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 329, pi. 

4, fig. 53, 1862. 

The types of this species were described by d'Orbigny from the 
Falkland Islands. His figures show a single chamber with very 
strong, longitudinal costae, very similar to those in our figure. 
These costae are blunt as shown in his partial section. In our speci- 
mens there seem to be distinct and rather coarse perforations between 
the costae. These are referred to d'Orbigny's species and are from 
the Falklands at Port William. 

LAGENA MELD (d'Orbigny) 

Lagena melo Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 4, p. 38, 1923. 

D'Orbigny originally described this species from the Falkland Is- 
lands, and we have specimens both from the Falklands from Port 
William, and from station 123, St. Julian, Argentina, which are 
exactly like the figured spocimens given by d'Orbigny. Most of the 
figured forms referred to this species are not typical, and many 
of them seem best referred to Williamson's species, which he figured 
from off the British Isles. It may be possible that the typical 
Lagena melo is only to be found in the vicinity of the Falklands and 
the southern part of South America. 

Family POLYMORPHINIDAE 

Genus GUTTULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

GUTTULINA LACTEA (Walker and Jacob) 

Plate 3, Figures 10, 11 

OuttuHna lacteo- Cushman and Ozawa, Proc. V. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 77, art. 6, 
p. 43, 1930. 

There are a few specimens from Rio de Janeiro Harbor, adult and 

young of which are figured here. These seem to correspond closely 

with the typical form of the species, which is widely distributed in 

the present oceans. 

68198—31 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. sO 

Family NONIONIDAE 
Genus NONION Montfort, 1808 

NONION GRATELOUPI (d'Orbigny) 

PLATE] 2, Figures 6 a, 6 

Nonian grateloupi Cxtshman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 10. 1930. 

There are numerous specimens of this West Indian species from 
the three stations in Rio de eTaneiro Hai-bor, but it has not occurred 
in any of the material from the region to the south. 

Genus ELPHIDIUM Montfort, 1808 

ELPHIDIUM POEYANUM (d'Orbigny) 

Elphidium poeyanum Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 25, 1930. 

This species is the most abundant one in the West Indian region, 
and it is therefore not surprising to find that it is common at all three 
of the stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. These specimens are typi- 
cal and show the very prominently perforate wall and the short retral 
processes. It seems to be replaced in the colder water to the south 
by the following species, 

ELPHIDIUM ARTICULATUM (d'Orbigrny) 

Elphidium articulatum Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 26, 1930. 

D'Orbigny described this species from " the coast of Patagonia, 
near Rio Negro, and also from the Falklands." It is fairly common 
off the Falklands in shallow water and also occurs off St. Julian, 
Argentina, and off Puerto Deseado, Argentina. These stations cor- 
respond exactly with the distribution of the species as given by 
d'Orbigny. This may be distinguished from E. foeyanum by the 
highly polished and very finely perforate wall, the perforations being 
so small that the wall appears entirely clear in many specimens. 

ELPHIDIUM INCERTUM (Williamson) 

Elphidium incertum Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 18, 1930. 

A very few specimens in the collections from South America may 
be referred to Williamson's species. They are not typical, however, 
and possibly may have to be referred elsewhere. 

ELPHroiUM SAGRUM (d'Orbigny) 

Elphidium sagrum Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 24, 1930. 

The only specimen that can be referred to this West Indian species 
is a single one from Rio de Janeiro Harbor. This specimen is typical, 



ART. 3 SOUTH AMERICAN FORAMINIFEEA — CUSHMAN AND PARKER 1 1 

however, in its general form and in the heav3^ somewhat costate, 
appearance of the early part of the last-formed coil. So far as the 
examination of West Indian material shows, this species is never an 
abundant one, but is nevertheless widely distributed in this warmer 
area of the western Atlantic. 

ELPHroiUM LESSONII (d'Orbigny) 

Elvhidium lessonii Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 22, 1930. 

This is one of the finest species of the genus, very abundant and 
well developed in the general region of the Falklands, occurring at 
Port William, Port Stanley, and Port Howard. There are also typi- 
cal specimens from Puerto Deseado, Argentina. D'Orbigny's original 
type locality is given as the " coast of Patagonia, to the south of Rio 
Negro." His type specimen was not apparently a completely adult 
form, but represents a young stage frequently seen with the others in 
our collections. In the adult form this is a very beautifully sculp- 
tured species and can hardly be confused with any other one of the 
genus. So far as is known it is limited to the general region of the 
Falklands and southern South America. It may be noted that 
Brady's figure in the Challenger report (pi. 110, fig. 9) is probably 
this species. This particular figured specimen was from the Falk- 
lands. 

ELPHIDIUM OWENIANUM (d'Orbigny) 

Elphidium owenianum Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 21, 1930. 

D'Orbigny described this species from off the " coast of Patagonia, 
to the south of Rio Negro." It may be distinguished from the 
others of the region by the thickening of the umbilical region, very 
distinct sutures, and the subacute margin. We have specimens from 
the Falklands at Port Howard and Port William, and it also occurs 
off Puerto Deseado, Argentina. It is not nearly so common as the 
preceding species. 

ELPHmiUM cf. ADVENUM (Cushman) 

Elphidium cf. advenum Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 25, 1930. 

The only specimens that can be referred to tliis species occur in 
the warm water of Rio de Janeiro Harbor. This species is typically 
a warm- water one of the West Indies and occurs also as far back as 
the Miocene of the Florida region. Some of the specimens of the 
following species somewhat resemble this, but the umbonal portion 
of E. advenum is very distinct, with a definite boss in its typical 
form, whereas the central region of E. alvarezianum is excavated and 
without any central boss. 



12 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

ELPHIDIUM ALVAREZIANUM (d'Orbigny) 

Elphidium alvaresianum, Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 7, p. 18, 1930. 
This is one of the distinctive species of the Falklands and southern 
South America, recorded from both regions by d'Orbigny in his 
original description. Besides the typical form the following variety 
occurs in the region of the Falklands: 

ELPHIDIUM ALVAREZIANUM (d'Orbigny) SERRULATUM, new variety 

Pr^TB 2, Figures i) a, h 

Variety differing from the typical in the character of the periphery, 
which has definite toothlike projections, in the extreme form having 
each projection opposite the chambers divided into numerous serra- 
tions. Specimens connecting this variety with the typical form occur 
in which the spinose projections are simple. 

Holotype of variety (U.S.N.M. No. 21932) from station 97, Port 
William, Falkland Islands, collected by Dr. Waldo L. Schmitt. 

In its fully developed form this is a very beautiful variety and 
unlike any other form known to us. It is, however, very definitely 
related to d'Orbigny's species. 

ELPHroiUM AUSTRALIS, new species 

Plate 2, Figures 8 a, V 

Test planispiral, nearly completely involute, the periphery very 
broadly rounded, and in the last- formed portion almost truncate; 
chambers very distinct, 12 to 15 in the last-formed coil, of nearly uni- 
form shape and increasing only slightly in size as added; sutures 
deep, very distinct; retral processes very short and often incon- 
spicuous; wall of the main bod}^ of the chamber smooth except in the 
early portion of the last-formed coil, where it is often roughened by 
small papillae arranged more or less in longitudinal lines in the plane 
of coiling, unbonal region also strongly papillate; aperture consisting 
of numerous small circular pores at the base of the apertural face, 
which is smooth, with a distinct border about its periphery. Diameter, 
0.5-0.6 mm. ; thickness, 0.25 mm. 

Holotype (U.S.N.M. No. 21933) from station 80, Port Stanley, 
Falkland Islands, collected by Dr. Waldo L. Schmitt. 

This species was common at the type station but did not occur at 
any of the other stations in the entire collection. It is a very distinct 
and unmistakable species and apparently of very limited distribution. 



ABT. 3 SOUTH AMERICAISr FOEAMINIFEBA — CUSHMAN AND PARKER 13 

Family BULIMINIDAE 
Genus BULIMINELLA Cushman, 1911 

BULIMINELLA ELEGANTISSIMA (d'Orbigny) 

Plate 3. Figures 32. 13 

BuVunina elcyanlisshna d'Orbigny, Voyage dans I'Aiiierique M6i'idiouale, vol. 5, 
no. 5, " Foraminiferes," p. 51, pi. 7, ligs. 13, 14, 1839.— ScHLUMBEKGEaj, 
Feuille Jeun. Nat., vol. 12, p. 8, pi. 1, fig. 14, 1882.— H. B. Beady, Rep. Voy. 
Challenger, Zoology, vol. 9, p. 402, pi. 50, figs. 20-22, 1884.— Sidebottom, 
Mem. Pi-oc. Manchester Lit. I'hllos. Soc, vol. 49, no. 5, p. 11, pi. 2, fig. 6, 1905. 

Btilimiiwlla elegantlssima Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 71, pt. 2, p. 89, 1911; 
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 56, p. 606, 1919; Coutr. Cushman Lab. Foram. 
Res., vol. 1, pt. 2, p. 40, pi. 6, figs. 5 a, 6, 1925. — Cushman and Keixettt, 
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, art. 25, p. 6, pi. 3, figs.1-3, 1929.— Cushman, 
Florida State Geol. Surv. Bull. 4, p. 42, pi. 8, figs. 2, 3, 1930. 

Test elongate, spiral, making about three volutions, initial end 
pointed, much more so in the microspheric form ; chambers numerous, 
7 to 10 in the la.st-formed whorl, narrow, slightly inflated; sutures 
distinct, slightly curved, very slightly depre.ssed; wall smooth, 
finely perforate; aperture elongate, narrow, somewhat enlarged 
toward the middle of the apertural face. 

This has proved to be one of the most abundant species in the 
collection, originally described from the west coast of South America, 
where it is also very abundant. Its range includes the Falklands 
and the coast of South America northward as far as our material 
covers, to Rio de Janeiro Harbor, where it also occvirs in typical 
form. Its fossil range goes back at least to the Miocene of Florida, 
where it is extremely common in the Choctawhatchee marl at 
numerous localities. Many other things have been included by 
various authors in this species, but in its typical form it does not 
seem to show any great degree of variation. 

BULIMINELLA PARALLELA. new species 

Plate 3, Figures 15 a-c 

Test elongate, the sides usualW nearly parallel for most of their 
length, both ends broadly rounded, nearly circular in transverse 
section; chambers distinct, in three or more whorls, the spiral suture 
being somewhat irregularly crenulate, several chambers, five or more, 
in each whorl, not much if at all inflated; sutures distinct, slightly 
limbate, flush with the surface; wall smooth and polished, very finely 
perforate ; aperture rounded with very slightly raised costae running 
in toward it on the surrounding depressed area. Length, 0.25 mm.; 
breadth, 0.08-0.1 mm. 

Holotype (U.S.N.M. No. 21934) from station 2 off Ilha Paqueta,.. 
Rio de Janeiro Harbor, collected by Dr. Waldo L. Schmitt. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. SO 

This species has been referred to B. elegantisshna by some authors 
and is closely related to the form described by Millett from the 
Malay Archipelago, as B. elegantisslma var. c077ipressa. The form 
that Millett assigns to B. elegantissima is also very close to our 
species. 

Genus BULIMINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

BULIMINA PATAGONICA d'Orbigny 

Pl.\te 3, Figure 14 

Bulimma pat agon ica d'Orbigny, Voyage dans rAin^rique M^ridionale, vol. 5, 
pt. 5, " Foraminif^res," p. 50, pi. 1, figs. 8, t), 1839.— Cushman and 
WiCKENDEN, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, p. 8, pi. 3, figs. 11 a, h, 1929.— 
Cushman and Kellett, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, art. 25, p. 7, pi. 3, 
figs. 4 a, h, 1929. 

There are a very few specimens that seem to be the same as that 
described by d'Orbigny and that have been recorded in the above 
references from the west coast of South America. The specimens 
we have, one of which is here figured, show the irregularity of the 
last-formed chambers, very similar to the type specimen figured by 
d'Orbigny. This seems to be a characteristic feature of the species. 

BULIMINA MARGINATA d'Orbigny 

BuUmina marginata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 3, p. 91, 1922. 

There are a few specimens, all from the three stations in Rio de 
Janeiro Harbor, that seem best referred to this species. They have 
the small teeth along the margin definitely at the margin and not 
above it, as in d'Orbigny's B. pidchella. 

Genus ENTOSOLENIA Ehrenberg, 1848 

ENTOSOLENIA COMPRESSA (d'Orbigny) 

Plate 3, Figure 10 

Oolina comprcsaa d'Orbigny, Voyage dans rA.merlque M<^ridionale, vol. 5, pt. 5, 
" Foraminif&res," p. 19, pi. 5, figs. 1. 2, 1839. 

Under this specific name d'Orbignj^ described a compressed Lagena- 
like form from the Falklands and the coast of Patagonia. He noted 
that it is very rare. We have a very similar form, in which the pe- 
riphery has a blunt, thickened keel and there is a definite internal 
tube, placing this species in Entosolenia. Our specimens were from 
the Falklands at Port Howard and Port William. 



ART. 3 SOUTH AMERICAN FORAMINIFERA — CUSH MAN" AND PARKER 15 

ENTOSOLENIA IOTA (Cushman)(7) 

Plate 3, Figube 17 

Entosolenia iota Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. B\ill. 104, pt. 4, p. 27, 192:i. 

A very few specimens from the Falklands have a peculiar curved 
thickness resembling very much the species described under this 
specific name from the North Atlantic. The shape, however, is not 
exactly the same, and it may be found not to be this species when 
further material is available. 

ENTOSOLENIA sp.(?) 

Plate 3, Figure IS 

A figure is given showing tlie peculiar small species with an internal 
tube, whicli lias a very broad aperture with a decided short neck 
and phialine lip. It is figured here for future reference. 

Genus VIRGULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

VIRGULINA PUNCTATA d'Orbigmy 

VirguUna punctata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. BuU. 10-i, pt. 3, p. 117, 1922. 

Very rare specimens, which are identical with this species so com- 
mon in the general West Indian region, occur at all three of the sta- 
tions in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 

There are single specimens from three stations off the Falklands 
which represent species belonging to this genus, but they are evidently 
the young stages, and therefore are not specifically determinable. 

Genus BOLIVINA d'Orbigny, 18.39 

BOLIVINA PULCHELLA (d'Orbigny) 

Plate 3, Figuee 20 

Bolivina pulchella Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 3, p. 41, 1922. 

There are a few very typical specimens of this species from two of 
the stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. This is, however, a typically 
West Indian species confined to this region of the w^estern Atlantic. 

BOLIVINA PLICATELLA Cushman 

Plate 3, Figitre 19 

Bolivina plicatella Cushman, Florida State Geol. Surv, Bull. 4, p. 46, pi. 8, figs. 
10 a, b, 1930. 

Test small, short and broad, compressed, greatest width near the 
apertural end, periphery subacute; chambers, except the last two, 
obscured by the ornamentation, which also obscures the sutures; wall 



16 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

ornamented by two distinct longitudinal ridges, rounded or sharp, 
connected between with transverse ridges, coinciding partially with 
the chambers, leaving the whole surface broken into series of irregu- 
lar depressions, coarsely perforate; aperture elongate. 

This species, recently described from the Miocene of the Choctaw- 
hatchee marl of Florida, occurs also living in the West Indian 
region, and specimens occur as far south as the Falklands, including 
Rio de Janeiro Harbor and the coast of Argentina. 

Heron-Allen and Earland have given a new name to a closely 
related form that occurs off the coast of Europe. Both of these 
species have been for a long time classed with d'Orbigny's B. plicata^ 
w^hich is a very different species occurring off the western coasts of 
North and South America. 

BOLIVINA STRIATULA Gushman 
PiuATB 3, FrouREs 21 a, h 

BoUvina striaUila Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 3, p. 43, 1922. 

Like many others of the typical West Indian species, this one 
occurs in considerable numbers at all three stations in Rio de Janeiro 
Harbor, but nowhere else in the collections to the southward. Speci- 
mens are well developed and typical. 

BOLIVINA TORTUOSA H. B. Brady 

Plate 3, Figukes 22 a, 6 

BoUvina tortuosa Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 3, p. 49, 1922. 

There are two specimens of this species from one of the stations in 
Rio de Janeiro Harbor. Neither of these is apparently an adult 
specimen, but they resemble the Atlantic form of the species much 
more than the Pacific one. 

BOLIVINA sp.(?) 

Plate 3, Figures 2S a, b 

The figured specimen shows a peculiar small species, which oc- 
curred rarely in the material from Rio de Janeiro Harbor, and with- 
out a larger series it can not be definitely assigned a specific name. 

Genus LOXOSTOMUM Ehrenberg, 1854 

LOXOSTOMUM MAYORI (Cushman) 

Plate 3, Figure 24 

Bolipina mayori Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 3, p. 40, 1922. 

Very excellent and typical specimens of this species occur in con- 
siderable numbers in the collection from Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 



ART. 3 SOUTH AMERICAN FORAMINIFERA — CUSHMAN AND PARKER 17 

It is a characteristic West Indian species, and some of the Brazilian 
specimens reach a size nearly as great as that of those specimens 
found off the Tortngas, Fla., the type locality. The last chambers 
have the aperture terminal and show a tendency toward becoming 
imiserial, characters that place this species in the genus Loxostom/wm. 

Genus SIPHOGENERINA Schlumberger, 1883 

SIPHOGENERINA cf. RAPHANUS (Parker and Jones) 

Plate 3, Figures 25, 26 

Siphogenerina cf. raphanus Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 4, p. 174, 
1923. 

The Atlantic material of this species is never so well developed as 
is that form found in the Indo-Pacific. Forms assigned to this 
species occur rarely in the West Indian region, and there are a few 
specimens from all three of the stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 
The aperture is always large, and there is no definite neck produced 
as in the Indo-Pacific form. The costae are limited to the early 
portion of the test as a rule and are not so well developed as in the 
typical form. 

Genus ANGULOGERINA Cushman, 1927 

ANGULOGERINA OCCIDENTALIS (Cushman) 

Umfferina angulosa Cushman (not Williamson), Carnegie Inst. Washington 

Publ. 311, p. 34, pi. 5, figs. 3, 4, 1922. 
TJvigerina occidentalis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 4, p. 169, 1923. 
Angulogerina occidentalis (Cushman), Florida State Geol. Surv. Bull. 4, p. 50, 

pi. 9, figs. 8, 9, 1930. 

Test minute, elongate, triangular in transverse section, the periph- 
ery somewhat lobulate; chambers distinct, those of the last-formed 
portion becoming more distinct and remote; sutures distinct and 
depressed; wall ornamented with longitudinal costae on all but the 
last-formed chambers in the adult; apertural end drawn out into a 
short tubular neck and slight phialine lip. 

This species is known from the Miocene of the Florida region, 
and also is living in the general West Indian area. Our material 
shows it to be present at all three of the stations in Rio de Janeiro 
Harbor, but its range does not extend to the collections made to the 
southward. 



18 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 8Q 

Family ROTALIIDAE 
Genus SPIRILLINA Ehrenberg, 1841 

SPIRILLINA VIVIPARA Ehrenberg var. DENSEPUNCTATA Cushman 

Plate 4, Figukes 1 a-c 

Spirillina vivipara var. densepunctata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 
8, pp. 4, 5, 1931. 

Figures are given of this somewhat trochoid form recently de- 
scribed from Porto Rico. The few specimens in our material came 
from the stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor, showing that this variety 
is probably to be found throughout the general West Indian area. 
The perforations are usually numerous and closely placed, and in 
spite of being a planispiral form, there is a tendency for it to become 
trochoid. 

Genus PATELLINA Williamson, 1858 

PATELLINA CORRUGATA WiUiamson 
Plate 4, Figuee 2 

Patellina corrugata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 11, 12, 1931. 

Specimens that seem to be identical with those described by Wil- 
liamson and others from off Great Britain occur in the material from 
Port William, Falklands. They have, as is shown in the figure, a low 
spire and coarse divisions of the chambers. They do not occur in the 
warmer water to the northward. 

PATELLINA ADVENA Cushman 
Plate 4, Figitbe 3 

Patellina advena Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, p. 13, 1931. 

Typical specimens with the very finely divided chambers and rather 
high spire occur in two of the lots of material from Rio de Janeiro 
Harbor. The appearance of these two species under the microscope 
is very distinct, and their distribution is apparently equally distinc- 
tive, P. advena being a warmer water species, while P. corrugata is 
laiown only from cold waters. 

Genus DISCORBIS Lamarck, 1804 

DISCORBIS FLORmANA Cushman 

Plate 4, Figures 5 Or-c 

Discorbis floridana Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 21, 22, 1931. 

A few specimens, which seem to be identical with this species, 

occur at the various stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. One of the 



ABT. 3 SOUTH AMERICAN FORAMINIFEKA GUSH MAN AND PARKER 19 

small specimens is here figured, which, although not quite typical, 
is probably to be assigned to this species. 

DISCORBIS MFRA Cushman 

Dlscorbis mira Ctishman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 25, 26, 1931. 

A very few but very typical specimens occur in Rio de Janeiro 
Harbor. As this is typically a West Indian species, it would not be 
expected in the colder-water material. 

DISCORBIS CANDEIANA (d'Orbigny) 

DiscorMs candeiana Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, p. 19, 1931. 

There are rare specimens of this species described by d'Orbigny 
from the West Indies occurring with the preceding species. 

DISCORBIS NITIDA (Williamson) 

Plate 4, Figures 4 a-c 

DiSGorlis nitida Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 26, 27, 1931. 

The figured specimen shows a typical specimen of a form that 
is here assigned to Williamson's species. It shows some differences, 
in that our form usually has fewer chambers, and the ventral por- 
tion has a somewhat more lobed appearance. Otherwise, however, 
it seems to be very close to this species as developed off the British 
Isles, and a comparison of specimens from the two areas shows very 
little difference, except in the points noted. Our specimens are most 
abundant at the three stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor, but some- 
what similar ones occur at Port William in the Falklands, this being 
one of the few forms which occurs in the two areas. 

Genus EPONIDES Montfort, 1808 

EPONIDES PERUVIANUS (d'Orbiffny) 

Rosalina peruviana d'Orbigny, Voyage dans I'Am^rique Meridiouale, vol. 5, 

pt. 5, " Foraminiferes," p. 35, pi. 2, figs, a-5, 1839. 
Eponides peruviana Cushman and Kei.lett, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, art. 

25, p. 10, pi. 4, figs. 5a-c, 1929. 

Test trochoid, nearly equally biconvex, periphery carinate, gener- 
ally circular in outline; chambers numerous, distinct, about eight in 
the last-formed whorl, on the dorsal side forming a very even, 
polished surface, ventrally inflated, giving a very distinct appearance 
to the test ; sutures very distinct on the dorsal side, curved, flush with 
the surface, slightly limbate, on the ventral side radial, depressed; 
wall smooth, very finely perforate ; aperture ventral, at the base of the 
chamber between the periphery and the umbilicus. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

The original material of d'Orbigny came from the west coast of 
South America, and apparently has a wide distribution along that 
coast. A comparison of material from Chile and Peru, described in 
the above reference, with the abundant material from along the coast 
of South America and the Falklands, seems to show that they are 
the same. D'Orbigny's Rotalina 'patagonica shows no trace of the 
granulations in the sutures, but in the general form and appearance 
it is very similar to much of the material occurring at the Falklands 
and off the coast of Argentina, as well as northward at Rivadavia, 
Brazil. D'Orbigny's figure of E. peruviana shows a form with more 
numerous chambers and an acute periphery, the chambers on the 
dorsal side limbate and on the ventral side radial and straight. An 
examination of a great many specimens from both sides of South 
America leaves one somewhat confused as to the name that should 
be applied to these specimens. There seem to be gradations be- 
tween them in several respects. Many of the specimens from the 
Falklands, for instance, have the same number of chambers and a 
rounded periphery similar to d'Orbigny's ^''fatagonica^'' but the 
sutures are always practically radial, have a distinct depressed area, 
which is finely granular, and frequently have along the periphery a 
distinct, thickened, keel-like appearance. Probably the only way to 
finally determine the status of these two species is to examine the 
type specimens in the original d'Orbigny collection. 

Genus ROTALIA Lamarck, 1804 

ROTALIA BECCARII (Linnaeus) var, PARKINSONIANA (d'Orbigny) 

Rosalina parhinsoniana d'Orbigny, Hist. Fis. Pol. Nat. Cuba, " Foraminiferes," 

p. 99, pi. 4, figs. 25-27, 1839. 
Rotalia heccarii (Linnaeus) var, parkinsoniana (d'Orbigny), Cushman and 

Cole, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 6, p. 100, pi. 13, figs. 14 a-c, 

1930. 

In the West Indian region there is a distinctive form of Rotalia 
to which d'Orbigny gave the specific name " parkinsoniana.^^ This is 
apparently living, widely spread in the general West Indian region, 
and from our material extends southward as far as Rio de Janeiro 
Harbor, where it is common at all three stations. The same form 
has been recorded in the above reference from the Pleistocene of 
Maryland. 

Genus CANCRIS Montfort, 1808 

CANCRIS SAGRA (d'Orbigny) 

Cancris sagra Cushman, U, S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 74, 75, 1931. 

There are numerous, very typical specimens of this West Indian 
species from all the stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor, The series 



AKT. 3 SOUTH AMEEICAN FOEAMINIFERA CUSH MAN AND PARKER 21 

shows the same general variation of form that is seen in West Indian 
material and also in that from the Miocene of both Florida and 
California. 

Genus SIPHONINA Reuss, 1849 

SIPHONINA PULCHRA Cushman 

Siphonina pulchra Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, p. 69, 1931. 

There were two specimens of this species noted occurring in one 
of the stations in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. 

Family CASSIDULINIDAE 
Genus PULVINULINELLA Cushman, 1926 

PULVINULINELLA EXIGUA (H. B. Brady) 

Pulvinulina exigua H. B. Brady, Rep. Voy. Challenger, Zoology, vol. 9, p. 696, 
pi. 103, figs. 13, 14, 1884. 

Brady's small species evidently belongs to the genus PulvinuUnella- 
Its aperture is in the plane of coiling and is elongate. It is interest- 
ing to find that the two figured specimens in the Challenge?' report 
are one from the South Atlantic and the other marked " Southern 
Ocean." We have numerous specimens of very small size, comparing 
very well with Brady's figures, from several stations in the Falkland 
Islands. 

Genus CASSIDULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

CASSIDULINA CRASSA d'Orbigmy 

Plate 4, Figxjres 6 a, & 

Cassidulina crassa Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 3, p. 124, 1922. 

D'Orbigny's types of this species came from the general region of 
our collections, and very typical specimens occur in the material 
from Port William, Falkland Islands. We have also other speci- 
mens that are very similar, and perhaps identical, from the stations 
in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. There are no sizable specimens present 
in any of the collections, but from Earland we have received some 
very fine large specimens of this same general form from off the 
Falklands in deeper water. 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80: art. 3 

Genus CASSIDULINOIDES Cushman, 1927 

CASSIDULINOIDES PAKKERIANA (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 4, Figures 7 a, 6 

Cassidulina parJceriana H. B. Beady, Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci., vol. 21, p. 59, 1881 ; 
Rep. Voy. Challenger, Zoology, vol. 9, p. 432, pi. 54, figs. 11-16, 1884. 

All three of the Challenger stations from which Brady had this 
species are " amongst the islands on the west coast of Patagonia." 
These stations are in much deeper water than is represented b}^ our 
material. We have very typical specimens from Port William, Falk- 
land Islands, but comparatively rare. 

Family ANOMALINIDAE 
Genus CIBICIDES Montfort, 1808 

CIBICmES ROBERTSONIANA (H. B. Brady) 

Cibicides robertsoniana Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 121, 122, 
1931. 
Very rare specimens showing the typical color and form of this 
species occurred in material from Rio de Janeiro Harbor. There are 
other records for the species from off the coast of Brazil. It was 
found in the Albatross dredgings from the western Atlantic, and 
seems to be a very distinct species of that part of the world. 

CIBICmES CONCENTRICUS (Cushman) 

Cibicides concentricus Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 120, 121, 
1931. 

This is one of the species originally described from the Miocene of 
Florida, and later has been found to be fairly common, living off the 
Florida coast and elsewhere in the West Indian region. A few 
typical specimens occurred at station 8 in Rio de Janeiro Harbor, 
thus extending very much to the southward the known range of this 
species. 

Genus DYOCIBICIDES Cushman and Valentine, 1930 

DYOCIBICIDES BISERIALIS Cushman and Valentine 

Plate 4, Figure 8 

Dyocibicides biserialis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 8, pp. 126, 127, 
1931. 
All stages from the coiled young to the biserial adult were found 
in the material from Port William. One of these is figured. It has 
not, however, occurred at any of the other stations as far as we have 
noted. 



EXPLANATION OF PLATES 
Plate 1 

FiQUKE 1. Proteonina difflugiformis (H. B. Brady), X60. 

2. Olomospira gordialis (Jones and Parker), X60. 

3. Tolypammina vagans (H. B. Brady), X40. 

4a,l>. Hai^lGphragmoides canariensis (d'Orbigny), X60. a, Side view; 
6, peripheral view. 
5, 6. Quinquelooulina laevigata d'Orbigny. a, a, 6, 6, Opposite sides ; c, 
apertural view. Fig. 5, X70. Fig. 6, X150. 

7 a-c. Quinqueloculina lamarcklana d'Orbigny, X40. a, b, Opposite sides; 

c, apertural view. 

8 a-c. Quinqueloculina costata d'Orbigny, X70. a, 6, Opposite sides; c, 

apertural view. 
9 a-c. Quinqueloculina fusca H. B, Brady, X70. a, 6, Opposite sides; 
G, apertural view. 

10 0-0. Quinqueloculina candeiana d'Orbigny, X70. c, 6, Opposite sides; c, 

apertural view. 

11 a-c. Quinqueloculina isabellei d'Orbigny, X40. a, 6, Opposite sides; c, 

apertural view. 

12 a-c. Triloculina circularis Bornemann, X 50. a, 6, Opposite sides ; o, aper- 

tural view. 
13cf, &. Pyrgo subsphaerica (d'Orbigny), X50. o. Front view; 6, apertural 
view. 

Plate 2 

I'lGTOE 1. Cornuspira involvens Reuss, X70. 

2 a-c. Quinqueloculina isabellei d'Orbigny, X40. o, &, Opposite sides; c, 
apertural view. 
3. Planispirina auriculata Egger, X70. 

4 o-c. Trochammina globigeriniformis (Parker and Jones), X60. a, Dor- 

sal view ; 6, ventral view ; c, peripheral view. 

5 a-c. Trochammlna rotaliformis J. Wright, X70. a, Dorsal view; b, ven- 

tral view; c, peripheral view. 
6a,b. Nonion grateloupi (d'Orbigny), XIOO. a, Side view; 6, peripheral 

view. 
7 a-c. Trochammina peruviana Cushman and Kellett, X150. a, Dorsal 

view ; b, ventral view ; c, peripheral view. 
8a,b. Elphidium australis, new species, X60. a, Side view; b, peripheral 

view. 
Sa, 6. Elphidium alvarezianum (d'Orbigny) serr«7a*ttm, new variety, X60. 
a, Side view ; b, peripheral view. 

23 



24 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 : aet. 3 

Plate 3 

FiGTJEES 1,2. Nodosaria calomorpha Reuss (?), X70. 
3,4. Nodosaria catesbyi d'Orbigny, XTO. 

5. Lagena vilardehoana (d'Orbigny), XTO. 

6. Lagena perltioida (Montagu), XlOO. 

7. Lagena aspera Reuss, X70. 

8. Lagena lyelli (Seguenza), X70. 

9. Lagena caudata (d'Orbigny), X70. 

10,11. GiittuUnu lactea (Walker and Jacob), X70. Fig. 10, Early stage.. 

Fig. 11, Adult. 
12,13. BvUminella elegantissima (d'Orbigny), X120. 

14. Bulimina patagonica d'Orbigny, X70. 
15 a-o. BuUminclla purallela, new species, X 150. a, c, Opposite sides;; 

h, apertural view. 

16. Entosolenia compressa (d'Orbigny), X70. 

17. Entosolenia iota (Cushman) (?), X70. 

18. Entosolenia sp. (?), X70. 

19. Bolivina plicatella Cushman, X70. 

20. Bolivina pulchella (d'Orbigny), X70. 

21 a, &. Bolivina striatula Cushman, X150. a, Front view; b, apertural 

view. 

22 o, &. Bolivina tortiiosa H. B. Brady, X150. a, Front view ; b, apertural 

view. 
23a, b. Bolivina sp. (?), X150. o. Front view; b, apertural view. 

24. Loxostomum mayori (Cushman), X50. 
25,26. 8iphogenerina cf. raphanus (Parker and Jones), X60. a, a, Side 
views; b, b, apertural views. 

Plate 4 

FiQUEES 1 a-c. Spirillina vivipara Ehrenberg var. densepunctata Cushman,. 
X 120. a, Dorsal view ; b, ventral view ; c, peripheral view. 

2. Patellina corrugata Williamson, X150. 

3. Patellina advena Cushman, X150. 

4 a-c. Discorbis nitida (Williamson) (?),Xl20. a, Dorsal view; b, 

ventral view ; c, peripheral view. 

5 a-c. Discorbis floiidana Cushman, XlOO. a, Dorsal view; b, ventral 

view ; c, peripheral view. 
6a, b. Cassidulina crassa d'Orhig-ny, XlOO. o. Side view; b, peripheral 

view. 
7 a, b. Cassidulinoides parkeriana (H. B. Brady), X70. a, Side view;: 

b, peripheral view. 
8. Dyocibicides biserialis Cushman and Valentine, X70.. 

o 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 3 PL. 1 




Recent Atlantic Foraminifera from South America 
For explanation of plate see page 23. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 3 PL, 2 




Recent Atlantic foraminifera from South America 

For explanation of plate see page 23. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80, ART. 3 PL. 3 




Recent Atlantic Foraminifera from South America 

For EXPLANATiON OF PLATE SEE PAGE 24. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 3 PL. 4 




Recent Atlantic Foraminifera from South America 
For explanation of plate see page 24 



THE NORTH AMERICAN BEETLES OF THE GENUS 

COCCINELLA 



By Th. Dobzhansky 
California Institute 0/ Technology , Pasadena, Calif. 



The North American species of the genus Coccinella Linnaeus have 
been studied particularly by Casey (1899) and by Leng (1903). The 
results arrived at by these authors are, however, quite different. 
More than twice as many forms are recognized as separate species 
in the Casey revision as in the more recent survey of Leng. A new 
survey of the genus is, therefore, desirable. As shown by my studies 
(1925, 1926) on the palaearctic representatives of the genus Coccinella, 
the structure of the genitalia is a first-class character for the deter- 
mination of the limits of the species in this genus. Consequently, 
the description of the genitalia is made the cornerstone of the present 
study. 

A thorough comparison of the American species of Coccinella with 
Eurasiatic ones seems also very desirable. The genus Coccinella 
(hmited as defined by me, 1925) inhabits chiefly the holarctic region. 
Only a few true Coccinella Kve outside of this region. If the holarctic 
fauna of this genus is properly understood, the world-wide revision 
of the genus may be easily accomplished. 

The present study is based primarily on the examination of the 
collection of the United States National Museum, which was sent to me 
through the kindness of Dr. E. A. Chapin. Besides this, collections 
belonging to the following institutions and individuals were examined : 
American Museum of Natural History, Cornell University, University 
of Minnesota, Indiana University, Illinois State Natural History Sur- 
vey, Cahfornia Academy of Sciences (including collections of E. C. Van 
Dyke, F. E. Blaisdell, E. P. Van Duzee, and others), Citrus Experi- 
ment Station, F. W. Nunenmacher, A. H. Sturtevant, F. T. Scott, and 
P. H. Timberlake. I wish to express my gratitude to the owners and 
to the custodians of these collections for the privilege of examining 
their material. 

No. 2904.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 4 

68143—31 1 1 



Z PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

The geographical distribution of the species of Coccinella is out- 
lined here on the basis of the material personally studied by me. 
The localities are grouped in the sequence from east to west, and from 
north to south. The names of the collectors are indicated only for 
rare or little-known species and for especially interesting finds. 

Genus COCCINELLA Linnaeus 

Body more or less broadly oval, from moderately to very strongly 
convex. Head black, with a yellowish- white spot on each side near 
the eyes, or with a broad transverse white band across the front. 
Antennae longer than the diameter of the eye, with a compact club. 
Antennae and mouth parts dark brown or black, the base of the 
mandible frequently with a white spot; labrum brownish. Pronotum 
black with quadrangular or triangular white markings in the ante- 
rior angles, and in some species also with a white stripe along the 
anterior margin. Underside black, the episterna and the epimera of 
the mesosternum and metasternum white in some species. Prester- 
num with two carinae, which are slightly convergent anteriorly. 
Mesosternum not emarginate in the middle of the anterior margin. 
The coxal lines of the first abdominal sternite divided into two sep- 
arate branches, one of which runs parallel to the posterior margin of 
the segment and the other directed toward the anterior angles. Legs 
black, tibiae with two spurs at the end, tarsal claws with a tooth at 
base. Elytra yellow, orange, or red with a variable black pattern. 
The elytral patterns of all the species and varieties of Coccinella may 
be represented as derivatives from the basic pattern consisting of six 
spots on each elytron (fig. 30). The first of these spots (^, the 
scutellar spot) lies on the suture at the scutellum and is common to 
both elytra; the humeral spot (1) lies at the humeral angles; the 
lateral spot (2) lies at one-third of the length of the elytron, near the 
external border; the discal spot (3) at two-fifths of the length of 
the elytron, closer to the suture than to the external border; the 
marginal spot (4) at two-thirds of the length of the external border, 
and the apical spot (5) at four-fifths of the length of the elytron, 
closer to the suture than to the external border. Among the Ameri- 
can species only Coccinella undecimpunctata Linnaeus, some varieties 
of C. johnsoni Casey, and C. transversoguttata Falderman var. nuga- 
toria Mulsant have the basic elytral pattern of the genus unchanged. 
In all other species some of the spots are either absent or confluent 
with others. Especially frequent is the fusion of spots 4 and 5 into 
a common apico-marginal spot (4 + 5) . This fusion is frequently so 
intimate that the compound nature of the resulting spot may be not 
at all apparent. 

Male genitalia. — The terminolog}" of the parts of the genitalia of 
Coccinellidae proposed by Verhoeff (1895) seems to me preferable to 



ART. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 



that used by other authors. The part functioning in Coccinellidae 
as a penis is, as shown by its development, homologous to only the 
proximal part of the penis of other Coleoptera (according to the 
unpublished data of the author). This part is termed the sipho 
(penis of other authors). Moreover, the penis, which is homologous 
to the distal part of the penis of other Coleoptera, is intimately fused 
with the basal plates (basal piece of other authors). The fingerlike 
paramera (lateral lobes) are articulated with the basal plates. The 
trabes (tegminal strut of other authors) is an unpaired chitinous rod 
articulated to the basal plates, and connected by muscles with the 
proximal end of the sipho. 

In the genus Coccinella the sipho (s, fig. 1 and figs. 13-20) is hook- 
shaped. Its proximal end, in 
most species, is strongly chiti- 
nized and separated from the 
body of the sipho to form the 
so-called siphonal capsule {sc, 
figs, land 13-20). Onlyin(7oc- 
cinella undecimpunctata Lin- 
naeus the siphonal capsule is 
rudimentary (fig. 20). The 
distal end of the sipho carries bS-.. 
rather strongly developed 
praeputial sacs. The penis 
{p, figs. 1, 2-12) frequently 
possesses complicated proc- 03— 
esses on its distal end. The 
form of the penis is exceed- 
ingly variable and constitutes 
the best specific character. 
The trabes {tr, fig. 1) is rela- 
tively short and thick, and its 
free end has no clearly pro- 
nounced emargination. The basal plates {bp, fig. 1) are strongly 
developed. Paramera (pa, figs. 1, 2) are fingerlike and slightly 
compressed from the sides. 

Female genitalia. — The receptaculum seminis is large, mostly rather 
clearly differentiated into the cornu (c, figs. 22, 28), the nodulus {n), 
and the ramus (r). The sculpture of the walls of the receptaculum, 
consisting of chitinous rings, is well developed in all species except 
Coccinella undecimpunctata Linnaeus and its relatives. The infundib- 
ulum (?', figs. 22, 28) has a funnel-shaped dilatation on its anterior end 
and, in some species, a similar dilatation on its posterior end. The 
ductus receptaculi (dr, fig. 28) is very short and nearly hidden in the 




Figure 1. — Male genitalia of Coccinella novemnotata 
Herbst (lateral view), bp. Basal plates; p, penis; pa, 
paramera; s, sipho; sc, siphonal capsule; tr, trabes 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

funnel-shaped dilatation of the infundibulum. Some species have an 
accessory plate (Verhoeff' s Anhangsplatte, loc cit.) attached to the 
posterior end of the infundibulum (a/p, fig. 22). 

COCCINELLA NOVEMNOTATA Herbst 

Coccinella novemnotata Herbst, Natursystem der Kafer, vol. 5, p. 269, 1793. — 
Casey, 1899, p. 88.— Leng, 1903, p. 198; 1920, p. 216.— Johnson, 1910, pp. 
59-60. 

Body subhemispherical. Head with a broad, undulate, yellowish- 
white band across the front, and with yellow anterior margin of the 
clypeus. Pronotum and pronotal epipleura with white subquadrate 
marks in the anterior angles, anterior margin of the pronotum more 
or less broadly white. Mesepimera and metepimera, the posterior 
ends of the metepisterna, and in males a spot on the anterior 
coxae and a stripe on the anterior femora, yellowish white. Head, 
pronotum, and elytra alutaceous, obscurely punctulate with the punc- 
tures somewhat stronger near the external margin of the elytra. 
Elytra yellow or orange, with nine black spots (K, 1, 2, 3, 4). The 
spot K moderate in size, triangular or rhomboidal, spots 1 and 2 small 
and usually rounded, spots 3 and 4 large in size and transversely 
elliptical in shape. The spots may fuse together or may be connected 
by rather slender black lines. The following patterns have been 
described: 1+2 (conjuncta Fitch), 3 + 5, K + 3, 2 + 1 + 3, 2 + 1 + 3 + 5 
(confluenta Fitch). Length of body, 5.3-7 mm. 

Male genitalia (figs. 2, 13). — Penis rather long and narrow, its 
proximal end extended in a triangular process. Paramera much 
shorter than penis. Basal plates broader than long. Sipho rather 
long and slender. 

Female genitalia (fig. 21). — Cornu broad, ramus very small, nodu- 
lus conic in shape and thick-walled. Infundibulum short and thick, 
its posterior end dilated and surrounded by a ringlike furrow. 

This purely American species seems to be related to the palaearctic 
species Coccinella divaricata Olivier ( = distincta Redtenbacher) . The 
points of similarity are the sculpture of the elytra, the shape of the 
elytral spots, and the shape of the sipho and the infundibulum. The 
form of the penis is, however, very different in these two species. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Quebec: Montreal, Chelsea. 

Ontario: Britannia. 

New Hampshire: Lancaster, Mount Washington, Franconia, Wolfeboro. 

Vermont: Ludlow. 

Massachusetts: Melrose, Medford, Arlington, Stoughton, Springfield, Plymouth, 

Middleboro, North Saugus, Woods Hole, Falmouth, Truro, Siasconset, Oak 

Bluffs, Edgartown, Nantucket Island, New Bedford. 
Rhode Island: Watch Hill. 
Connecticut: Brookfield, Bridgeport. 



ART. 4 



BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA — DOBZHANSKY 



New York: Black Mountain, Thousand Islands, Kinderhook, White Lake, 
New York, Farmingdale, Cold Spring Harbor, Riverhead, West Point, Ithaca, 
Forest Lawn, Honeoye Falls, Batavia, Dansville. 

New Jersey: Fort Lee, Hackensack, Paterson, Passaic, Ramsey, Boonton, New- 
ton, Mendham, Milltown, Lakehurst. 

Pennsylvania: Philadelphia, Ashbourne, Glenside, Reading, Lehigh Gap, Get- 
tysburg. 




Figures 2-9.— Male genitalia of the diSerent species of Coccinella: 2, Coccinella novem- 
notata; 3, C. prolongata; 4, C. californica; 6, C. johnsoni; 6, C. transversoguttata; 7, C. 
nivicola; 8, C. suluralis; 9, C. difficitis. In all figures the sipho and the trabes are not 
represented, bp. Basal plates; p, penis; pn, paramera 

Delaware: Newark. 

Maryland: Baltimore, Hagerstown, Odenton, Glen Echo, Riverdale. 

District of Columbia: Washington. 

Virginia: Falls Church, Vienna, Arlington, Fredericksburg, Bowling Green, 

Cuckoo, Richmond, Norfolk, Blue Ridge Mountains, Staunton, Afton, Peaks 

of Otter, Pennington Gap. 



■6 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

West Virginia: White Sulphur Springs. 

North Carolina: Areola, Southern Pines, Salisbury, Black Mountain. 

South Carolina: Oswego, Batesburg, Beaufort. 

Georgia: La Grange, Baconton, Moultrie, Thomasville. 

Florida: State record. 

Michigan: Whitefish Point, Marquette, Port Huron, Detroit, Douglas. 

Ohio: Newton Falls, Salineville, Columbus. 

Indiana: Knox, Culver, Nashville, Bloomington, Mineral. 

Illinois: Chicago, Kankakee, Fulton, Oakwood, Urbana, St. Joseph, Champaign, 
White Heath, Charleston, Topeca, Havana, Dubois, MetropoHs. 

Kentucky: Campton. 

Tennessee: Black Mountains, Coal Creek. 

Alabama: Longview. 

Louisiana: Tallulah, Mound. 

Wisconsin: Waupaca, Madison, Osceola. 

Minnesota: St. Paul, Minneapolis, High Prairie, Hennepin County, Lake Crystal, 
Minnehaha Creek, Lake City, Jordan, Shakopee, Rice County, St. Peter, 
Lesueur Center, Albert Lea, Owatonna, Mora, Brooten, Princeton, New Lon- 
don, Taylors Falls, Willow River, Houston County, Itasca Lake, Luverne, 
Ramsey. 

Iowa: Muscatine, Ames. 

Missouri: St. Louis, Utica, Willard. 

Arkansas: Siloam Springs. 

South Dakota: Madison, Black Hills. 

Oklahoma: Hobart. 

Texas: Dallas. 

Wyoming: Carbon County. 

Colorado: Boulder, Colorado Springs, Manitou, Rocky Ford. 

Remarks. — In the individuals coming from the Eastern and South- 
ern States the elytral spots are distinctly larger than in those from 
Minnesota, Missouri, and Iowa. Specimens from Wyoming and 
Colorado are intermediate between the typical novemnotata and the 
variety degener Casey (see below). Moreover, the frequency of 
specimens having confluent elytral spots is higher in Eastern and 
Southern States, and lower in the Middle West. 

COCCINELLA NOVEMNOTATA Herbst subspecies DEGENER Casey 

Coccinella degener Casey, 1899, p. 88. 

Coccinella novemnotata Herbst var. degener Casey, Lentg, 1903, p. 198; 1920, p. 
216.— Johnson, 1910, p. 59. 

This race differs from the typical form by smaller size of the 
body, more polished surface of the elytra, and by smaller, sometimes 
absent, elytral spots. The genitalia of both sexes are not signifi- 
cantly different from those of the typical novemnotata Herbst. The 
geographic distribution of degener Casey gives a convincing evidence 
in favor of considering it as a subspecies of novemnotata Herbst, and 
not as a separate species. Length of the body, 4.8-6.2 mm. 



AHT. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 7 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Saskatchewan: Carlyle. 

Nebraska: Mitchell. 

Kansas: Douglas County. 

Oklahoma: Summit, Hobart. 

Montana: Assiniboine, Bear Paw Mountains, Helena, Powderville, Broadwater 
County, Yellowstone County. 

Wyoming: Big Horn Mountains, Canyon Camp (Yellowstone Park), Wheat- 
land, Cheyenne, Carbon County. 

Colorado: Pine Creek, Fort Collins, Greeley, Dixon, Boulder, Longs Peak (9,000 
feet), Summit County, Golden, Denver, Florissant, Manitou, Colorado 
Springs, Rocky Ford, Buena Vista, Paonia, Salida. 

New Mexico: Espanola, Santa Fe, Albuquerque, Koehler Junction, Coolidge. 

Idaho: Moscow, Pocatello, Jerome, Twin Falls, Nampa. 

Utah: Salt Lake City, American Fork, Saltair, Taylorsville, Murray, Holliday, 
Fort Douglas, Emigration Canyon, St. George. 

Nevada: State record. 

Arizona: Grand Canyon, Bright Angel, Williams, Flagstaff, Clemenceau. 

Remarks. — The Middle West representatives are clearly intermedi- 
ate between degener and the typical novemnotata. The variability of 
all the characters in which these subspecies differ from each other is 
very high in this region. On the other hand, many individuals from 
the western part of the distribution of degener have some of the 
spots on the elytra very small or missing. The subspecies degener 
is thus connected with the subspecies oregona Casey and franciscana 
Mulsant by a series of intergrades. 

COCCINELLA NOVEMNOTATA Herbst subspecies OREGONA Casey 

Coccinella novemnotata Herbst subspecies oregona Casey, 1908, p. 403. — Leng, 
1920, p. 216. 

This subspecies is very close to degener Casey. It differs from it 
by the larger size of the body (equal to that of the typical novem- 
notata Herbst), by very dense but obscure punctation, and by very 
small and frequently missing elytral spots. The surface of the 
elytra is more polished than in either novemnotata novemnotata or 
novemnotata degener. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

British Columbia: Vernon, Midday Valley, Merritt, Nanaimo, Victoria, Depar- 
ture Bay. 

Washington: Fairfield, Pullman, Blue Mountains, Coulee City, Ritzville, Paha, 
Toppenish, Paradise Inn (Mount Rainier National Park), Olympia, Tenino. 

Oregon: Wallowa Mountains, La Grande, Portland, McMinnville, Coast Range 
(Benton County), Corvallis, Klamath County, Amity. 

California: Modoc County, Klamath Lake, Lassen County, CarrviUe, Plumas 
County, Mono County. 

Remarks. — This subspecies occupies the northern Pacific States. 
In California it finds the southern limit of its distribution, and is 
connected by numerous intermediates with the more southern sub- 
species, nsimely franciscana Mulsant. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

COCCINELLA NOVEMNOTATA Herbst subspecies FRANCISCANA Mulsant 

Coccinella franciscana Mulsant, 1853, p. 19. 
Coccinella calif ornica Casey (partim), 1899, p. 89; 1908, p. 404. 
Coccinella novemnotata Herbst var. franciscana Mulsant, Leng, 1903, p. 198; 
1920, p. 216.— Johnson, 1910, p. 59. 

This race differs from other subspecies of novemnotata Herbst by 
the absence of all or most of the elytral spots, by the bright red of the 
elytra, and by the polished and sliiny surface of the elytra. The 
individuals from southern California are usually spotless; those from 
San Joaquin Valley usually have a few of the spots characteristic for 
other subspecies of novemnotata Herbst. The Coccinella living in 
San Joaquin Valley may thus be considered intermediate between 
the subspecies oregona Casey and franciscana Mulsant. Casey 
(loc. cit.) considered franciscana Mulsant as a synonym for Coccinella 
californica Mannerheim. This view is unfounded. Even without 
consideration of the structure of the genitalia, the presence of the 
white margin of the pronotum in franciscana Mulsant is evidence 
against such a supposition. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

California: Klamath Springs, Carrville, Oroville, Yuba County, Lake Tahoe, 
Truckee, Placerville, Mokelumne Hill, Valley Springs, Tuolumne County, 
Patterson, Fresno, Coalinga, Huntington Lake (7,000 feet). Independence, 
Visalia, Lemoncove, Lindsay, Bakersfield, San Fernando, Mint Canyon, 
Mount Lowe, Mount Wilson, Pasadena, Los Angeles, Whittier, Arcadia, 
Monrovia, Fish Canyon, Riverside, Balboa, San Diego, Coronado, Poway, 
Imperial County. 

Utah: St. George. 

Arizona: Yuma. 

New Mexico: Espanola. 

Remarks. — The distribution oi franciscana Mulsant exhibits an inter- 
esting feature. This form is frequent in regions where Coccinella 
californica Mannerheim is absent, and is lacking or occurs only seldom 
in places where C. californica is frequent. Practically the only region 
where the distribution of the two species overlaps is the vicinity 
of Los Angeles. In general, californica occupies the region west of the 
Coast Range, while franciscana lives east of the Coast Range. Such a 
relationship seems typical for close species which are not far from being 
only subspecies of the same species. This is, however, hardly true 
in respect of franciscana and californica. Indeed, californica seems 
to be related closely to transversoguttata Falderman and not to novem- 
notata Herbst. On the other hand, franciscana is beyond doubt a 
subspecies of novemnotata. Perhaps the explanation of this peculi- 
arity of distribution of the two species lies in some of their ecological 
peculiarities. 



AKT. 4 



BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 



COCCINELLA PROLONGATA Crotch 



Coccinella prolongata Crotch, 1873, p. 371. — Casey, 1899, p. 88. — Johnson, 

1910, p. 64. 
Coccinella transversoguttata Falderman var. prolongata Crotch, Leng, 1903, p. 199. 
Coccinella monticola Mulsant var. prolongata Crotch, Leng, 1920, p. 216. 




Figures 10-12.— Male genitalia of Coccinella trifasciata, C. hierogtyphica, and C. undecimpunc- 

tata, respectively. The sipho and the trabes are not represented. 
FiGUEES 13-20.— Sipho of the different species of Coccinella: 13, C. novemnotata; 14, C. prolongata; 

15, C. californica; 16, C. difficilis; 17, C. hieroglyphica; 18, C. nivicola; 19, C. trifasciata; 20, C. 

undecimpunctata. sc, Siphonal capsule 

More elongately oval than C novemnotata Herbst, moderately con- 
vex, the sides of the elytra subparallel in the middle of their length, 
the convexity of the elytra very great in the posterior third of their 
length. Head black with very large white spots near the eyes, leav- 
es 143— 31 2 



10 PROCEEDIN-QS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

ing only a narrow black bridge between them, Mesepimera and 
metepimera, the posterior ends of the metepisterna, and, in the males, 
a spot on the anterior coxae, white. White markings in the anterior 
angles of the pronotum are extended toward the posterior angles and 
toward the middle of the disk, and, in most cases, are united by a 
narrow white stripe on the anterior margin of the pronotum. Ante- 
rior angles of the pronotal epipleura broadly white. Pronotum and 
the elytra alutaceous, rather densely and very finely punctulate, with 
punctures somewhat stronger than in novemnotata Herbst. Elytra 
yellow or orange with a large rhomboidal scutellar spot (K), a small 
round spot (2), a large obliquo-transverse spot (3), and a transverse 
spot in the apical third of then- length (4 + 5) , which sometimes is 
separated into two spots (4 and 5). Length of the body, 6.2-7 mm. 

Male genitalia (figs. 3, 14). — Similar to those of C. novemnotata 
Herbst, but penis shorter, its sides angulate, the proximal end 
extended into a very broad, rhomboidal process. Basal plates wider 
than long. Sipho very large, the siphonal capsule developed more 
strongly than in any other species of Coccinella. 

Female genitalia. — Unknown. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Montana: Helena (W. M. Mann, collector). 
Wyoming: Yellowstone National Park (W. Robinson, collector). 
Kansas: State record (National Museum collection). 
Colorado: Denver, Garland (National Museum collection). 
Washington: Wenatchee (E. J. Newcomer, collector). 

Remarks. — This species is rather closely related to C. novemnotata 
Herbst because of the structure of the genitalia, the punctation of 
the elytra, and the presence of the white spots on the anterior coxae 
in the males. I can not agree, therefore, with the opinion of Mr. 
Leng that prolongata Crotch is a variety of nivicola Menetries 
{monticola Mulsant). I find no characters indicating such a rela- 
tionship except the pattern of the elytra, which is indeed similar 
to C. nivicola Menetries var. aluiacea Casey. On the other hand, 
the genitalia of prolongata Crotch are quite suflSciently different 
from those of novemnotata Herbst to consider them separate species. 
The area of habitation of prolongata is completely included in that of 
novemnotata. 

COCCINELLA PROLONGATA Crotch SEQUOIAE new subspecies 

Similar to Coccinella prolongata Crotch but with the frontal spots 
smaller, with the quadrangular white spots in the anterior angles of 
the pronotum not dilated, elytra much more strongly punctate, 
intervals very finely alutaceous, reddish testaceous, elytral spots 
3 + 2 + 4 + 5 + 3 + K+3 + 5 + 4 + 2 + 3 confluent. 

This race differs from the typical form in a rather large series of 
characters. The white markings on the pronotum are not extended 



ART. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 1 1 

toward the posterior angles or toward the disk; the white stripe on 
anterior margin of the pronotiim is missing. The mesepimera and 
metepimera are white, and the anterior coxae of the males have a 
white spot, as in prolongata. The convexity of the elytra is more 
regular than in prolongata, but less regular than in other species of 
Coccinella. The elytral spots are strongly increased in size and con- 
fluent with one another. Spots 2, 3, 4, and 5 form aringlike pattern, 
which in most specimens is connected with spot ji. The elytral 
suture is red, at least in the posterior half of its length. The male 
genitalia are slightly different from those of the typical prolongata. 
The process on the distal end of the penis is somewhat longer and 
more pointed at the end; the sides of the penis are more rounded. 
In spite of all these differences, I consider this form a subspecies of 
prolongata rather than a separate species. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows : 

California: Sequoia National Park, near Camp Wolverton (7,000 to 9,000 feet 
June 24-25, 1929, 51 specimens, E. C. Van Dyke, collector; ibidem, June 29, 
1930, 2 specimens, T. Dobzhansky, collector; the type in the California 
Academy of Sciences collection). 

COCCINELLA PROLONGATA Crotch subspecies BRIDWELLI Nunenmacher 

Coccinella hridicelli Nunenmacher, Ent. News, vol. 24, p, 76, 1913. — Leng, 
1920, p. 216. 

This subspecies is different from the typical form and from the 
subspecies sequoiae Dobzhansky by the smaller size and the less con- 
vex shape of the body, by the more strongly alutaceous surface, and 
the color of elytra. Elytra entirely black. The wliite markings on 
the head and the pronotum, and the punctation of the elytra, as in 
sequoiae. Mesepimera white, metepimera usually white, but in some 
specimens black (the type of bridwelli, according to Nunenmacher's 
description, has black metepimera). Three out of the five males 
studied had white spots on the anterior coxae. The genitalia not 
distinguishable from those of sequoiae. Length of body, 5.5-6.3 mm. 

This is one of the three entirely black forms known in the genus 
Coccinella. It is more similar to the subspecies sequoiae than to the 
typical form. The subspecies sequoiae may be considered as an 
intermediate form between the subspecies bridwelli Nunenmacher 
and the typical prolongata Crotch. 

Geographic distribution. — LocaUties as follows: 

California: Tahquitz Valley (type and cotypes, J. C. Bridwell, collector), Tah- 
quitz Canyon (E. C, Van Dyke, collector), Idyllwild (E, C. Van Dyke, 
collector), 

COCCINELLA CALIFORNICA Mannerheim 

Coccinella calif arnica Mannerheim, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou, vol. 16, p. 312, 
1843.— Caset, 1899, pp. 88, 89.— Johnson, 1910, p. 62. 

Coccinella trasversoguttala Falderman var. californica Mannerheim, Leng, 1903, 
p. 200; 1920, p. 216. 



12 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



Body broadly oval, strongly convex. Head with a white spot on 
each side near the eyes, pronotum with a quadrangular mark in the 
anterior angles, pronotal epipleura with a narrow white margin. The 
variety melanocollis Casey has the whole pronotum black. Mesepi- 
mera wliite, metepimera black. Pronotum and elytra slightly 
alutaceous, densely but finely punctulate, the punctures becoming 
stronger toward the external margin of the elytra. Elytra bright 
red or orange with a black scutellar spot (]£) and with a narrow black 
stripe along the suture. In some specimens the elytra are entirely 
red (var. nevadica Casey ?). Very seldom individuals occur having 
rudiments of the elytral spot 1, or the spot 3, or both. Length of 
the body, 5.4-6.5 mm. 





Figures 21-29.— Receptaculum seminis and infundibulum of the diflerent species of the genus Coc- 
cinella: 21, Coccinella novemnotata: 22, C. californica: 23, C. johnsoni; 24, C. transversoguttata; 25, C. 
nmcola: 26, C. difficiiis: 27, C. trifasciata: 28, C. hieroglyphica; 29, C. undecimpunctata. ap, Acces- 
sory plate; c, cornu; dr, ductus receptaculi; i, infundibulum; gr, accessory gland of the recepta- 
culum seminis; n, nodulus ; r, ramus 

Male genitalia (figs. 4, 15) .—Penis sUghtly longer than the paramera, 
broadening distally, deeply emarginated in the distal half of its 
length, and extended into a very broad triangular process. Basal 
plates broader than long. Sipho shorter than in C. transversoguttata 
Falderman and in G. novemnotata Herbst. 

Female genitalia (fig. 22). — Receptaculum seminis similar to that 
of C. novemnotata and C, transversoguttata. The infundibulum longer 
and more slender than in the species just mentioned. 

This species is rather closely related to C. transversoguttata. This 
relationship is correctly recognized by Leng, but these species must 
be undoubtedly considered separate because of the difference in the 
structure of the genitaUa, as well as in the external characters. I 
place Coccinella nevadica Casey as a synonym of californica Man- 
nerlieim with much hesitancy. I have not examined the Casey type 



ABT. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 13 

specimen, and the description of it is unsatisfactory. C. nevadica 
may also be a spotless variety of C. nivicola Menetries, or even may 
be synonymous with C. novemnotata Herbst veLT.Jranciscana Mulsant. 
Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows : 

British Columbia: Victoria, Nanaimo, Departure Bay. 

Washington: Whatcom, Port Townsend, Seattle, Forks, Hoquiam. 

Oregon: Astoria, Cannon Beach, Tillamook, Otter Rocks, Agate Beach. 

California: Areata, Samoa, Eureka, Scotia, Fortuna, Orick, Klamath, Sisson 
(J. Bradley collector), Chilcoot (Essig collector), Mendocino, Guerneville, 
Santa Rosa, Petaluma, Fairfield, San Rafael, Mount Tamalpais, Sausalito, 
Cazadero, Berkeley, Oakland, Alameda, Sacramento County (Citrus Experi- 
ment Station collection) , Merced County (F.T. Scott collector) , San Francisco, 
San Mateo, Redwood City, Palo Alto, Santa Clara, San Jose, Los Gatos, 
Santa Cruz, Morgan Hill, Salinas, Spreckels, Del Monte, Monterey, Pacific 
Grove, Carmel, Soledad, Pinnacles National Monument, King City, Lindsay 
(R. Jones collector) , Guadalupe, Betteravia, Los Alamos, Lompoc, Santa Ynez, 
Santa Barbara, Santa Paula, Oxnard, Santa Monica, Mint Canyon, Saugus, 
San Fernando, Pasadena, Mount Wilson, Mount Lowe, Los Angeles, Arcadia, 
Monrovia, Fish Canyon, San Gabriel Canyon, Pomona, Whittier, San Pedro, 
Santa Ana, Balboa, Laguna Beach, San Juan Capistrano, Fall Brook, La 
JoUa, San Diego, El Cajon, Santa Rosa Island, Santa Cruz Island, San Nicolas 
Island (S. Emerson collector), San Clemente Island. 

Lower California: Ensenada, Descanso Bay, Guadalupe Island. 

Arizona: Senator (American Museum of Natural History collection). 

Remarks. — One may conclude from the data presented above that 
C. californica is very common between the Coast Range and the 
Pacific Ocean, but occurs only very seldom between the Coast Range 
and the Sierra Nevada. It is the commonest species of Coccinella 
in the Los Angeles region, but seems to be entirely absent in the 
Mohave Desert. F. T. Scott informs me that C, californica is not 
found in the central part of the San Joaquin Valley, being replaced 
there by C. novemnotata Herbst var. franciscana Mulsant, which is 
not very common in the Los Angeles region. The finding of 
C. californica in Arizona and at Lindsay, Calif, (see above) seems to 
be very doubtful. It is probable that this species will be found also 
along the western coast of the northern part of Mexico. 

COCCINELLA JOHNSONI Casey 

Coccinella johnsoni Casey, 1908, p. 403. — Johnson, 1910, p. 61. 
Coccinella novemnotata Herbst. var. johnsoni Casey, Leng, 1920, p. 216. 

Body more elongate and less convex than in C. californica Man- 
nerheim. Punctulation of the pronotum and the elytra somewhat 
stronger than in the latter species. Elytra red with the 11 spots con- 
stituting the typical pattern of the genus Coccinella (fig. 30), and with 
a narrow black stripe along the suture. Spots 4 and 5 lie close to 
each other, and are frequently confluent. The black sutural margin 
maybe absent; likewise spot 2, or spot 4, or both, may be absent. Spot 



14 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Yi may be fused with spot 1 to form a transverse black fascia. Length 
of the body, 5.8-6.8 mm. 

Male genitalia (fig. 5). — Resembling those of C. calif ornica; but the 
process on the distal end of the penis shorter, broader, and less acu- 
minate at the end. 

Female genitalia (fig. 23). — Not distinguishable from C. calif ornica. 

This species is very close to C. calif ornica but not to C. novemno- 
tata, as suggested by Johnson and Leng. Its specific rank may be, 
however, a subject of dispute. Indeed, the very small differences in 
the structure of the genitalia and in the form of the body might make 
it questionable. No intermediates between the two species occur, 
however, in spite of the fact that the whole known distribution of 
C. johnsoni is included in that of C. calif ornica. Notwithstanding the 
smallness of the differences between the two species, and the varia- 
bility of the elytral pattern of C. johnsoni, they may be distinguished 
without difficulty. The species described by Casey (1908, p. 402) 
from northern Mexico, namely, Coccinella sonorica, is almost certainly 
a color variation of C. johnsoni. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

British Columbia: Victoria (California Academy of Sciences collection). 
Washington: Orcas Island (W. M. Mann collector), King County (F. W. 

Nunenmacher collection). 
California: Shively (E. O. Essig collector), San Francisco (F. T. Scott collector), 

Santa Paula, Pasadena, Fish Canyon, Santa Ana, Santa Monica, Costa Mesa, 

San Diego, Coronado, San Nicolas Island (S. Emerson collector), San 

Clemente Island (F. Blaisdell collector). 

Remarks. — The individuals from British Columbia and Washington 
are rather considerably different from those from California in being 
less convex, in having the apex of the elytra acuminate, and in having 
very small elytral spots. This fact suggests that the species C. johnsoni 
is differentiated into two subspecies, one of which is living in British 
Columbia and Washington and the other living in California. It 
seems to be wise, however, not to propose Latin names to these sub- 
species until more material is available, 

COCCINELLA TRANSVERSOGUTTATA Falderman 

Coccinella transversoguttata Falderman, Mem. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou, vol. 4, p. 

454, 1835.— Leng, 1903, p. 199; 1920, p. 216.— Johnson, 1910, pp. 61, 62. 
Coccinella quinquenolata Kirby, Richardson's Fauna Boreali-Americana, p. 230, 

1837.— Casey, 1899, p. 89; 1908, p. 401. 
Coccinella transversalis Mulsant, 1850, p. 117. 

Body broadly oval, very strongly convex. Head with a white spot 
on each side near the eyes, pronotum with white quadrangular marks 
in the anterior angles, pronotal epipleura narrowly white in the ante- 
rior angles. Mesepimera white, metepimera brown or black. Head, 
pronotum, and elytra densely and rather strongly punctulate, the 



ART. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 15 

punctures becoming stronger toward the external margin of the ely- 
tra. Elytra yellow or red with a common black subbasal fascia (spots 
l + K+l), a very small spot near the external margin (2), which is 
mostly absent in the American specimens (var, guinquenotaia Kirby), 
a large transversely oval spot on the disk (3), and a subapical trans- 
verse fascia (spots 4 + 5) . The subbasal fascia and spot 3 are reduced 
in the western specimens to narrow black stripes (var. transversalis 
Mulsant). Length of the body, 5.8-7.2 mm. 

Male genitalia (fig. 6). — Penis longer than the paramera, rather 
wide, deeply emarginated in the distal half of its length, the distal 
end extended into a tonguelike process. Basal plates wider than long. 

Female genitalia (fig. 24) . — Receptaculum seminis similar to that of 
C. novemnotata Herbst, but shorter, wider, and with slightly thinner 
walls. Infundibulum also similar to that of C. novemnotata, but rel- 
atively longer and more slender. 

Casey (1899) insisted on calling the American representatives of 
this species quinquenotata Kirby, and on restricting the name trans- 
versoguttata Falderman to the Asiatic representatives. I see no suffi- 
cient reason for such a separation, since the only difference between 
the American and the Asiatic representatives of this species is the fre- 
quent absence of spot 2 in the former. The absence of this spot is, 
however, observed also in Asiatic specimens, though as an exception, 
and its presence is sometimes observed in American individuals. The 
genitaha are completely alike in the American and in the Asiatic 
specimens (see Dobzhansky, 1926, fig. 1). Consequently, it seems 
superfluous to preserve the name quinquenotata Kirby even as a sub- 
specific name. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Nova Scotia: Truro. 

Quebec: Montreal. 

Ontario: North Bay, Ottawa, Toronto, Port Credit, HuntsviUe, Ridgeway. 

Manitoba: Mile 214 on Hudson Bay Railroad, Winnipeg, Aweme. 

Mackenzie: Great Slave Lake (National Museum collection). 

Saskatchewan: Prince Albert, Carlyle. 

Alberta: Calgary, Banff. 

Alaska: New Rampart House (J. M. Jessup collector), Skagway (Harrington 

collector), Chitina Glacier (30 miles north of Mount St. Elias) (D. W. Eaton 

collector). 
Yukon: Whitehorse (J. A. Kusche collector), Dawson (J. A. Kusche collector), 

White Pass (J. A. Kusche collector), Carcross (Harrington collector). 
British Columbia: Vernon, Penticton, Merritt, Fort McLeod, Vancouver. 
New Hampshire: Mount Washington, White Mountains, Lancaster, Franconia, 

Wolfeboro, Barnstead. 
Massachusetts: Arlington, Boston, Cambridge, Forest Hills, Winchester, Truro, 

Woods Hole. 
Connecticut: Bridgeport. 

New York: Thousand Islands, Whiteface Mountain, Batavia, Ithaca, Honeoye 
■^.Z_ Falls, West Point, Broadalbin. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OE THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

New Jersey: Riverton. 

Delaware: Wilmington. 

Pennsylvania: State record. 

Virginia: Fredericksburg. 

Michigan: Whitefish Point, Marquette, Alpena, Daggett, Douglas. 

Ohio: Lake County. 

Illinois: State record. 

Wisconsin: Waupaca, Winneconne. 

Minnesota: Two Harbors, Duluth, St. Louis County, Itasca County, Beltrami 

County, Marshal County, Norman County, Otter Lake, North Branch, 

Taylors Falls, Ramsey County, Anoka, St. Paul, Minneapolis, Lake City, 

Lake Crystal, New London, Luverne. 
Iowa: Muscatine, Crawford County. 
Missouri: Belgrade. 
North Dakota: Trail County, Binford, Fargo, Valley City, Drake, Oakdale, 

Bismarck, Mott. 
South Dakota: Black Hills. 
Texas: San Antonio, Colorado County. 
Montana: Moccasin. 
Wyoming: Big Horn Mountains, Cheyenne, Owl Creek Mountains, Cannon 

Camp (Yellowstone National Park), Paint Creek, Carbon County, Green 

River. 
Colorado: Greeley, Pingree Park, Longmont, Boulder, Longs Peak Inn (9,000 

feet). Golden, Denver, Grant, Rocky Ford, Fowler, Colorado Springs, 

Manitou, Canon City, Leadville (10,000 feet), Paonia, Grand Junction, Veta 

Pass, Garland, San Luis, Dark Canyon. 
New Mexico: Chama, Aztec, Espanola, Las Vegas Hot Springs (7,000 feet), 

Chuska Mountains (8,800 feet). 
Idaho: Moscow, Lewiston, Blackfoot, Pocatello, Jerome, Twin Falls, Boise. 
Utah: Logan, Promontory, Huntsville, Kaysville, Coalville, Salt Lake City, 

Taylorsville, Kamas, Park City, Heber, Silverlake, Alta, Murray, Sandy, 

Lehi, West Jordan, Prove, Emigration Canyon, Fort Douglas, Price, Beaver 

Mountains (8,000-10,000 feet), St. George. 
Arizona: Williams, Chiricahui Mountains. 
Washington: Pullman, Ritzville, Paha, Coulee, Wenatchee, Toppenish, Seattle, 

Tacoma, Paradise Park (Mount Rainier, 6,000 feet). 
Oregon: Baker, Cascade Rapids, Portland. 
Nevada: Shell Canon (Ruby Mountains), Reno, Steamboat Springs, Lyon 

County, Esmeralda County. 
California: Modoc County, Madeline, Truckee, Lake Tahoe, Mono County, 

Ryan (Dobzhansky collector). 

This form is apparently lacking in southern California. 

COCCINELLA TRANSVERSOGUTTATA Falderman subspecies NUGATORIA Mulsant 

Cocdnella nugatoria Mulsant, 1850, p. 1021. — Casey 1908, p. 403. 
Coccinella transversoguttata Falderman var. nugatoria Mulsant; Lenq, 1903, p. 
199; 1920, p. 216.— Johnson, 1910, p. 61. 

This is a western subspecies of C. transversoguttata Falderman, dif- 
fering from the typical form by smaller size, less convex elytra, finer 
punctation, and by the reduction of the pigmentation of the elytra. 
Spots K and 1 are separate, spot K is transversely oval or pyriform, 
spot 1 is round and small, spot 2 usually absent, spot 3 is smaller 



ABT. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCIKELLA DOBZHAITSKY 17 

and more narrowly oval than in transversoguttata, spots 4 and 5 fre- 
quently separate. Spot 1, or spot 4, or both, may be missing. Length 
of the body, 5.8-6.5 mm. 

Casey (1899) insisted on granting a specific rank to C. nugatoria 
Mulsant. In fact it is only a rather indistinct subspecies of C. tranS' 
versoguttata Falderman living in the Western States and in Mexico. 
An enormous area extending from North Dakota and New Mexico 
to the Pacific Ocean is inhabited by a mixed population in which all 
the intermediates between the typical transversoguttata Falderman 
and the typical nugatoria Mulsant may occur. Only in Mexico is the 
whole population nugatoria. The genitalia of transversoguttata (from 
Massachusetts) and of nugatoria (from California) are alike. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Minnesota: Two Harbors, New London, Lake City. 

North Dakota: Binford, Bismarck. 

Wyoming: Clieyenne, Como, Carbon County. 

Colorado: Pingree Park, Denver, Manitou, Leadville (10,000 feet), Vega. 

New Mexico: Chama. 

Idaho: Lewiston, Jerome, Boise, Nampa. 

Utah: Ogden Canyon, Emery County, Taylorsville, Salt Lake City, Murray 

Park City. 
British Columbia:. Vernon, Penticton, Merritt, Vancouver. 
Washington: Pullman, Toppenish, Tacoma, Wapato. 
Oregon: Cascade Rapids. 

Nevada: Carson City, Esmeralda County, Nixon. 
California: Modoc County, Madeline, Nevada County, Big Pine. 
Mexico: Queretaro, Mexico City, Guadalajara. 

COCCINELLA NIVICOLA Menelries subspecies MONTICOLA Mulsant 

Coccinella rnonticola Mulsant, 1850, p. 115. — Casey, 1899, p. 89. — Leng, 1903, 

p. 198; 1920, p. 216.— Johnson, 1910, p. 63. 
Coccinella lacustris LeConte, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 6, p. 131, 

1852. 
Coccinella impressa Casey, 1899, p. 89; 1908, p. 402. 

Broadly oval, strongly convex. Head with white spots near the 
eyes, pronotum with white quadrangular spots in anterior angles, 
pronotal epipleura with quadrangular marks or with only a white 
stripe in the anterior angles. Mesepimera white, metepimera brown 
or black. The sides of the pronotum frequently possess one or several 
impressions, which are variable in extent but which may be altogether 
lacking. Individuals with very strongly developed impressions on the 
pronotum were described by Casey (1899) as a separate species, Cocci- 
nella impressa. In a more recent paper, Casey (1908, p. 402) treated 
impressa as a subspecies of rnonticola Mulsant. The character is, how- 
ever, only an individual variation, and in my opinion the name 
impressa must be treated simply as a synonym of monticola. Elytra 



18 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

orange or yellow, alutaceous, punctation dense and strong, becom- 
ing stronger toward the external margin, with a very large pyriform 
scutellar spot (}0, an oblique transverse fascia not attaining the 
suture or the external margin (spots 2 + 3), and with a large, trans- 
versally oval spot in the apical third (spots 4 + 5). Length of the 
body, 5.8-7 mm. 

Male genitalia (figs. 7, 18). — Penis considerably longer than the para- 
mera, slightly wider at the middle of its length than at the base, rapidly 
narrowing distally, the distal end extended into rather long fingerlike 
process. Basal plates longer than wide. 

Female genitalia (fig. 25). — Receptaculum seminis short and wide, 
with ringlike sculpture on its walls rather delicate. Infundibulum 
short and thick, its posterior end with a funnel-shaped dilatation, the 
diameter of which is nearly twice as much as the diameter of the 
anterior dilatation of the infundibulum. Accessory plate absent. 

I find C. monticola Mulsant not specifically distinct from the Asiatic 
species Coccinella nivicola Menetries, The typical nivicola (from 
eastern Siberia) differs from monticola in having the anterior fascia 
extended toward the humeral angles and in having a stronger punctu- 
lation of the elytra. Both characters are, however, variable. Indi- 
viduals of monticola from Canada and the Northern United States 
have the elytral fascia very broad, and frequently extended toward 
the humeral angles. On the other hand, individuals of nivicola from 
southern Siberia, Mongolia, and Djungaria have the elytra! pattern 
approaching that of monticola. Even more important is the fact that 
the genitalia of nivicola (see Dobzhansky, 1926, fig. 6) are identical 
with those of monticola. Thus, monticola must be considered a sub- 
specific form of nivicola, equivalent to the subspecies alutacea Casey. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 
Quebec: Quebec, Hudson Bay (University of Minnesota collection). 
New Hampshire: Mount Washington, Lancaster, Franconia. 
Michigan: Whitefish Point. 
Minnesota: Duluth, Itasca Park. 
Montana: Glacier National Park (T. Ulke collector), Missoula (National 

Museum collection). 
Utah: Brighton (National Museum collection). 
Colorado: Rogers Pass (Bradley collector). 
Florida: State record (Illinois State Natural History Survey collection; this 

record is very doubtful). 
California: Lassen National Park (8,000-10,000 feet, Dobzhansky collector), 
Tallac (A. Feneys collector). Fallen Leaf (California Academy of Sciences 
collection), Eldorado County (Blaisdell collector), Mono (Blaisdell collector): 

Remarks. — The individuals from Montana, Colorado, and Utah 
are intermediate between monticola and alutacea. Those from Cali- 
fornia have the elytral pattern similar to that of monticola from New 
England, but one individual has the anterior fascia connected with 
ihe scutellar spot. 



ART. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 19 

COCCINELLA NIVICOLA Menetries subspecies ALUTACEA Casey 

Coccinella alutacea Casey, 1899, p. 89. 

Coccinella transversoguttata Falderman var. alutacea Casey, Lbng, 1903, p. 200. 
Coccinnella monticola Mulsant var. alutacea Casey, Johnson, 1910, p. 63. — Leng, 
1920, p. 216. 

Differs from the typical nivicola Menetries and from var. monticola 
Mulsant by the more strongly alutaceous surface of the elytra; the 
finer and sparser punctulation, and by the reduced pigmentation of 
the elytra. The shape of the body is less convex in alutacea than in 
monticola. The scutellar spot is rather small, the black fascia nar- 
row, frequently disintegrating into a small round spot 2, and a large 
transversally oval spot 3. The apico-marginal spot (4 + 5) small, 
round or transversally oval. Spot 2, or spot 4 + 5, or both, may dis- 
appear (var. biguttata Johnson). Metepimera and the posterior ends 
of the metepisterna usually brown or yellow, though specimens hav- 
ing black metepimera also occur. The genitalia of both sexes are iden- 
tical with those of typical nivicola and of subspecies monticola. Leng 
and Johnson were correct in not recognizing this variety as a separate 
species. 

Geographic distribution. — Locahties as follows: 

Kansas: State record (Illinois State Natural History Survey collection). 

South Dakota: Ardmore. 

Montana: Assiniboine, Missoula, Yellowstone County. 

Wyoming: Newcastle, Big Horn Mountains, Yellowstone National Park, Grand 
Teton National Park, Cheyenne, Green River (6,000-7,000 feet). 

Colorado: Pingree Park, Fort Collins, Longniont, Boulder, Denver, Golden, 
Cimarron, Garden of the Gods, Manitou, Colorado Springs, Rocky Ford, 
La Veta, Leadville, Buena Vista, Paonia, Saguache. 

New Mexico: Chama, Espanola, Santa Fe, Las Vegas Hot Springs, Elida, 
Albuquerque. 

Idaho: Snake Canyon, Blackfoot, Burley. 

Utah: Uinta National Forest, Alta, Salt Lake City, Silverlake, Murray, Heber, 
Logan, Emery County, Beaver Creek Hills, Iron County, St. George. 

Arizona: San Francisco Mountains (7,900 feet) (Cornell University collection). 

Nevada: Elko, Ely, Lovelock, Ormsby County, Nixon, Lamoille. 

British Columbia: Fort McLeod, Vancouver, Victoria. 

Washington: Sprague Lake, Toppenish, Paradise Park (Mount Rainier, 6,000 
feet). 

Oregon: Vale, Huntington, Lake County, Dallas. 

California: Davis, Modoc County (California Academy of Sciences collection), 
Siskiyou County, Klamath (F. W. Nunenmacher collection), Lassen County 
(F. W. Nunenmacher collection), Plumas County (F. W. Nunenmacher collec- 
tion), Madeline, Piedmont (F. W. Nunenmacher collector), Truckee (Califor- 
nia Academy of Sciences collection), Bullfrog Lake (10,600 feet) (California 
Academy of Sciences collection). 

Remarks. — Individuals from western Utah, Nevada, and California 
are characterized by an extreme reduction of the pigmentation of 
the elytra. Indeed, most of them have only spot 3 (var. biguttata 
Johnson), or only spot 5. Besides this they are usually smaller, less 



20 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

convex, and more elongate-oval than the typical alutacea from more 
eastern localities. Perhaps this race deserves being called a separate 
subspecies, but more material is needed before its status can be 
established definitely. It must be noted that this very light race is. 
recorded in the Sierra Nevada in nearly the same localities in which 
monticola Mulsant (see above) is recorded. In spite of this no inter- 
grades between these very different races are so far observed. The 
genitalia of the Calif ornian alutacea were studied and found to be 
not distinguishable from other specimens of alutacea or from 
monticola. The whole question certainly deserves further study. 

COCCINELLA DIFFICILIS Crotch 

Coccinella difficilis Crotch, 1873, p. 370. — Leng, 1903, p. 200. — Johnson 1910, 

p. 64. 
Coccinella monticola Mulsant var. difficilis Crotch, Leng, 1920, p. 216. 
Coccinella vandykei Nunenmacher, Ent. News, vol. 20, p. 161, 1909. 
Coccinella iransversoguttata Faldernian var. vandykei Nunenmacher, Leng, 1920, 

p. 216. 

Broadly oval, rather strongly convex. Head with white spots near 
the eyes, labrum brown, the anterior angles of the pronotum with 
quadrangular white marks, the anterior angles of the pronotal 
epipleura with a narrow white margin. Pronotum and elytra non- 
alutaceous, densely and finely punctulate. Elytra orange or red with 
a large scutellar spot {%), a small, round, frequently missing spot 2, 
a large, transversally elliptical spot 3, and a very large transverse 
apico-marginal spot (4 + 5), tending to break into two separate spots. 
Mesepimera and metepimera white. Length of the body, 5.4-6.3 mm. 

Male genitalia (figs. 9, 16). — Penis only slightly longer than the 
paramera, gradually widening from the base in the distal direction, 
sharply narrowed at two-thirds of its length, and extended into a 
fingerlike process. Basal plates longer than wide. Sipho very long 
as compared with the size of the penis. Siphonal capsule angulate. 

Female genitalia (fig. 26). — Receptaculm seminis short and wide; 
ramus rudimentary. Infundibulm similar to that of Coccinella 
nivicola Menetries. 

This species is surprisingly close to Coccinella tian^hanica Dob- 
zhansky from middle Asia. The external structures as well as the 
genitalia are similar, though not identical, in the two species. They 
differ in the sculpture of the elytra, in the form of spot 4 + 5, in the- 
form of the penis, and that of the receptaculum seminis. Among the 
American species of Coccinella the only close relative of difficilis is C. 
suturalis Casey. The two species just mentioned, and the Asiatic 
species tianshanica Dobzhansky and iranica Dobzhansky, form a sep- 
arate section of the genus Coccinella. C. nivicola Menetries belongs, 



ART. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 21 

however, to the group of species headed by the palaearctic species C. 
sejpteraj)unctata Linnaeus. Though these two sections of the genus are 
related to each other, I can not agree with Leng, who places both 
difficilis Crotch and suturalis Casey as varieties of nivicola Menetries. 
Coccinella vandyTcei Nunenmacher is a synonym of difficilis Crotch. 
Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Montana: Helena (National Museum collection), Gallatin County (National 

Museum collection). 
Wyoming: Cheyenne, Green River. 

Colorado: Colorado Springs (National Museum collection). 
Idaho: Bingham County, Pocatello, Jerome, Boise. 
Utah: Salt Lake City, Beaver Valley, South Creek, Beaver County. 
Nevada: Elko (H. F. Wickham collector), Lovelock (F. E. Blaisdell collector), 

Goldfield (Nunenmacher collector, type and two cotypes of C. vandykei 

Nunenmacher). 
California: Chilcoot (Essig collector). 

COCCINELLA SUTURALIS Casey 

Coccinella suturalis Caset, 1899, p. 89. — Johnson 1910, p. 64. 

Coccinella monticola Mulsant var. suturalis Casey, Leng, 1903, p. 198; 1920, p. 216. 

Elongate-oval, less convex than any other American species of Coc- 
cinella. Head and pronotum similar to C. difficilis Casey. Anterior 
angles of the pronotal epipleura with quadrangular white marks in 
females, and only narrowly white in males. Mesepimera white, met- 
epimera black. Punctulation of the pronotum and of the elytra dense 
and strong, becoming much stronger toward the external margin of 
the elytra and toward the sides of the pronotum. Elytra orange, 
with a large, obcordiform scutellar spot (}0, a rather broad black stripe 
along the suture, an oblique black fascia on the disk (spots 2 + 3), and 
a tranversal black spot in the posterior third of the length (spots 4 + 5) . 
Length of the body, 5.5-5.8 mm. 

Male genitalia (fig. 8) . — Penis similar to that of C. difficilis Crotch, 
but considerably longer than the paramera, the distal process much 
longer and less pointed at the end. Basal plates wider than long. 
Siphonal capsule not angulate. 

Female genitalia. — Unknown. 

Coccinella suturalis Casey is related to diflcilis Crotch, but differs 
from it in the shape of the body, in the punctulation and the pattern 
of the elytra, and in the structure of the genitalia. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows : 

Utah: Alta (Hubbard and Schwarz collection). 

California (Fresno County): Mount Kaiser (10,000 feet) (California Academy 
of Sciences collection), Mount Gould (12,000 feet) (California Academy of 
Sciences collection), Bubbs Creek (9,700 feet) (California Academy of 
Sciences collection). 



22 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

COCCINELLA TRIFASCIATA Linnaeus 

Coccinella trijasciata Linnaeus, Systema naturae, p. 365, 1758. — Leng, 1903, p. 

200. 
Coccinella perplexa Mulsant, 1850, p. 1021. — Casey, 1899, p. 89. — Johnson, 

1910, p. 57.— Leng, 1920, p. 216. 

Broadly oval, strongly convex. Head in females with white spots 
near the eyes, in males with a broad white stripe across the front. 
Pronotum with triangular or quadrangular white marks in the ante- 
rior angles, and with white anterior margin, pronotal epipleura with 
quadrangular white marks in the anterior angles. Mesepimera and 
metepimera, and usually also the posterior ends of the metepisterna, 
white. Pronotum densely and finely punctulate, punctures on the 
elytra nearly as dense as those on the pronotum but considerably 
stronger. Elytra yellow or orange with three transverse black fasciae ; 
the anterior fascia is common to both elytra (it is the result of the 
fusion of the spots 1 + K+l). The median fascia (spots 2 + 3), and 
the posterior fascia (spots 4 + 5) do not reach the suture or the 
<5xternal margin. Length of the body, 4.5-5.5 mm. 

Male genitalia (figs. 10, 19). — Penis short and wide, pyriform in 
shape, its distal end extended into a short process. Paramera only 
slightly, if at all, shorter than penis. Basal plates not wider than 
long. Sipho very short and thick, the siphonal capsule rather small 
and rounded. 

Female genitalia (fig. 27). — Receptaculum seminis long and slender, 
cornu almost pointed at the end, ramus wide, infundibulum not 
dilatated at the posterior end. 

The American representatives of this species were described under 
the name perplexa Mulsant. The identity of perplexa Mulsant with 
the palaearctic species trifasciata Linnaeus was the subject of a dispute 
between Casey and Leng (see Casey, 1908). I find myself in a com- 
plete agreement with Leng, who regards perplexa as a mere synonym 
of trifasciata. The only difference between the American and the 
Eurasiatic specimens of this species is the presence of the white 
margin of the pronotum in the former. Johnson (1910) found an 
individual of perplexa having no white margin on the pronotum. 
Furthermore, this character is sometimes found also in Asiatic speci- 
mens (Dobzhansky, 1926). The genitalia of the American and the 
Asiatic specimens are quite alike (cf. Dobzhansky, 1926, fig. 10). It 
seems that perplexa can not be considered even as a subspecifically 
distinct form, and therefore the name should be dropped. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Nova Scotia: Truro. 
New Brunswick: Hampton. 
Quebec: St. Hilaire, Lavaltrie, Fort Coulonge. 

Ontario: Ottavva, Huntsville, North Bay, Toronto, Chatham, Hudson Bay 
(University of Minnesota collection). 



ART. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 23 

Manitoba: Aweme, Mile 17 on Hudson Bay Railroad. 

Alberta: Banff. 

Alaska: Mountain Sheep Creek (22 miles below Eagle) (Harrington collector). 

Yukon: Dawson (J. M. Jessup collector), Whitehorse (J. A. Kusche collector). 

British Columbia: Glacier, Agassiz, Vernon, Victoria. 

Maine: Orono, Boothbay, Casco Bay. 

New Hampshire: Mount Washington, Lancaster, Franconia, Center Harbor, 

Farniington, Barnstead, Nashua. 
Massachusetts: Boston, Arlington, Melrose Highlands, Princeton, Cambridge, 

Stoughton, West Medford, Middleboro, North Saugus, Falmouth, W^oods 

Hole, Oak Bluffs. 
Rhode Island: Watch Hill. 

Connecticut: South Windsor, New Haven, Cromwell, Brookfield. 
New York: Adirondack Mountains, Mount Whiteface, Mount Mclntire, New- 
comb, Wilmington, Lake Placid, Middletown, West Point, Larchmont, Pelham 

Bay, New York, Staten Island, Ithaca. 
New Jersey: Fort Lee, Passaic, Ramsey, Great Notch, Newark, Westwood> 

Paterson, Chester, Boonton. 
Pennsylvania: State record. 
Maryland: State record. 
Michigan: Whitefish Point, Alpena, Detroit. 
Wisconsin: Madison. 
Minnesota: Grand Marais, Two Harbors, Duluth, Itasca County, Roseau C oun ty| 

Minneapolis, St. Paul, Lake City, Beaver Dam, Lake Crystal, St. Antony. 
North Dakota: State record. 
Montana: Bear Paw Mountains, Columbia Falls. 
Wyoming: Yellowstone National Park. 
Colorado: Larimer County, La Veta. 
New Mexico: Maxwell (National Museum collection). 
Texas: State record (National Museum collection). 
Idaho: Moscow, Ashton. 

Utah: Logan (California Academy of Sciences collection). 
Washington: Pullman. 
California: Eureka, Klamath (Dobzhansky collector). 

Remarks. — The individuals from Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, 
New Mexico, Idaho, and Utah are similar to those from the North- 
eastern States. A few individuals from Washington, Oregon, and 
California are probably extreme variants of the subspecies subversa 
LeConte. 

COCCINELLA TRIFASCIATA Linnaeus subspecies SUBVERSA LeConte 

Coccinella subversa LeConte, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 7, p. 19, 

1854.— Casey, 1899, p. 89. 
Coccinella perplexa Mulsant var. subversa LeConte, Johnson, 1910, p. 57. — 

Leng, 1920, p. 216. 

Differs from the typical trifasciata by the distinctly smaller size of 
the body and by a strong reduction of the black pigmentation of the 
elytra. Elytra spotless, or with only the scutellar spot (^) , or with 
only a very small discal spot (3), or with both the scutellar and the 
discal spots. In any case, the size of the scutellar and the discal 
spots is very much decreased as compared with typical trifasciata. 



24 PEOCEEDIFGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

the pigment is often brownish instead of black, and the outlines of 
the spots are frequently diffuse and indistinct. Length of the body, 
4.3-5 mm. 

According to Casey (1899, 1908) this is a species separate from 
trifasciafa {perplexa). The opinion of Leng and Johnson seems to be, 
however, better founded. An investigation of the genitalia of a large 
series of specimens of C. subversa from Oregon failed to reveal any 
difference between it and the typical C. trifasciata from the Eastern 
States, except, perhaps, an insignificant difference in the absolute 
size. Thus, C. subversa may be classified as a good example of a 
subspecific form. 

Geographic distribution. Localities as follows: 

British Columbia: Agassiz, Vancouver, Wellington, Victoria. 

Washington: Orcas Island, Mount Vernon, Everett, Port Angeles, Seattle, 
Tacoma, Puyallup, North Bend, Easton, Paradise Park (Mount Rainier), 
Longmire (Mount Rainier), Tenino, Oakville, Vancouver. 

Oregon: Astoria, Agate Beach, Neskowin, Olney, Portland, Hillsboro, Forest 
Grove, Cannon Beach, Tillamook. McMinnville, Siuslaw National Forest, 
Wilsonville, Corvallis, Waldport, North Bend, Josephine County. 

California: Scotia, Fortuna, Orick, Klamath, Hydesville, Sonoma County, 
Berkeley, Oakland. 

Remarks. — As shown by the list of localities, the subspecies is 
abundant in Washington and Oregon, in the whole region between 
the Cascade Range and the Pacific Ocean. Its distribution extends 
to British Columbia, where it overlaps the distribution of the typi- 
cal C. trifasciata. In the south the distribution of subversa overlaps 
that of the subspecies eugenii Mulsant and Juliana Mulsant. It 
must be noted, however, that the individuals of subversa from Cali- 
fornia have the form of the body and the punctation of the elytra 
more similar to that of Juliana than to that of subversa from Oregon 
and Washington. The parts of Oregon and Washington lying east 
of the Cascade Range are apparently inhabited by typical trifasciata. 
Thus the Cascade Range appears to be the line dividing the two 
subspecies. 

COCCINELLA TRIFASCIATA, Linnaeus subspecies EUGENII Mulsant 

Coccinella eugenii Mulsant, 1866, p. 95. 

Coccinella trifasciata Linnaeus var. eugenii Mulsant, Leng, 1903, p. 200. 
Coccinella perplexa Mulsant var. eugenii Mulsant, Johnson, 1910, p. 57. — Leng, 
1920, p. 216. 

This is a geographical race intermediate between the subspecies 
subversa LeConte and the subspecies Juliana Mulsant. The size and 
the punctation of the elytra are as in subversa. The pattern of the 
elytra may consist of the three transverse fasciae similar to those of 
the typical trifasciata but much narrower and showing a clear tend- 
ency to disintegrate into separate spots. More frequently the inter- 
mediate fascia is broken into a small round spot 2 and an oblong, 



ART. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 25 

transverse spot 3. The subapical fascia may also disintegrate into 
two small, usually round spots (4 and 5). Equally frequently the 
intermediate and the subapical fasciae remain intact, but the hum- 
eral fascia resolves itself into a round humeral spot (1) and a trans- 
verse scutellar spot (K). Finally, all the fasciae may disintegrate, 
resulting in a pattern similar to the typical pattern of the genus 
Coccinella (fig. 30) . Some spots, especially 2, 4, and 1, may be absent. 
Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Oregon: Cannon Beach, Tillamook, Colestin. 

California: Modoc County, Mount Shasta, Shively, Slsson, Cayton, Areata, 
Eureka, Scotia, Fortuna, Orick, Klamath, Hydesville, Mendocino, Guerne- 
ville, Lagunitas, Fairfax, Albany, Alameda, Piedmont, San Francisco, Los 
Gatos, Napa County, Plumas County, Tallac, Tahoe, Half Moon. 

Remarks. — The distribution of this subspecies overlaps that of the 
subspecies Juliana Mulsant. The subspecies eugenii Mulsant is, 
however, more frequent in the northern part of California than in 
the San Francisco region. The reverse holds true ior Juliana. 

COCCINELLA TRIFASCIATA Linnaeus subspecies JULIANA Mulsant 

Coccinella Juliana Mulsant, 1856, p. 135. — Casey, 1899, p. 89. 
Coccinella barda LeConte, 1859, p. 286. 

Coccinella trifasciata Linnaeus var. Juliana Mulsant, Leng, 1903, p. 200. 
Coccinella perplexa Mulsant var. Juliana Mulsant, Johnson, 1910, p. 57. — 
Leng, 1920, p. 216. 

More oblong but not less convex than other varieties of C. trifas- 
ciata. Punctation of the pronotum and of the elytra finer and 
sparser than in typical trifasciata; elytra shining. Pigmentation of 
the elytra strongly reduced. Usually only the humeral fascia is 
present, the two other fasciae being absent completely. The humeral 
fascia may resolve itself into separate spots (K and 1) . Small blotches 
of dark pigment may be present on the places occupied in other 
varieties by the spots 3, 4, and 5. Length of the body, 4.6-5.3 mm. 

The genitalia of the subspecies Juliana are not different from those of 
the typical trifasciata or from those of the subspecies subversa LeConte. 
This fact, as well as the absence of marked external differences, 
indicates that Juliana is a geographical race of trifasciata and not a 
separate species. The geographic distribution oi Juliana is in accord 
with this view. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows ; 

California; Areata, Hydesville, Scotia, Fortuna, Orick, Klamath, Dyerville, 
Shively, Casadero, Felton, Muir Woods, San Anselmo, Point Reyes, 
Fairfax, Sausalito, Muir Woods, Tiburon, Lagunitas, Mayfield, Napa 
County, Fieldbrook, Berkeley, Alameda, Piedmont, Contra Costa County, 
San Francisco, Millbrae, San Mateo, Mountain View, Crystal Lake, San 
Jose, Palo Alto, Los Gatos, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz Mountains, Monterey, 
Carmel, Point Sal (T. Dobzhansky collector), Santa Paula, (P. H. Timber- 
lake collection). 



26 PEOCiEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Remarks. — This subspecies is very common in the San Francisco 
region. To the north it gives numerous intergradations connecting 
it with the subspecies eugenii Mulsant (see above). 

COCCINELLA HIEROGLYPHICA Linnaeus subspecies TRICUSPIS Kirby 

Coccinella tricuspis Kirby, Richardson's Fauna Boreali-Americana, p. 231, 
1837.— Casey, 1899, p. 90.— Leng, 1903, p. 201; 1920, p. 216.— Johnson, 
1910, p. 59. 

Body oval, more elongate than in other species of the genus Cocci- 
nella, strongly convex. Head with white elongate spots near the eyes, 
pronotum with quadrangular white marks in the anterior angles, the 
anterior margin of the pronotum usually white, pronotal epipleura 
with white quadrangular marks in the anterior angles. Mesepimera 
and metepimera black, mesepimera brownish only in fresh specimens. 
Pronotum densely and finely, elytra densely and strongly punctu- 
late, elytra orange, with a common undulate subbasal fascia (spots 
1+2 + 3 + ^ + 3 + 2 + 1), and with another transverse black fascia in 
the posterior half of their length (spots 4 + 5), not continuous across 
the suture. Length of the body, 3.7-4.3 mm. 

Male genitalia (figs. 11, 17). — Penis short, sugar-loaf shaped, with- 
out processes or emarginations. Paramera short and thick. Basal 
plates wider than long. Sipho short and thick, siphonal capsule 
relatively very large. 

Female genitalia (fig. 28). — Receptaculum seminis slender, cornu 
pointed at the end, ramus strongly developed. Infundibulum not 
dilatated at its posterior end. 

I have shown (Dobzhansky, 1926) that the Siberian Coccinella tri- 
cuspis Kirby subsp. mannerheimi Mulsant is not specifically different 
from the European Coccinella hieroglyphica Linnaeus. This conclusion 
may be extended also to the American tricuspis. The genitalia of C. 
tricuspis Kirby (figs. 11, 17, 28) are completely like those of C. hiero- 
glyphica (see Dobzhansky, 1926, fig. 4), and the external differences 
between these forms, involving the color pattern and the shape of the 
body, are by no means more extreme than those that are to be 
expected between geographic races. Thus, the species C. hieroglyphica 
inhabits the entire north of the holarctic region. The subspecies C. 
hieroglyphica lives in Europe and in western Siberia ; C. mannerheimi 
occupies eastern Siberia; C. tricuspis occurs in Canada and north- 
ern United States; and C. humholdtiensis Nunenmacher inhabits 
the Pacific coast area of North America. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Guebec: Quebec, Quinze Lake, Montreal. 
Ontario: Lake Superior. 

Manitoba: Aweme, Mile 17 on Hudson Bay Railroad. 
Saskatchewan: Lebret. 



ART. 4 



BEETLES OP THE GENUS COCCIN-ELLA DOBZHANSKY 



27 



Alberta: Province record. 

New Hampshire: Lancaster, Mount Washington, Barnstead. 

Michigan: Whitefish Point. 

Minnesota: Two Harbors, Winton, Itasca Park, Minneapolis. 

Montana: Bear Paw Mountains (National Museum collection). 

COCCINELLA HIEROGLYPHICA Linnaeus subspecies HUMBOLDTIENSIS Nunenmacher 

Coccinella humboldtiensis Nunenmacher, Ent. News, vol. 23, p. 448, 1912. — 
Leng, 1920, p. 216. 

Differs from Coccinella hieroglyphica Linnaeus subspecies tricuspis 
Kirby by less elongate form of the body, finer punctulation, and by 
reduction of the black pigmentation of the elytra. Elytra orange 
with a rhomboidal black spot ji and without other 
spots, or with spots ji, 2, 3, and 4 + 5, or with K, 
4, and 5, or 4 + 5, or with two transverse fasciae 
(2 + 3 and 4 + 5), and the scutellar spot. Length 
of the body, 3.6-4.2 mm. 

The genitalia of C. humboldtiensis (one male and 
one female were examined) are identical with those 
of C. hieroglyphica tricuspis. Nunenmacher (loc. 
cit.) correctly pointed out the closeness of humbold- 
tiensis to tricuspis, but, in my opinion, overestimat- 
ed the value of the differences discovered between 
them. Surprisingly enough, humboldtiensis pos- 
sesses some similarities to the European hieroglyph- 
ica, which the geographically closer subspecies 
tricuspis does not possess. The similarities are the 
form of the body and the shape of the elytral 
markings. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 




Figure 30.— Right ely- 
tron of Coccinella 
undecimpunctata, 
representing the spots 
constituting the typi. 
cal pattern of the genus 
Coccinella. H» Spot 
}A, or the scutellar 
spot; 1, the first, or 
humeral, spot; 2, the 
second, or lateral, spot; 
3, the third, or discal, 
spot; 4, the fourth, or 
marginal, spot; 5, the 
fifth, or apical, spot 

Oregon: State record (Koebele collector). 

California: Crescent City (F. W. Nunenmacher collector, type and cotypes), 
Plumas County (F. W. Nunenmacher collector), Siskiyou County (Koebele 
collector). 

COCCINELLA UNDECIMPUNCTATA Linnaeus 

Coccinella undecimpunctata Linnaeus, Systema naturae, p. 366, 1758. — Leng, 
1920, p. 216. 

Oval, not strongly convex. Head with white spots near the eyes, 
pronotum and the pronotal epipleura with quadrangular or triangu- 
lar white markings in the anterior angles. Mesepimera and metepi- 
mera white. Pronotum and elytra very densely and rather finely 
punctulate, elytra yellow or brick red with the 11 typical spots 
(fig. 30). Spots 2 + 3 and 4+5 fuse together forming two transverse 
fasciae (var. boreolittoralis Donisthorpe) . Length of the body, 
5-5.5 mm. 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Male genitalia (figs. 12, 20). — This species may be recognized at 
once by the rudimentary, little chitinized siphonal capsule, and by 
the presence of a wide dilatation of the sipho just distal to the siphonal 
capsule. This dilatation is provided with an opening on the con- 
cave side of the sipho. Penis much longer than the paramera, basal 
plates much longer than wide, extended posteriorly into two diver- 
gent processes. 

Female genitalia (fig. 29). — Receptaculum seminis long and slender, 
cornu pointed at the end, the ringlike sculptor rudimentary. Infun- 
dibulum short and provided with wide funnel-shaped dilatations at 
both ends. 

Geographic distribution. — Localities as follows: 

Massachusetts: Stoneham (F. A. Sherriff collector), Nahant (F. E. Blaisdell 
collector), Falmouth Heights (T. Dobzhansky collector). 

Alaska: 4 miles north of New Rampart House (J. M. Jessup collector), 60-75 
miles north of Rampart House (J. M. Jessup collector). 

Remarks. — This species lives only along the sea coasts of Europe, 
on saline soils of Middle and Central Asia, and along the coast of the 
Polar Ocean from Greenland to the mouth of Yenisei. The finding 
of this species on the Massachusetts coast may be explained by two 
different hypotheses. First, it may have been introduced there from 
Europe. Second, it may be native there. In the latter case one may 
expect that it will be found also along the coasts of Nova Scotia, 
Newfoundland, and Labrador. The individuals from Massachusetts 
are quite similar to those from England and the northern coasts of 
Europe. The two individuals from Alaska are different from those 
from Massachusetts in appearance. They are larger, less convex, 
and have a stronger punctation. This seems to be a race the distri- 
bution of which is, as far as known, restricted to Alaska. It seems 
probable that C. undecimpunctata will be found also along the north- 
ern coast of eastern Siberia. 

GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES OF THE GENUS 

COCCINELLA 

As shown above, the nearctic region is inhabited by 1 1 species of 
the genus Coccinella. In the palaearctic region there are at least 15 
species of that genus. Six of the nearctic species are represented in 
this region by more than one subspecies. Furthermore, 5 species, as 
follows, live in both nearctic and in palaearctic regions: transversa' 
guttata Falderman, nivicola Menetries, trifasciata Linnaeus, hiero- 
glyphica Linnaeus, and undecimpunctata Linnaeus. All these species, 
except perhaps undecimpunctata, are widely distributed in northern 
and eastern Siberia, in Canada, and in the northern United States. 
Most of them are found also in Alaska, and it is very probable that 
all of them will be found there when the country is studied more 



ART. 4 



BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 



29 



thoroughly. On the other hand, only one of these species — namely, 
transversoguttata — extends its distribution to the southern limits of both 
nearctic and palaearctic regions; that is to say, most of the species 
in common to both regions are distributed only in the northern part 
of the hoiarctic region. The accompanying table shows the subdivi- 
sion of the genus into groups, and the correspondence between the 
nearctic and the palaearctic faunas. 



Group 



novemnotata 

transversoguttata. 

septempunetata.. . 



difflcilis 

trifasciata 

undecimpunctata. 



Nearctic species 



f novemnotata Herbst 

Iprolongata Crotch. 

(transversoguttata Falderman. 
johnsoni Casey 



Icalifornica Mannerheim 

InivJcoia subspecies monticola Muisant. 



[difficilis Crotch.. 



suturalis Casey 

trifasciata Linnaeus. 



hieroglyphica subspecies tricuspis Kirby. 
(undecimpunctata Linnaeus 

1::::::::;:::::::::::: :::::::::::: 



Palaearctic species 



divaricata Olivier. 

i transversoguttata Falderman. 
magnopunctata Rybakow. 

[septempunetata Linnaeus. 
Inivicola Menetries. 
Ireitteri Weise. 
[saucerottei Muisant. 

Jtianshanica Dobzhansky. 
liranica Dobzhansky. 

[trifasciata Linnaeus. 
<quinquepunctata Linnaeus. 
Ihieroglyphica Linnaeus. 

{undecimpunctata Linnaeus, 
pontica Dobzhansky. 
miranda Wollaston. 



The specific diversity of the genus Coccinella is concentrated, in 
North America, in the region between the Rocky Mountains and 
the Pacific Ocean. There is no species, except undecim'punctata L., 
that lives in North America, and that is not found in this region. 
East of the Hocky Mountains there are found only five species, and 
these are the species common to the nearctic and palaearctic regions 
(see above), i. e., the widely distributed hoiarctic species. As men- 
tioned above, these species are chiefly northern in their distribution. 
Hence, the fauna of the southeastern United States is very poor. 
The only species found in this region is novemnotata Herbst. The 
presence of a clear center of the specific diversity in the nearctic 
region has no parallel in the palaearctic. Indeed, in the palaearctic 
one may point to at least two separate such centers; one in the 
region of Mongolia, Tsaidam, and Kuku-nor and the other in the 
mountains of Russian Turkestan (especially the Tian-Shan system) 
One may also note that all the species that are w^idely distributed 
in North America form separate subspecies in the regions lying west 
of the Rockies. 

The second outstanding feature of the distribution of Coccinella 
is the decrease of the number of species from north to south. The 
fauna of Mexico, though very little known, is certainly poor. In the 
south the genus Coccinella is replaced by the closely related Cyclo- 
neda Crotch. The center of the specific diversity of Cycloneda lies 
in Central and South America, where it, and some related genera, 
replace Coccinella completely. 



30 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 



KEY TO THE SPECIES OF COCCINELLA 



MALES 



1. Head with a broad white stripe across the front 2. 

Head black, with two white spots near the eyes 3. 

2. Anterior coxae with a white spot. Elytra never with trans- 

verse black fasciae. Penis extended into a triangular process, 

which is nearly as wide as long novemnotata. 

Coxae black. Elytra frequently with transverse black fasciae. 
Penis extended into an acuminate process, which is much 
longer than wide trif asciata. 

3. Mesepimera and metepimera black. Penis without emargina- 

tions or processes, sugarloaf like in shape hieroglyphica. 

At least the mesepimera white. Penis of a different shape 4. 

4. The siphonal capsule strongly chitinized. The sipho not 

dilated immediately beyond the siphonal capsule, and not 

provided in this region by a wide opening 5. 

Siphonal capsule rudimentary, not more strongly chitinized 
than the rest of the sipho. Sipho strongly dilated immedi- 
ately beyond the siphonal capsule, and provided with a wide 
opening. Mesepimera and metepimera white undecimpunctata 

5. Body little convex. Elytral suture with a broad black stripe. 

Penis extended into a fingerlike process, the sides of which 

are subparallel suturalis. 

Body moderately to strongly convex. Elytral suture without 

or with a narrow black stripe 6. 

6. The sides of the penis deeply emarginated, its proximal part 

extended into a rhomboidal or triangular process 7. 

The sides of the penis convergent distally, its proximal end 
extended into a more fingerlike process, acuminate at the 
end 10. 

7. Anterior coxae with a white spot. Convexity of the elytra very 

great in the posterior third of their length. Penis extended 

into a rhomboidal process prolongata. 

Anterior coxae black. Convexity of the elytra regular. Penis 

extended into a triangular process 8. 

8. Penis extended into a process that is much longer than wide, 

the sides of this process strongly concave transversoguttata. 

Penis extended into a broad triangular process, the sides of 

which are straight 9. 

9. Body convex. Elytra spotless calif ornica. 

Body moderately convex. Elytra spotted johnsoni. 

10. Body large, strongly convex. Penis gradually narrowing dis- 
tally, extended into a long fingerlike process nivicola. 

Body smaller, moderately convex. Penis abruptly narrowed 

distally, and extended into a short, acuminate process difRcilis. 

FEMALES 

1. Mesepimera and metepimera black. Infundibulum not dilated 

at its posterior end hieroglyphica. 

At least the mesepimera whiti.' 2 

2. Metepimera white 3. 

Metepimera black or dark brown S. 



AET. 4 BEETLES OF THE GENUS COCCINELLA DOBZHANSKY 31 

3. Convexity of the elytra very great in the posterior third of 

their length prolongata. 

Convexity of the elytra regular 4. 

4. Infundibulum not dilated on its posterior end. Elytra fre- 

quently with transverse black fasciae trifasciata. 

Infundibulum dilated at both ends. Elytra usually without 

transverse black fasciae 5. 

5. Head with a broad white band across the front. Infundibu- 

lum dilated more strongly at the anterior than at the posterior 

end novemnotata. 

Head v.-ith two white spots near the eyes. Infundibulum 
dilated equally at both ends, or with the posterior end dilated 
more strongly than the anterior 6. 

6. Infundibulum very short, equally dilated at both ends. Cornu 

pointed at the end, its ringlike sculpture rudimentary. Body 

little convex undecimpunctata, 

Infundibulum very strongly dilated at its posterior end. Cornu 

not pointed 7. 

7. Body strongly convex. Elytra alutaceous_- nivicola subspecies alutacea. 
Body moderately convex. Elytra nonalutaceous difRcilia. 

8. Body little convex. Elytral suture with a broad black stripe. _ suturalis. 
Body moderately or strongly convex. Elytral suture with- 
out or with a narrow black stripe 9. 

9. The posterior end of the infundibulum dilated much more 

strongly than the anterior end, and not provided with a 

circular constriction nivicola. 

The posterior end of the infundibulum provided with a circu- 
lar constriction. Both ends of the infundibulum equally 
strongly dilated, or the anterior end more strongly dilated 
than the posterior 10. 

10. Elytra spotless californica. 

Elytra spotted 11. 

11. Body strongly convex transversoguttata. 

Body moderately convex johnsoni 



LITERATURE CITED 
Casey, T. L. 

1899. Revision of the American Coccinellidae. Journ. New York Ent. Soc, 

vol. 7, pp. 71-169. 
1908. Notes on the Coccinellidae. Can. Ent., vol. 40, pp. 393-421. 

Crotch, G. R. 

1873. Revision of the Coccinellidae of the United States. Trans. Amer. 
Ent. Soc, vol. 4, pp. 363-382. 

DOBZHANSKY, Th. 

1925. Zur Kenntnis der Gattung Coccinella auct. Zool. Anz., vol. 62, pp. 

241-249. 

1926. Die palaarktischen Arten der Gattung Coccinella L. Rev. Russe 

d'Ent., vol. 20, pp. 16-32. 
Johnson, R. H. 

1910. Determinate evolution in the color-pattern of the lady-beetles. 
Carnegie Inst. Washington Publ. 122, 104 pp. 

LeConte, John L. 

1859. Additions to the coleopterous fauna of northern California and Oregon, 
Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 11, pp. 281-292. 
Leng, C. W. 

1903. Notes on Coccinellidae. II, Coccinellini. Journ. New York Ent. 
Soc, vol. 11, pp. 193-213. 

1920. Catalogue of the Coleoptera of America north of Mexico. 470 pp. 
Mount Vernon. 

Mxjlsant, E. 

1850. Species des coleoptferes trimferes s^curipalpes. Ann. Soc. Agr. Lyon, 

ser. 2, vol. 2, pp. 1-1104. 
1853. Supplement species des coleopteres trimeres securipalpes. Ann. Soc. 

Agr. Lyon, ser. 3, vol. 1, pp. 129-334. 
1853. Opuscules entomologiques. Op. 3, Coccinellidae. Pp. 1-205. Paris. 
1856. Opuscules entomologiques. Op. 7, Coccinellidae. 200 pp. Paris, 
1866. Monographie des Coccinellides. I. 292 pp. Paris. 

Verhoepf, K. 

1895. Beitrage zur vergleichenden Morphologie des Abdomens der Cocci- 
nelliden. Wiegm. Arch. Naturg., vol. 61, pp. 1-80. 

32 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1931 



ECHINODERMS FROM THE ISLANDS OF NIUAFOOU 
AND NUKUALOFA, TONGA ARCHIPELAGO, WITH THE 
DESCRIPTION OF A NEW GENUS AND TWO NEW 
SPECIES 



By Austin H. Clark 
Curator, Division of Echdnoderms, United States National Museum 



While attached to the United States Naval Eclipse Expedition to 
the island of Niuafooii, 1930, Lieut. Henry C. Kellers (M. C), 
United States Navy, made an extensive collection of the local 
echinoderms. 

Niuafooii, or Tin Can Island, is one of the islands in the Tonga 
Archipelago, and is situated between Samoa and Fiji in latitude 
15° 33' 52'' S., longitude 175° 37' 46" W. It is a volcanic island 
subject to more or less frequent eruptions, the last of which took 
place on July 25, 1929. 

Lieutenant Kellers tells me that, except for a distance of about 
3% miles, Niuafoou is practically surrounded by lava benches backed 
by basaltic cliffs from 70 to 100 feet in height. These benches are 
now covered as a result of the eruption of 1929, although in places 
one can see outcroppings of the old lava. They extend from 100 to 
200 yards into the sea. On the outer edge they have an almost 
precipitous drop to the 20-fathom line, which runs out for practically 
a mile, where the sea floor sinks to the abysses. 

Some of the benches are awash all the time and are mostly entirely 
covered at high tide. At low water tide pools of all sizes are found, 
and in these tide pools most of the collecting was done. 

Lieutenant Kellers's collection includes a few specimens that were 
brought to him by natives from Nukualofa, the seat of government 
of the Tonga Group, a couple of hundred miles to the southwest of 
Niuafoou. 

The echinoderms found at Niuafoou were species that would be 
expected to occur on an island situated in this general region, with a 
single remarkable exception. This exception is an entirely new 
genus of echinoids of the family Echinometridae, represented by two 
species, which is related to Podophora and also to Heterocentrotus. 

No. 2905.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum. Vol. 80, Art. 6. 

68391—31 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol.80 

It seems to represent Podofhora here much as Golobocentrotus^ also 
with two species, represents it in the Bonin Islands. The genus 
Podophora itself also includes two species, one of which, P. atrata^ 
ranges from Zanzibar and Mauritius to the Hawaiian Islands but is 
very local in its occurrence and has been reported only from volcanic 
regions ; while the other, P. yedifera^ is definitely known only from 
the Tuamotus, although it has been reported from the western coast 
of South America and from the West Indies. 

In addition to the sea urchins and sea stars listed in the following 
pages, the collection includes a number of ophiurans and holo- 
thurians. 

I am greatly indebted to Dr. Hubert Lyman Clark, of the Museum 
of Comparative Zoology at Cambridge, Mass., for his kindness in 
examining for me and commenting upon the tj^e specimen of 
Zenocentrotus paradoxus^ and for his further kindness in revising 
the manuscript of the present paper. 

Class ECHINOIDEA 
Family CENTRECHINIDAE 

CENTRECHINUS SETOSUS (Leske) 

One small' specimen. 

ECHINOTHRIX DIADEMA (Linnaena) 

One small specimen. 

Family STOMOPNEUSTIDAE 

STOMOPNEUSTES VARIOLARIS (Lamarck) 

Six specimens, all but one of which are small. 

Very small specimens much resemble similarly small individuals 
of Echinometra ohlovga. They may easily be distinguished, how- 
ever, by the milled ring at the base of the primary spines, which is 
only slightly developed and not sharply differentiated from the spine 
itself, is very fine, and is of the same color as the spine. In small 
examples of Echinometra ohlonga the milled ring is strongly devel- 
oped and stands out abruptly from the spine itself, is coarse, and is 
brilliant white, or pinkish or grayish white, in sharp contrast to the 
deep olive or blackish color of the spine. 

The United States National Museum possesses a fine series of 83 
specimens of this species collected by Owen Bryant at Pelaboean 
Ratoe, Wynkoops Bay, western Java. 



ART. 5 ECHINODERMS FROM THE TONGA ARCHIPELAGO — CLARK 3 

Family ECHINIDAE 

TRIPNEUSTES GRATILLA (Linnaeus) 

Two specimens, one with dark and the other with whitish spines. 
Family ECHINOMETRIDAE 

PARASALENIA GRATIOSA A. Agassiz 

Nukualofa Island. Two specimens; the larger is parasitized by a 
small gastropod. 

The larger specimen measures 33 mm. in the longer axis and 26 
mm. in the shorter. The longest spines on the longer axis are 23 mm. 
in length, and the longest spines on the shorter axis measure 19 mm. 

The periproct is largely covered by five large plates. Of these, 
two are situated on the inner border of genital 1, one is on genital 2, 
one occupies the whole inner edge of genital 3 and about two-thirds 
of that of genital 4, and one occupies one-third of the inner border of 
genital 4 and nearly all that of genital 5. These plates are short 
with broadly rounded tips, and the center of the periproct is covered 
with eight small subequal plates. 

Genital 3, though long, is very narrow, and its inner border is 
only about half as long as that of genitals 2 and 4. Genital 1 is 
short but broad, and genital 5 is the smallest, triangular, with its 
inner border about twice as long as that of the elongate rhombic 
genital 3. 

Genitals 4, 5, and 1 each bear a single cylindrical or more or less 
club-shaped spine 2 mm. long situated near the inner edge. Genital 
2 bears two spines, one diagonally behind and close to the other. 
Genital 3 bears two spines, one in the middle of the plate and one 
near the inner border. In addition to these spines, the genitals bear 
a few pediceilariae, some of which have jointed stalks. 

Oculars II and V are insert, and ocular I is very nearly so, but 
oculars III and IV are very widely excluded from the periproct. 
Oculars II, III, and IV each bear a spine similar to the spines borne 
by the genitals. 

Most of the spines remain cylindrical from the base to the end of 
the proximal third or half, from that point tapering regularly to 
the tip, but some taper regularly from the base, and some increase 
slightly in diameter as far as the end of the proximal third or half. 

The test is deep black. The spines are dark olive-brown, most of 
them with the tips polished. The spines at and below the ambitus 
are somewhat lighter with longer and more prominent polished tips. 
The milled ring is pure white and very conspicuous. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

The smaller specimen measures 21 mm. in the longer axis and 
16 mm. in the shorter. The longest spines in the longer axis are 
18 mm. in length, and the longest spines on the shorter axis measure 
13 mm. 

The periproct is completely covered by four plates. Two of these, 
one occupying one corner of genital 2, the whole inner edge of genital 
3, and two-thirds of the inner edge of genital 4, and the other 
occupying one-third of the inner edge of genital 4 and the entire 
inner edge of genital 5, are subequal and larger than the two 
opposite. 

The genitals are more nearly of the same size than in the other 
specimen. Genital 2 is the largest, followed by genital 4; genital 
3 is narrower than 2 or 4 but longer; and genital 5 is longer than 
genital 1. The inner border of genital 3 adjoining the periproct 
is about half as long as the inner border of the other genitals. 
Genital 2 bears a cylindrical spine near the inner border, and genitals 
3 and 4 have a prominent tubercle in this position but no spine; 
genitals 1 and 5 bear neither spines nor tubercles. 

All the oculars are exsert, ocular II only slightly so, oculars I 
and V about twice as much so as ocular II, and oculars III and TV 
three or four times as much so as oculars I and V. Oculars I and 
III bear each a cylindrical spine, and all the oculars bear several 
pedicellariae. 

In color this specimen resembles the other, but the spines are 
slightly lighter, a very few of the spines on the oral surface show- 
ing light tips with one or two very obscure subapical dark bands. 

ECmNOMETRA MATHAEI (de Blainville) 

Four hundred and thirty-eight specimens, all but 22 of which 
are more or less strongly flattened immature and young of various 
sizes, and are referable to E. picta as described by A. Agassiz and 
H. L. Clark. 

In their final account of E. picta these authors said that the more 
the specimens on which that form is based are studied, the more 
doubtful it seems whether it is really distinct from E. mathaei. 
They note that in the specimens regarded as picta the test is dis- 
tinctly flattened and is wider than usual, and the spines seem to 
be less crowded and are somewhat more slender than in mathaei^ 
and are much less numerous on the abactinal system. The latter is 
distinctly larger than it is in 7natha£% its diameter sometimes nearly 
equaling one-third of the test length. There is seldom more than 
one secondary tubercle on each genital plate. The color. is dark 
brown for the test and light fawn color for the spines. Agassiz 
and Clark say that these specimens intergrade more or less com- 



ART. 5 ECHINODERMS FROM THE TONGA ARCHIPELAGO CLARK 5 

pletely with niathaei in each one of the characters, but are usually 
easily distinguished by the combination of all five. They remarked 
that such specimens occur only in material from the Hawaiian, 
Society, and Philippine Islands. 

The si^ecimens from Niuafoou are very variable in every feature, 
but those that are referable to ficta seem simply to represent the 
younger or immature stages of the large ones, which are undoubtedly 
referable to niathaei. 

In color the test is always dark, usually a more or less deep reddish 
brown, though sometimes quite black. The spines may be light olive- 
gray to deep olive, with long or short white or pinkish tips usually 
preceded by a broad and indefinite very dark band; or fawn color, 
uniform or with lighter or darker tips; or olive with fawn-colored 
tips; or olive becoming gradually darker at the tips; or whitish 
faintly tinged with olive or with fawn color. The milled ring is 
almost always pure white, but is occasionally slightly tinged with 
fawn color or pink. 

In some specimens, apparently from quiet water, the spines are 
very slender and much elongated. 

ECHINOMETRA OBLONGA (de Blainville) 

Plate 5, Figtire 3 ; Plate 7, Figubb 3 

One hundred and seventy-eight specimens, most of which are young 
of various sizes. 

Young individuals of this species (pi. 5, fig. 3; pi. 7, fig. 3) are 
much flattened and broadened, the longer diameter being often but 
slightly in excess of the shorter, and the spines are slender and rela- 
tively long, and occasionally elongated. This gives them a consider- 
able superficial resemblance to similarly small examples of Stomop- 
neustes variolaris. 

The specimens are all very dark in color, purplish black or very 
dark olive. The milled ring at the base of the primary spines is 
usually pure white, sometimes white tinged with purplish, pinkish, 
or olive. 

A specimen from Puako Bay, Hawaii, recorded by A. Agassiz and 
H. L. Clark as Echinometra picta (U.S.N.M. No, 32813) seems to me 
to be a young example of this species. 

ZENOCENTROTUS, new genus 

Diagnosis. — A genus of Echinometridae in which the longer axis, 
which only slightly exceeds the shorter, passes through interambu- 
lacrum 4a and ambulacrum Ila; the ambulacral plates consist of 
9 to 11 elements ; the periproct is studded with numerous small plates ; 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

the primary spines are circular, subtriangular, or oval in cross sec- 
tion, tapering, with parallel sides, or with slightly divergent sides, 
becoming broad and much flattened below the ambitus, much longer 
at the ambitus than elsewhere; the miliary spines are short, rather 
stout, mostly tapering and abruptly truncated at the tip, the smaller 
slender and club shaped ; and the primary tubercles are of moderate 
size, one to each interambulacral plate above the ambitus, two, and 
later two larger and one smaller at and below the ambitus. 

Genotype. — Zenocentrotus kellersi^ new species. 

Range. — Only known from Niuafoou Island, between Samoa and 
Fiji. 

Included species. — Zenocentrotus kellersi and Z. paradoxus. 

Remarks. — Except for the position of the longer axis, the test of 
Zenocentrotus., especially of Z. paradoxus., is very similar to that of 
Echinometra vanbrunti, in which the test is much flattened, the 
longer axis is often only slightly longer than the shorter, and there 
are numerous pore pairs — usually 7 or 8. In a specimen of Echino- 
metra vanbrunti of approximately the same size as the type speci- 
men of Zenocentrotus kellersi^ there are 15 interambulacral and 20 
ambulacral plates in each column as in that species. 

The genus Zenocentrotus., however, appears to be most closely re- 
lated to Heterocentrotus with which it agrees in the main features 
of the test, particularly the number and relative size of the primary 
tubercles, and the shape and structure of the poriferous areas on the 
oral surface. The test is, however, much more nearly circular and 
much more depressed than in Heterocentrotus. Though much more 
slender, the primary spines are of the same general character as 
those of Heterocentrotus trigonarius., and the young specimens of 
this species have a very considerable general resemblance to the 
species of Zenocentrotus., some to Z. kellersi (compare pi. 8, fig. 1, 
and pi. 3, fig. 1), and others to Z. paradoxus (compare pi, 8, fig. 2, 
and pi. 6, fig. 2). In a specimen of Heterocentrotus trigonarius with 
the test 80 mm. in the longer axis, (here are 10 or 11 interambulacral 
and 14 to 15 ambulacral plates in each column, the plates being there- 
fore considerably fewer than in Zenocenti^otus. 

The longer axis in Heterocentrotus passes through ambulacrum 
IVb and interambulacrum lb, while in Podophora and in Coloho- 
centrotus it passes through interambulacrum 4a and ambulacrum Ila 
as in Zenocentrotus. As in Echinometra., the test in Podophora and 
in Colohocentrotus varies from subcircular or rounded pentagonal 
to elliptical, and from much flattened to rather strongly arched. 
The broad poriferous zones, especially the greatly broadened porifer- 
ous areas on the oral surface, the very numerous tubercles on the 
interambulacral plates, and the more or less marked concavity of the 



ART. 5 ECHINODERMS FROM THE TONGA ARCHIPELAGO CLARK 7 

oral surface of the test along the longer axis, readily separate Podo- 
phora and Colohocentrotius from Zenocentrotus. The teeth of Zeno- 
centrotus, it may be noticed, with their strongly beveled sides and 
broad flat upper surface bordered with fine rounded ridges, re- 
semble the teeth of Podophora more closely than they do the teeth 
of the other genera. 

The tube-feet resemble those of related genera, but the sucking 
disk is divided into almost invariably 5 (occasionally 6 and rarely 
4) sectors, instead of into 4 as in Podophora and Colohocentrotus or 
5 or 6 in Heterocentrotus. 

KEY TO THE SPECIES OF THE GENUS ZENOCENTROTUS 

a\ Poriferous areas below much broadened, in the widest portion 
three-fourths the width of the adjacent portion of the inter- 
ambulacral area, with the outer border strongly convex; 
tubercles on the interambulacral plates above the ambitus 
with their bases separated by less than the diameter of the 
tubercles ; primary spines at ambitus long and mostly some- 
what tapering, the spines gradually decreasing in length 
toward the pei*iproct kellersi. 

a^ Poriferous areas below not greatly broadened, in the widest 
portion not more than half the width of the adjacent por- 
tion of the interambulacral area, with the outer border gently 
convex ; tubercles on the interambulacral plates above the 
ambitus with their bases separated by much more than the 
diameter of the tubercles ; spines at the ambitus less elongated 
and mostly increasing slightly in width distally paradoxus. 

ZENOCENTROTUS KELLEKSI. new species 

Plates 1-3 ; Plate 4, Figure 1 ; Plate 5, Figure 1 ; Plate 6, Figure 3 

Description of the type specimen. — The longer diameter of the 
test is 55 mm., and the shorter diameter is 47.5 mm. ; the height is 
19 mm. 

There are 15 or 16 interambulacral and 20 ambulacral plates in 
each column. 

The periproct (pi. 1) is irregularly oval, 4 by 3 mm.; it bears 
nmnerous small plates, which decrease in size inwardly; a very few 
of the larger plates bear tubercles. The madreporic plate is more 
than half again as large as the other genitals, which are subequal 
in size. It is situated in the middle half of one of the sides of the 
periproct delimited by the longer axis. It bears about 14 very 
minute tubercles, which are arranged roughly in two irregular trans- 
verse rows across the middle. The other genitals are subequal in 
size. Each bears 7 to 9 small tubercles, of which 2, situated on the 
inner margin, are much larger than the others. 



8 PBOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

All the oculars are exsert, II and III widely so, IV rather less 
widely, I still less widely, and V barely exsert. The oculars are very 
small, chevron-shaped, each with five very small tubercles. 

Near the oculogenital ring each interambulacral plate bears a 
prominent central tubercle and a few small peripheral tubercles. 
These last on the third or fourth plate beyond the genital form a 
complete row and vary somewhat in size, those at the angles of the 
plates being the largest. Just above the ambitus those near the outer 
edge of the plate rapidly increase in size, and at the ambitus others 
beyond these also increase in size so that when viewed from above 
the inner two-thirds or half of the interambulacral areas is seen to 
bear two rows of large tubercles, while the outer third has four 
rows; and at and just below the ambitus there is a short row of some- 
what smaller tubercles beyond each of the outer rows. On the actinal 
surface of the test these six rows rapidly converge, as a result of the 
broadening of the poriferous areas, and the tubercles become smaller. 
Two-thirds of the distance from the ambitus to the peristome the 
intermediate rows on each half of the interambulacra come to an 
end, and from that point the two central rows, and at some distance 
from them the two outermost rows, continue parallel to the peristome. 

The ambulacral plates each bear a prominent tubercle, which 
slowly increases in size from the oculogenital ring to the ambitus; 
on the oral side of the test these tubercles rapidly decrease in size, 
and the two lines of tubercles converge; slightly more than half- 
way between the ambitus and the peristome the now very small 
tubercles form two parallel rows close together and run to the 
peristome. 

There are 8 to 11 (usually 9 or 10) pore pairs in an arc both at 
the ambitus and near the oculars. 

The oral surface of the test (pi. 2) is flat, and is only very slightly, 
if at all, concave in the longer axis. The peristomal area is pentag- 
onal with double angles. The radius to the point of an angle (on 
the ambulacral-interambulacral border) is 11.5 mm., and the radius 
to the deepest (inner) portion of a poriferous area is 10 mm. 

On the oral surface the poriferous areas gradually and regularly 
broaden to a maximum width of 5.5 mm. two-thirds of the distance 
from the ambitus to the peristome. From that point the outer bor- 
der curves broadly downward and inward, but the inner border 
curves only very slightly. At their widest point the poriferous 
areas are about three- fourths as broad as the interambulacral areas 
separating them. 

At the ambitus the primary spines are from 20 to 25 mm. long, 
the lower more or less strongly flattened, especially on the lower 
side. Though the lower side is slightly and evenly convex, the 



AET. 5 ECHINODERMS JTEOM THE TONGA ARCHIPELAGO CLARK 9 

upper side is less evenly rounded, being highest in the center, the 
cross section being a more or less low triangle with broadly rounded 
angles, the upper obtuse angle becoming less and less marked dis- 
tally. The spines are about 2.5 mm. broad with parallel sides and 
an abruptly truncated tip. Just below the ambitus the spines are 
somewhat shorter and more flattened, and broaden slowly from the 
base to the distal half or two-thirds. On the oral surface they 
are abruptly shorter, and they rapidly decrease in size adorally, 
becoming at the same time much more slender. 

Above the ambitus the primary spines decrease in length and 
become less flattened and more pointed, tapering evenly from the 
base to the somewhat blunted tip and being more or less regularly 
rounded in cross section. The spines on the third interambulacral 
plates below the apical disk are 13 to 15 mm. long. 

Interspersed with these large spines are great numbers of much 
smaller spines from 3 to 5 mm. in length. These are mostly, 
especially along the poriferous zones, club shaped, slowly increasing 
in diameter to an abruptly truncated tip. A few of the larger ones 
have parallel sides, and some taper to a blunt tip. 

The primordial ambulacral plates are rounded wedge shaped, the 
two of each pair with their larger ends together, forming a closed 
ring about the mouth. They are studded with tubercles and bear 
small blunt spines and numerous pedicellariae. Frequently very 
small nonambulacral plates are intercalated between these pairs of 
ambulacrals. 

The peristomal membrane is thickly set with very numerous very 
small and greatly elongated plates arranged concentrically, and it 
also bears a few widely scattered small rounded plates each with 
a median tubercle and spine and a thickened rim. 

The teeth are much flattened and very thin, as in Podophora^ with 
a narrow elevated rim bordering the flat upper surface on each side. 
In section the teeth are flattened trapezoidal. 

The color is dull olive-brown with a tinge of purplish, the long 
spines at the ambitus lighter below and outwardly more or less 
strongly tinged with violet. 

ry/)e.— U.S.N.M. No. E. 2810, collected at Niuafoou by Lieut. 
H. C. Kellers on October 6, 1930. 

Six additional specimens were collected on October 5 and 6, 1930. 

Notes. — In the largest specimen (pi. 4, fig. 1; pi. 5, fig. 1) the 
longer diameter of the test is 60 mm., and the shorter diameter is 
55 mm. ; the height of the test is 25 mm. The longest spines at the 
ambitus are 30 mm. and the spines near the apical disk are 15 mm. 
long. The color is dull olive, the longest spines tinged with violet 
toward the tip; the spines at and below the ambitus have violet 
tips beneath. 



IQ PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

In the smallest specimen (pi. 6, fig. 3) the diameter of the test is 
25.5 mm. The longest spines at the ambitus are 20 mm. long and 
the spines nearest the periproct are 12 mm. long. The color is dull 
olive. 

ZENOCENTROTUS PARADOXUS, new species 

Plate 5, Figuee; 2 ; Plate 6, Figures 1, 2 ; Plate 7, Figures 1, 2 

Description of the type specimen. — The longer diameter of the 
test is 37 mm., and the shorter diameter is 33 mm.; the height is 
13.5 mm. 

There are 13 or 14 interambulacral and 16 ambulacral plates in 
each column. 

The large spines at the ambitus (pi. 5, fig. 2 ; pi. 6, figs. 1, 2) are flat- 
ter and more broadened than in Z. kellersi, all of them increasing 
slightly in width distally or having parallel sides ; none taper distally. 
On the apical surface the spines very rapidly decrease in size above the 
ambitus, almost immediately becoming short, and mostly very short, 
the longest not more than 7 or 8 mm. in length. About the peristome 
(pi. 7, fig. 2) there is in each interambulacral area a group of usually 
4 long, slender, narrowly spatulate spines 4-5 mm. long which stand 
out rather conspicuously because of their length from the other 
spines on the oral surface. In Z. kellersi (pi. 4, fig. 1) the spines 
in this position are not noticeably different from those behind them. 

The oculars (pi. 6, fig. 1) are larger than in the type specimen of 
Z. kellersi, with I and V more fully exsert; each bears from 1 to 3, 
usually 3, very small tubercles. 

The tubercles on the interambulacral and ambulacral plates are 
relatively smaller than in Z. kellersi, and are more widely separated. 

There are 10 or 11, usually 11, pore pairs in an arc. 

On the oral surface (pi. 7, fig. 1) the poriferous zones are less 
broadened, being where they are widest about half as broad as the 
interambulacral areas separating them. Their outer margin is much 
less strongly curved than in Z. kellersi, and the tubercles in the two 
ambulacral rows between the poriferous zones are smaller at the 
ambitus and decrease more gradually in size. 

Type.— U.S. l^M. No. E. 2813, collected at Niuafoou by Lieut. H. C. 
Kellers on September 20, 1930. 

Thirteen additional specimens were collected on September 19 and 
20 and on October 6, 1930. 

HETEROCENTROTUS TRIGONARIUS (Lamarck) 

Plate 4, Figubb 2; Plate 8 

Twenty-seven specimens. In the largest specimen the longer diam- 
eter of the test is 55 mm., and the longest spines are 75 mm. long. 



ART. 6 ECHINODEBMS FROM THE TONGA ARCHIPELAGO CLARK 1 1 

In the smallest the longer diameter of the test is 25 mm., and the 
longest spines are 20 mm. long. 

These specimens, most of which are small, show very great diver- 
sity. In the largest (pi. 8, fig. 1) the primary spines near the center 
of the apical surface are very stout at the base, regularly tapering 
and conical, and up to 57 mm. long. Toward the ambitus the pri- 
mary spines gradually increase in length, reaching a maximum of 75 
mm., and at the same time gradually become rounded trigonal with 
somewhat blunted tips. The secondary spines for the most part are 
stout and sharp pointed, but those on the apical disk are very short 
and abruptly truncated. 

In three other specimens the primary spines are rather slender, 
tapering, and trigonal. In one there are a few short and abruptly 
truncated spines on and about the periproct and in the upper por- 
tions of the ambulacral areas ; in another short and irregularly trun- 
cated spines are rather numerous on and about the apical system; 
while in the third such spines are very numerous. 

In all the other specimens {cf. pi. 4, fig. 2 ; pi. 8, fig. 2) the primary 
spines are thickened, more or less club shaped, with abruptly rounded 
tips. In some the large primaries of the ambulacral areas run up 
almost to the oculars, while in others a large portion of the ambulacral 
areas on the apical surface is covered simply with short abruptly 
truncated spines, which in extreme cases may extend nearly to the 
ambitus as in H. mamtiiillatus. 

Class ASTEROIDEA 
Family ARCHASTERIDAE 

ARCHASTER TYPICUS MiiUer and Troschel 

Nukualofa Island. One specimen. 

LINCKIA LAEVIGATA (Linnaeus) 

Seventeen large specimens. 

LINCKLA. MULTIFORA (Lamarck) 

Nukualofa Island. Two small specimens. 



EXPLANATION OF PLATES 

Plate 1 

Zenoeentrotus kellersi, the type specimen, Niuafoou, October 6, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 
No. E. 2810), apical view, X2. Oral view of the same specimen shown ia 
Plate 2. 

Plate 2 

Zenoeentrotus kellersi, the type specimen, Niuafoou, October 6, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 
No. E. 2810), oral view, X2. Apical view of the same specimen shown in 
Plate 1. 



12 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 : abt. 5 

Pl^TB 3 

FiGT-TBB 1. Zenocentrotus kellersi, a medium-sized specimen, Niuafoou, October 
6, 1930 (U.S.N.M. No. B. 2970), apical view, natural size. 
2. Zenocentrotus kellersi, the same specimen, oral view, natural size. 

Plate 4 

FiQTTBE 1. Zenocentrotus kellersi, the largest specimen, Niuafoou, October 6, 
1930 (U.S.N.M. No. E. 2811), oral view, natural size. Apical view 
of the same specimen shown in Plate 5, Figure 1. 
2. Eeterocentrotus trigonarius, Niuafoou, October 6, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 
No. E. 2918), oral view, natural size. Apical view of the same 
specimen shown in Plate 8, Figure 2. 

Plate 5 

FioirBE 1. Zenocentrotus kellersi, the largest specimen, Niuafoou, October 6, 
1930 (U.S.N.M. No. E. 2811), apical view, natural size. Oral view 
of the same specimen shown in Plate 4, Figure 1. 

2. Zenocentrotus paradoxus, Niuafoou, September 20, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 

No. E. 2814), apical view, natural size. Oral view of the same 
specimen shown in Plate 7, Figure 2. 

3. Echinometra ohlonga, young, Niuafoou, September 13, 1930 (U.S.N.M, 

No. E. 2897), apical view, X2. Oral view of the same specimen 
shown in Plate 7, Figure 3. 

Plate 6 

FiGUBE 1. Zenocentrotus paradoxus, the type specimen, Niuafoou, September 20, 
1930 (U.S.N.M. No. E. 2813), apical view, X2. Oral view of the 
same specimen shown in Plate 7, Figure 1. 

2. Zenocentrotus paradoxus, Niuafoou, September 20, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 

No. E. 2814), apical view, natural size. 

3. Zenocentrotus kellersi, the smallest specimen, Niuafoou, October 6, 

1930 (U.S.N.M. No. E. 2970), apical view, X2. 

Plate 7 

FiGTJEE 1 Zenocentrotus paradoxus, the type specimen, Niuafoou, September 20, 
1930 (U.S.N.M. No. E. 2813), oral view, X2. Apical view of the 
same specimen shown in Plate 6, Figure 1. 

2. Zenocentrotus paradoxus, Niuafoou, September 30, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 

No. E. 2814), oral view, natural size. Apical view of the same 
specimen shown in Plate 5, Figure 2. 

3. Echinometra oblonga, Niuafoou, September 13, 1930 (U.S.N.M. No, 

E. 2897), oral view, X2. Apical view of the same specimen shown 
in Plate 5, Figure 3. 

Plate 8 

FiGTJBE 1. Eeterocentrotus trigonarius, Niuafoou. August 31, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 
No. B. 2903), apical view, natural size. 
2. Eeterocentrotus trigonarius, Niuafoou, October 6, 1930 (U.S.N.M. 
No. E. 2918), apical view, natural size. Oral view of the same 
specimen shown in Plate 4, Figure 2. 

U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: ISSI 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 5 PL. 1 




ZENOCENTROTUS KELLERSI 
For explanation of plate see page ii. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 5 PL. 2 




ZENOCENTROTUS KELLERSI 
FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 11. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 5 PL. 3 




ZENOCENTROTUS KELLERSl 
FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 12. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80, ART. 5 PL. 4 




ZENOCENTROTUS KELLERSl AND HETEROCENTROTUS TRIGONARIUS 
For explanation of plate see page 12. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL 80, ART 5 PL . 5 







'*^**<f«i^^ 





ZENOCENTROTUS KELLERSI. Z. PARADOXUS, AND ECHINOMETRA OBLONGA 

For explanation of plate see page I2. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 5 PL. 6 




ZENOCENTROTUS PARADOXUS AND Z. KELLERSl 
FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 12. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80, ART. 5 PL. 7 







3 



ZENOCENTROTUS PARADOXUS AND ECHINOMETRA OBLONGA 
FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 12 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 5 PL. 8 




HETEROCENTROTUS TRIGONARIUS 
For explanation of plate see page 12. 



THE FISHES OBTAINED BY THE PINCHOT SOUTH 
SEAS EXPEDITION OF 1929, WITH DESCRIPTION OF 
ONE NEW GENUS AND THREE NEW SPECIES 



By Henry W. Fowler 
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 



The fishes reported upon in this paper form the collection obtained 
by Gov. Gifford Pinchot's expedition of 1929 to the South Seas. 
Briefly, the course of this expedition was across the Caribbean Sea, 
through the Canal Zone, thence to Cocos Island and the Galapagos 
and Marquesas Groups, and finally to Tahiti, Society Islands. Most 
of the fishes were obtained in the Galapagos and Marquesas Groups, 
largely through Dr. A. K. Fisher, of the United States Biological 
Survey. Dr. Henry A. Pilsbry, of the Academy of Natural Sciences 
of Philadelphia, also accompanied the expedition and obtained a 
number of fishes forwarded to Philadelphia. In the following pages 
I have mentioned these materials as in the academy, as it may be 
understood that otherwise the specimens are in the United States 
National Museum. 

The collections include 69 determined species, many of which are 
interesting or valuable records for distribution. The following are 
described as new: Benthosema pinchoti^ new species; Ophiohlen- 
nius pinchoti^ new species; Giffordella^ new genus (Blenniidae) ; 
Giff ordella comeliae^ new species. 

Family EULAMHDAE 

EULAMIA GALAPAGENSIS (Snodgrass and Heller) 

One fine young example, 565 mm. long, an embryo from a female 
2,592 mm. long, taken in Chatham Bay, Cocos Island, June, 1929.^ 
Of the large female, portions of the left pectoral fin, upper teeth, and 
piece of skin are preserved. The teeth are broadly triangular, their 
outer edges slightly concave, and all edges finely serrate. 

'All dates herein are 1929. 

No. 2906.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum. Vol. 80. Art. 6 
68981—32 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Another example, evidently the present species, taken from Con- 
way Bay, Indefatigable Island, Galapagos, June 24. Represented 
by a section of jaw with four teeth, tip of pectoral, and portion of 
skin, and agrees with the Chatham Bay material. 

A third specimen taken in Wreck Bay, Chatham Island, July 6. 
Of the large female, portions of the left pectoral fin, upper 
preserved. 

EULAMIA sp.7 

From 70 miles south of Panama, August 15. Piece of fin, teeth, 
and other parts. 

Family MOBULIDAE 

^v MANTA BIROSTRIS (Walbaum) 

The following items, all portions or materials from several of these 
great rays, are preserved ; detailed observations under the name " sea 
bats " are well set forth in Governor Pinchot's recent volume on the 
expedition, To the South Seas : 

Tail without any trace of spine, piece of skin, and other parts. 
Length of tail, 1,400 mm. All from Ua Huka Island, Marquesas 
Islands, September 20. 

Three portions from specimen taken at Ua Huka, September 25. 
Head with rolled cephalic fin 350 mm. long, directed forward. Por- 
tion of end of pectoral fin. Short ventral fin with clasper, latter not 
reaching hind fin edge. 

Also tail and portions of skin of example from Ua Huka, Septem- 
ber 25. With this, bottle of stomach contents, mostly necton or 
copepod crustaceans. 

Piece of skin of example caught at entrance to Obi Tufa Bay, Eiro 
Island, Marquesas Islands. 

JaAvs of a large example as dry preparation, without exact data. 
Upper edentulous jaw 920 mm. wide. Lower jaw 1,200 mm. wide, 
dentary area 610 mm. as measured over surface. Teeth estimated in 
416 transverse rows, in which there are 7 to 10 short truncate or 
obtuse small teeth, the crown of each from nearly level to convex. 

In the academy, gill arches from a large example from Shavay 
Bay, Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands, September 21. 

Family CLUPEIDAE 

HARENGULA PUNCTATA (Ruppell) 

One in the academy, 74 mm. long, from Taiohae, Nukuhiva, Mar- 
quesas Islands. Taken in tide pools, September 26. Maxillary 
reaches one-fourth in eye. Gill rakers 23 + 35, finely lanceolate. 



ART. 6 FISHES OF PINCHOT EXPEDITION — FOWLER 6 

Scales 40 in median lateral series to caudal base, adherent ; 12 trans- 
versely. Abdominal serrae 16 + 10. A. ii, 18, i. Back brilliant steel 
blue to violet-black, sides and lower surfaces bright silvery white. 
Iris white. Fins pale, front terminal part of dorsal dark gray. 
Caudal with lobes grayish terminally. 

One in the National Museum, same data as above, 39 mm. 

Not previously reported from the Marquesas. 

OPISTHONEMA LIBERTATIS (Gunther) 

Three examples, 158 to 160 mm., from Conway Bay, Indefatigable 
Island, Galapagos, June 24. 

Family CONGRIDAE 

LEPTOCEPHALUS sp.? 

Two larval eels, 61 to 65 mm., in the academy, taken at the surface 
of Gardner Bay, Hood Island, Galapagos, June 30. 

Three larval eels, 102 to 138 mm., in the National Museum from 
Black Beach Anchorage, Charles Island, Galapagos, June 27. 

Family OPHICHTHYIDAE 

MYRICHTHYS MACULOSUS (Cuvier) 

One from the gullet of a cormorant at Narborough Island, Gala- 
pagos Islands, obtained by Dr. A. K. Fisher, August 25. This a 
damaged specimen 440 mm. long. 

LETHARCHUS PACIFICUS Osburn and Nichols 

Two, 204 to 290 mm. long, from Gardner Bay, Hood Island, June 
30. Also one in the academy, same data, 140 mm. 

CALLECHELYS MAKMORATUS (Bleeker) 

One, 310 mm. long, from Black Beach Anchorage, Charles Island, 
Galapagos, June 27. Interesting as new for the Galapagos. Its 
former distribution from Mauritius to the East Indies and Hawaii. 

Family ECHIDNIDAE 

LYCODONTIS NUDIVOMER (Gunther) 

One, 600 mm. long, from Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands, September 
26. Teeth all entire in jaws, though broad, well compressed, and 
uniserial. Palate toothless, except short depressible tooth anteriorly. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

Coloration largely blackish brown, with imperfect, variable, whitish 
reticulating lines, most distinct over under surfaces. The pattern 
of coloration somewhat approaches Gymnothorax hilonis Jordan 
and Evermann, and again it also suggests that of Lycodontis undu- 
lata (Lacepede). 

Family SYNODONTIDAE 

SYNODUS JAPONICUS (Houttnyn) 

Five, 55 to 60 mm., from Black Beach Anchorage, Charles Island, 
Galapagos, June 27. 

In the academy, five from the surface of Gardner Bay, Hood 
Island, June 30, and one from Charles Island, June 27, all in Gala- 
pagos Group. Former 23 to 60 mm., latter 59 mm. All are scale- 
less, with 10 dark saddles on back, the last at caudal base. 

Fourteen, 28 to 40 mm., in the National Museum, from Nukuhiva, 
Marquesas Islands, September 25. 

Family MYCTOPHIDAE 

DIAPHUS AGASSIZII Gilbert 

In the academy, 86 examples, 60 to 74 mm., from Taiohae, Nuku- 
hiva, Marquesas Islands. Obtained by light over side of boat at 
night, September 26. 

In the National Museum, 72 examples, 57 to 72 mm., September 
29, also from Taiohae. 

BENTHOSEMA PINCHOTI, new species 
FiGTJKE 1 

Description.— Depth. 3% ; head 2%, width 21/5. Snout 71/5 in head 
measured from snout tip; eye 24^, greatly exceeds snout or inter- 
orbital ; maxillary reaches little beyond eye, terminal expansion one- 
third of eye, well sheathed above by cheek, length 1% in head from 
snout tip ; teeth in jaws minutely villif orm, in narrow bands, visible 
with closed jaws ; mandible but slightly protrudes ; interorbital 4l^ in 
head from snout tip, nearly level. Gill rakers about 6+21, slender, 
lanceolate, 1% in eye or twice gill filaments. 

Anteorbital luminous organ veiled, though about one-half pupil; 
mandibular photophores veiled, 3 on each mandibular ramus, 2 
operculars close behind lower opercular edge and upper double; 
pectorals 5, first veiled by gill covers; 2 subpectoral, anterior 
veiled by gill cover and upper at lower pectoral fin base ; supra pec- 
toral high, at inception of lateral line; upper postpectoral slightly 
above level of pectoral origin though close below lateral line ; front 
supraventral below upper subpectoral, postero-supraventral higher, 
level with first supraanal; 3 ventrals; 6 anteroanals, then 4 postero- 



ABT. 6 



FISHES OF PINCHOT EXPEDITION FOWLER 



anals; 2 supraanals with uppermost on lateral line; 1 posterolateral 
on lateral line; 2 precaudals, posterior close below lateral line. 

Scales mostly all fallen, about 28 (pockets) in lateral line to 
caudal base and 2 more on latter ; 3 above, 4 below. 

D. II, 12, first ray 1% in total head length, adipose fin slender, 
midway between hind dorsal basal end and caudal base, length 
21/^ in eye; A. ii, 16, first branched ray 21/5 in total head length; 
caudal (damaged) estimated about 1^4; least depth of caudal 
peduncle 3; pectoral 1%, rays 16; ventral 2%, rays 8. 

Scales silvery, with metallic steel-blue reflections. Iris silvery 
white. Body and scale pockets where scales have fallen mostly 
dusky to blackish. Luminous organs silvery white. Fins all whit- 
ish, adjacent body basally blackish. 




FiGDRB 1. — Benthoaema pinchoti, new species. U. S. N. M. No. 91823 (type) 

Type.— U.S.N.M. No. 91823, collected near light, Nukuhiva, 
Marquesas Islands. September 25, 1929. Length, 71 mm. 

Diagnosis. — Distinguished in its genus chiefly by the presence of 
the suprapectoral photophore at the origin of the lateral line. 

Named for Gov. Gifford Pinchot. 

Family POECILIIDAE 

GAMBUSIA NICARAGUENSIS Gunther 

Seven, 21 to 49 mm., Colon, Panama. 

GAMBUSIA CAYMANENSIS Regan 

Eight, 10 to 44 mm., Grand Cayman, West Indies, April 17. 

Family BELONIDAE 

STRONGYLURA INDICA (Le Suenr) 

One caught in entrance to Taipi Bay, Nuloihiva, Marquesas 
Islands, September 26. Head 315 mm. long. 



PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80 

Family HEMIRAMPHIDAE 



HEMIRAMPHUS UNIFASCIATUS Kanzani 



Two, in academy, 120? to 200 mm., from Charles Island, Galapagos. 
Taken at light at anchorage. Lower gill rakers, 19 to 21. 



HEMIUAMPHUS ROBERTI Valenciennes 



Two, 137 to 154 mm., from Black Beach Anchorage, Charles Island, 
Galapagos, June. Depth from mandible tip 9; mandible tip from 
upper jaw tip longer than rest of head. D. i, 14 or 13; A. i, 15. 

HEMIRAMPHUS PACIFICUS Steindachner 

One, about 71 mm. long, from about light, Nukuhiva, Marquesas 
Islands, September 25. 

HEMIRAMPHUS BRASILIENSIS (Linnaeus) 

One, 368 mm., from Hivaoa, Marquesas Islands, September 12. 

Family EXOCOETIDAE 

FODIATOR ACUTUS (Valenciennes) 

One, about 144 mm., from Indefatigable Island, Galapagos, June 
21. New for the Galapagos Group. 

EXOCOETUS VOLITANS Linnaeus 

One, 248 mm. long, from 1,000 miles west of Galapagos Islands, lat 
itude 3° S., longitude 108° W., September 1. 

One, 193 mm., from latitude 2° 10' N., longitude 86° W. 

One, 188 mm., from 100 miles east of Tahiti, Society Islands, Octo- 
ber 9. 

CYPSELURUS RUBESCENS (Rafinesque) 

One, 285 mm., from the Pacific, latitude 7° S., longitude 124° W., 
September 7. 

CYPSELURUS ATRISIGNIS Jenkins 

One, 381 mm., from north of Tuamotu Islands, September 30. 
Predorsal scales 38 from occiput to dorsal. D. i, 11, i ; A, i, 10, i. 

CYPSELURUS BAHIENSIS (Ranzani) 

One, 405 mm., from Cocos Island, June 6. D. i, 13, i; A. i. 9, i. 
One in the academy, 385 mm., from Chatham Bay, Cocos Island. 
Same fin formula as above specimen. 



AKT. 6 FISHES OF PINCHOT EXPEDITION FOWLER, 7 

CYPSELURUS CALLOPTERUS (Gunther) 

One, about 270 mm., from 90 miles south of Panama, July 17. 
D. I, 11, i; A. I, 6, I, both fins uniformlj^ pale. Pectoral dark gray, 
thickly marked with round black spots, none larger than pupil. 
Ventral pale or whitish, grayish on outer half terminally, this area 
also with about four rows of black spots. 

Family SYNGNATHIDAE 

mPPOCAMPUS STYLIFER Jordan and Gilbert 

One, 48 mm., from Key West, Fla. Rings with quite numerous 
and elongate points or spines. 

COELONOTUS PLATYRHYNCHUS (Dumeril) 

FlGXTRE 2 

Desc7^iptio7i.— Depth 231/2 to 241^ ; head 8 to 9. width 31/2 to 33/5. 
Snout 21/5 to 214 in head from snout tip, width 1% to 1% its length; 
eye 5 to 5% in head from snout tip, 2l^ to 21/^ in snout, little greater 
than interorbital ; mouth with very short cleft, broad, superior ter- 
minally; interorbital 5% to 6 in head from snout tip, nearly level. 
Gill opening small. 




Figure 2.—Coelonotus platyrhynchus (Dumeril) 

Rings 17 or 18 + 35 to 37. Upper keel of trunk and tail continu- 
ous and joined with auxiliary short keel starting on last trunk ring 
superiorly and finally approximating opposite base of last dorsal 
ray; median lateral trunk keel slopes down on last 3 trunk rings or 
opposite front of dorsal and continues on tail as lower caudal keel; 
lower trunk keel approximates slightly with its fellow at vent to 
buttress abdominal brood organ, which is well marked in male. 

D. 40 to 45, extends on 4 trunk rings and 7 caudal rings, higher 
than body depth below or fin height 2% in head; caudal fanlike, 
1% ; pectoral 3 to 4, rays 15 or 16; anal very small, about half of eye. 

Pale brown, below to uniform whitish. Iris gray, evidently sil- 
very in life. At junction of each trunk ring above and below median 
lateral keel a small black ocellus, thus forming 2 lateral rows. 
Caudal brownish, other fins transparent. Black spots variable as 
in one example several before and behind pectoral base. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Three from Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands. September 23. Length, 
105 to 108 mm. 

Originally described from Nukuhiva in 1870, this species has not 
since been obtained there. Duncker has more recently reported it 
from New Pomerania in the Bismarck Archipelago. These are the 
only localities from which it is known. 

Family MUGILIDAE 

MUGIL THOBURNI Jordan and Evermann 

From tide pool at Eiao, Marquesas Islands, 67 examples, 39 to 60 
mm. long, September 28. No adipose eyelids. Scales 38 in median 
lateral series to caudal base and 4 more on latter. Soft dorsal and 
anal largely with small scales. Pectoral with pointed axillary 
scale. A. Ill, 9. Back slate gray, iris and below silvery white. 
Dorsals and caudal dark gray, other fins paler. Pectoral base about 
origin dusky. 

Three, 19 or 20 mm,, in National Museum, from Hivaoa, Mar- 
quesas, September 13, probably this species. 

Not previously reported from Oceania. 

MYXUS HARENGUS Giinther 

One, 53 mm., from Black Beach Anchorage, Charles Island, Gala- 
pagos Group, June 27. Scales 44 in lateral series to caudal base and 
3 more on latter. D. IV-I, 9, i ; A. II, 10, i. Back neutral dusky. 
Sides and lower surface, including iris, silvery white. Dorsals and 
caudal grayish. Pectoral pale, with dusky base, black in axilla. 
Lower fins white, 

NEOMYXUS CHAPTALII (Eydoux and Souleyet) 

Three, 100 to 123 mm,, Marquesas Islands, September. 
Three, 115 to 121 mm., Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands, September 24. 
Two, 100 to 120 mm., Ua Huka, September 24. 
Three, 42 to 135 mm., Taiohae tide pools, Nukuhiva, Marquesas 
Islands, September 26, in the academy. 

CESTRAEUS PLICATILIS Valenciennes 

One, 39 mm. (caudal broken), from Taiohae, Nukuhiva, Marque- 
sas Islands, September 26. Back generally metallic blue-black, sides 
and lower surface silvery white, with steel-blue shade. Iris and fins 
all whitish. Spinous dorsal with dusky shade forward. Bases of 
soft dorsal and caudal slate black. 



J.RT. 6 FISHES OF PINCHOT EXPEDITION FOWLER 9 

Family SCOMBRIDAE 

EUTHYNNUS PELAMIS (Linnaeus) 

One, 478 mm , from off Papeete, Tahiti, October 19. 

THUNNUS THYNNUS (Linnaeus) 

One, from :iear Obi, Tufa Bay, Eiao, Marquesas Islands, Septem- 
ber 28. Head 366 mm. long. Snout 2% in head; eye 6%, 3 in 
snout, 3 in ir terorbital ; maxillary reaches opposite % of eye, expan- 
sion iy2 in eye, with groove at lower expansion angle 1% in expan- 
sion; maxillary length 2 in head. 

One, fron Ua Huka, Tufa Bay, September 22. Pieces of body. 

One fron. near Obi, Tufa Bay, September 28. Pieces of body. 

Family CARANGIDAE 

CARANX SEXFASGIATUS Qaoy and Gaimard 

Two in the academy, 129 to 148 mm., from Conway Bay, Inde- 
fatigable Island, Galapagos Group, June 24. 

Two m National Museum, 145 and 128 mm. long. Same data. 

One, 120 mm., from Cocos Island, June 6. 

Fouv, 88 to 110 mm., from Hivaoa. Marquesas Group, Sep- 
tember 13. 

CARANX LATUS Agassiz 

One in the academy, 44 mm., from Key West, Fla., April 10. 
A single example, 42 mm. long, in the National Museum. Same 
data as above. 

VOMER SETIPINNIS (Mitchill) 

One in the academy, 183 mm., from Balboa, Canal Zone, August 8. 

Family DULEIDAE 

DULES MARGINATUS Cnvier 

Scales about 35 or 36 in lateral line to caudal base. D. X, 11. 
A. Ill, 11. Generally brilliant silvery white, back with leaden hue. 
Iris silvery white. Fins all whitish, cluster of blackish dots at caudal 
base, especially medially. Caudal terminally with some gray dots. 
Five, 28 to 30 mm., Nukuhiva, Marquesas Islands. September 25. 

Family SERRANIDAE 

SERRANUS MERRA (Bloch) 

One example, 66 mm., from Ua Huka, Marquesas Group, Septem- 
ber 24. 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

MTCTEROPERCA OLFAX (Jenyns) 

One, 690 mm., from Port Charles Bay, Charles Island, Galapagos 
Group, June 28 ; yellow. 

Family LUTJANIDAE 

LUTJANUS MONOSTIGMA (Cuvier) 

Four examples, 94 to 160 nrni., from tide pools, Ua Huka, Mar- 
quesas Islands, September 24. All have the black blotch on the 
lateral line, opposite front of soft dorsal, smaller than eye. 

One in the academy, 188 mm. long, from Taiohae, Nukuhiva, Mar- 
quesas Islands, in tide pools, September 26. 

XENOCYS JESSIAE Jordan and Bollman 

One example, 220 mm., from Black Beach Anchorage, Galapagos 
Group, June 27. 

Two, 190 to 210 mm., from Charles Island, Galapagos Group, in 
the academy, June 17. 

Family MULLIDAE 

UPENEUS VITTATUS (Forsk&l) 

Six, 140 to 182 mm., from Hivaoa, Marquesas Islands. 
In the academy, 4 examples, 150 to 175 mm., from stream at Atuona 
Bay. Hivaoa, September 12. 

Family GERRIDAE 

EUCINOSTOMUS CALIFORNIENSIS (Gill) 

One example, 144 mm., from Conway Bay, Indefatigable Island, 
Galapagos Group, June 24. 

Family HEPATIDAE 

HEPATUS TRIOSTEGUS (Linnaeus) 

Fourteen, 65 to 110 mm., from Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands, Sep- 
tember 24. 

One, 78 mm., from Taiohae, Nukuhiva, Marquesas Islands, Sep- 
tember 26, in the academy. 

NASD EOL'ME (Lesson) 

One example, head 100 mm. long, purchased at Hanamui, Ua Huka, 
Marquesas Islands, September 25. 



AET. 6 FISHES OF PINCHOT EXPEDITION FOWLEK 11 

Family POMACENTRIDAE 

ABUDEFDUF SAXATILIS (Linnaeus) 

One, 50 mm., from Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands, September 24. 

ABUDEFDUF SOROmUS (Forsk&l) 

Three, 62 to 84 mm., Marquesas Islands, September. 

Four, 50 to 76 mm., from Ua Huka, Marquesas Group, Sep- 
tember 24. 

Two examples, 21 or 22 mm., from Eiao, Marquesas Group, Sep- 
tember 28. 

Five, in the academy, from tide pools at Taiohae, Nukuhiva, Mar- 
quesas Group, September 26. Length, 55 to 85 mm. 

ABUDEFDUF UNIOCELLATUS (Quoy and Gaimard) 

One, 28 mm., from Ua Huka, Marquesas Group, September 24. 
One, in the academy, 21 mm. long, from Hivaoa, Marquesas Island, 
September 12. 

POMACENTRUS LEUCORUS Gilbert 

Eight examples, 18 or 19 mm. long, from Black Beach Anchorage, 
Charles Island, Galapagos. 

POMACENTRUS NIGRICANS (Lacepedc) 

Seventeen, 106 to 125 mm., from Ua Huka, Marquesas Islands, in 
tide pool, September 24. 

One, in the academy, 115 mm. long, from Taiohae, Marquesas 
Group, September 26. 

POMACENTRUS ARCTIFRONS Snodgrass and Heller 

Three, in the academy, 155 to 160 mm., from tide pool at Tower 
Island, Galapagos Group, June 15. In alcohol blackish, paler below. 
Caudal, caudal peduncle, soft dorsal, and anal posteriorly more or 
less olivaceous, latter fins each with neutral or blackish submarginal 
band. Lips pale. Iris neutral gray. 

Family LABRIDAE 

EPmULUS INSmiATOR (Pallas) 

Lower left mandibular ramus, length 145 mm. to end of lower 
branch, from Fakarava, Tuamotu Group, October 2. 

THALASSOMA UMBROSTYGMA (Ruppell) 

One, 47 mm. long, Ua Huka, Marquesas Group, September 24. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Family SCORPAENIDAE 

SCORPAENA HISTRIO Jenyns 

One, 21 mm., from Black Beach Anchorage, Charles Island, Gala- 
pagos Islands, June 27. 

Family ELEOTRIDAE 

ELEOTRIS FUSCA (Schneider) 

One, 150 mm., Hivaoa, Marquesas Group, September 12. 
Four, 62 to 95 mm., from tidal stream, Fatuhiva, Marquesas Group, 
September 14. 

ELEOTRIS TUBULARIS Snodgrass and Heller 

One, Y8 mm., from Cocos Island. Very similar to Eleotrk fusGOL, 
perhaps not distinct. 

Family GOBIIDAE 

COTYLOPUS COCOENSIS Heller and Snodgrass 

One from Cocos Island. D. VI, I, 10. A. I, 10. Teeth greatly 
damaged, apparently weakly and imperfectly tridentate, at least in 
a smaller example, where they appear swollen somewhat at the 
juncture of each lateral spur forming the tridentation, though ends 
of most apparently worn down. 

GOBIUS ORNATUS Riippell 

Three examples, 18 to 61 mm., from tide pool at Eiao, Marquesas 
Group, September 28. 

Family ECHENEIDAE 

ECHENEIS REMORA (Linnaeus) 

One, 148 mm. long, from large Manta hirostris, taken at Tower 
Island, Galapagos Group, June 16. 

One, 116 mm., from off Eulamia galapagenms^ taken at Cocos 
Island, June 10. Both this and preceding show 17 lamellae in the 
cephalic disk. 

ECHENEIS ALBESCENS Schlegcl 

One, 200 mm., from the stomach of a large Manta hirostrls taken 
in Shavay Bay, Ua Huka, Marquesas Group, September 20. 

One, 358 mm., from the stomach of Manta hirostris, alive and had 
been seen in gills, Ua Huka, September 20. 



ABT. 6 FISHES OF PINCHOT EXPEDITION — FOWLER 13 

One, 230 mm., from Tower Island, Galapagos Group, June 16. 
Though two were originally taken from a large Mania hirostris only 
this one was preserved. 

One, 111 mm., from Mania hirostris at Shavay Bay, Ua Huka, 
September 20. 

One, in the academy, 270 mm. long, from the mouth of Mania 
'hirostris but slipped into the stomach,. Shavay Bay, September 21. 
All the specimens show 13 lamellae in the cephalic disk. 

Family BLENNIIDAE 

RUNULA AZALEA Jordan and BoUman 

Two, 46 to 48 mm., from Black Beach Anchorage, Charles Island, 
Galapagos Group, June 27. 

Two, in the academy, 46 to 49 mm., at surface of Garden Ba}^, 
Hood Island, Galapagos Group, June 30. 

Runula alholinea Nichols ^ is supposed to differ in coloration. The 
terminal dark band on the dorsal fin is said to be entire, not broken 
as blackish blotches. It was based on specimens 35 to 46 mm. in 
length. 

OPHIOBLENNIUS PINCHOTI, new species 
Figure 3 

Desci-lption. — Depth 4 to 4i/4 ; head 31^ to 3%, width 2 to 214. 
Snout 31/3 to 4% in head ; eye 3 to 3l^, greater than snout or interor- 
bital, subequal with snout with age; maxillary reaches i^ to % in 
eye, length 2 to '2,% in head; 4 canines in front of each jaw, each 
greatly bent, curved or crooked and each outer lower one flaring out- 
ward ; interorbital 3^5 to 3^/2 in head, broadly convex. Gill opening 
forms broad free fold over isthmus. 

Body scaleless. Lateral line incomplete, superior, only extends far 
as depressed pectoral. 

D. XII, 22 or 23, notch dividing fins only about half their depth, 
fin height about half of head ; A. II, 21 to 23, front rays little highest, 
about high as dorsal rays ; caudal long as head, emarginate behind ; 
least depth of caudal peduncle 2>y^\ pectoral but little shorter than 
head, rays 15; ventral li^ in head. 

Uniform light straw brown. Top of head with dusky blotch, also 
dusky on upper lip. Iris gray, apparently silvery in life. Along base 
of each dorsal and anal spine or ray small blackish spot. Caudal 
with vertical blackish bar. Fins otherwise pale or transparent, with 
pale yellowish tinge basally to vertical fins. 

Type.—V.^.'^M. No. 91819, collected at Black Beach Anchorage, 
Charles Island, Galapagos, June 27, 1929, by Dr. A. K. Fisher. Also 
49 paratypes, same data. Length, 21 to 53 mm. 

»Zoologica, vol. 5, no. 4. p. 64, fig. 11, 1924. Indefatigable Island, Galapagos. 



14 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



Diagnosis. — Differs from Ophiohlennius steindachneri Jordan and 
Evermann, from the west coast of Mexico, in the coloration. The 
mainland species has dark longitudinal stripes on the caudal fin and 
a round, intense dark ocellated spot behind the eye. The coloration 
of Ophiohlennius finchoti is, however, unique, in that there is a large 
blackish blotch on the cranium and a black transverse basal band on 
the caudal. 




/n/n- 



FiGDRB 3. — Ophioblennius pinchoti, new species. D.S.N.M, No. 91819 
GIFFORDELLA, new genus 

Type species. — Giffordella corneliae, new species. 

Diagnosis. — Differs from Ophiohlennius in its entirely different 
physiognomy, also the lower teeth all flaring outward. Caudal trun- 
cate to slightly emarginate. 

Named in slight appreciation to the Hon. Gifford Pinchot, gover- 
nor of Pennsylvania, for his successful expedition to the South Seas. 

GIFFORDELLA CORNELIAE, new species 

Figure 4 

Depth 4 to 41/3; head Z% to 4; width ll^ to 11/3. Snout 3 to 31/2 
in head; eye 2i/^ to 3 in head, greater than snout to subequal with 
interorbital ; maxillary reaches back l^ to 14 in eye length, 24/^ to 
2% in head; teeth rather large, simple, conic, curved, uniserial in 
jaws and lower as 10 flaring outward each side; interorbital 3 to 314 
in head, well convex. Gill opening large, extends forward about op- 
posite hind eye edge, isthmus width about half eye. 

Body scaleless. No flaps or tentacles. Lateral line not evident, 
side medianly with axial longitudinal impression. 

D. 14, 14, fin height about two-thirds of head and divided by deep 
median notch, a little behind vertical of anal original; A. 14, each 
membrane notched terminally, fin height about one-half of head; 



ART. 6 



FISHES OF PINCHOT EXPEDITION- — FOWLER 



15 



caudal slightly less than head, hind edge slightly emarginate; least 
depth of caudal peduncle 2 to 2% in head; pectoral slightly longer 
than head, lower median rays longest, reaches little beyond anal 
origin ; ventral nearly long as head, of 2 simple rays. 

Largely transparent brownish or colorless. Dark pigment spots on 
cranium. Iris silver gray to white. 

Type.— \J. S.N M. No. 91821, collected near light, Nukuhiva, Mar- 
quesas Islands, September 25, 1929. Also 11 paratypes, same data, 
16 to 22 mm. 

Named for Mrs. Cornelia Bryce Pinchot, first lady of Pennsylvania. 




FiGUEB 4. — Qiffordella corneliae, new species. U.S.N.M. No. 91821 
SALARIAS EDENTULUS (Schneider) 

Three, 27 to 99 mm., Eiao, Marquesas Group, September 28. 
Four, 45 to 122 mm., Ua Huka, Marquesas Group, September 24. 
Two in the academy, 59 to 75 mm., Taiohae, Nukuhiva, Marquesas 
Group, September 26. Uniform, blackish. 



SALARIAS MELEAGRIS Valenciennes 



Four, 68 to 81 mm., Eiao, Marquesas Group, September 28. 



D. XIII, 21; A. 22. 



Upper lip with edge scarcely crenulate. 



Family GOBIESOCIDAE 

GOBIESOX POECILOPHTHALMOS Jcnyns 

Two in the academy, 87 to 106 mm. long, from Chatham Bay, 
Cocos Island. Found on stones in a stream. D. 7 or 8 ; A. 6. 

One in the National Museum, 109 mm., from Cocos Island, June 6. 

This species was based on a young example but 47 mm. long, from 
which most all the color had evidently faded. It is described as 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 : art. ft 

" of a uniform very pale brown, or brownish white, without anjr 
markings whatever. The eyes were probabl}^ very brilliant in the 
living fish, the irides still showing traces of what seems to have been 
blue and golden pink." The fin rays are given as D. 7; A. 7. 

Family MONACANTHIDAE 

MONACANTHUS HlSPmUS (Linnaeus) 

Two, 15 to 30 mm., from Key West, Fla., April 10. 
Family OSTRACIONTIDAE 

OSTRACION SEBAE Bleeker 

One, 164 mm., from Maragneii. Toau Atoll, Tuamotu Group,^ 
October 5. Scattered white spots over top and sides of carapacCy 
under surface uniform. 

Family TETRODONTIDAE 

SPHOEROIDES ANNULATUS (Jenyns) 

One, 140 mm., from Conway Bay, Indefatigable Island, Galapagos 
Group, June 24. 

Family ANTENNARIIDAE 

HISTRIO HISTRIO (Linnaeus) 

One, 44 mm.. Key West, Fla., April 10. 



B. S. COVERRHENT rRINTINS OFriCltHM 



A SECOND COLLECTION OF BIRDS FROM THE PROV- 
INCES OF YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA, MADE 
FOR THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY BY DR. 
JOSEPH F. ROCK 



By J. H. Riley 

Assistant Curator, Division of Birds 
United States National Museum 



INTRODUCTION 

After Dr. Joseph F. Rock had rested sufficiently from his explora- 
tions in Kansii and Tibet for the Arnold Arboretum/ he returned 
to China to make explorations in the interests of the National Geo- 
graphic Society. Assembling his outfit and Nashi collectors, he 
proceeded to Yungning in Yunnan and collected in the vicinity or 
on near-by mountains early in May, 1928, and then moved north 
into the semi-independent kingdom of Muli (or Mill) the same 
month. Doctor Rock had previously visited Muli in 1924,- but this 
was only a hurried visit and not many birds were collected. Muli 
is in southwestern Szechwan to the northward of Yungning, Yunnan. 
The lamasery of Muli is located on the Litang River, but the king- 
dom is of indefinite extent, and part of it is ruled by native bandits. 
The country is very mountainous and the mountains very high. To 
the northwest of Muli lies the unknown snow range of Konka Rison- 
quemba, which rises to a height of 25,000 feet and on which birds 
were collected at altitudes of 14,000 to 17,000 feet. Doctor Rock 
had to obtain permission, through the Muli king, from the local 
bandit that controlled the region, to visit this mountain, to which 
he made two trips, one in June and another in August. He started 
to make a third, but the bandit sent him word not to come again 
at the peril of his life. The remainder of the collection in Muli 
territory that year was made to the east or northeast of the Muli 
lamasery, in the Yalung Valley, the Muti Konka Mountains, or on 
the journey into the country, and the return into Yunnan for the 

1 Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 68, pp. 313-381, pis. 1-5, 1928. 

2 Of. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 2, 1926. 



No. 2907.-PROCEEDINGS U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM. VOL. 80. ART. 7 
70403—31 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

winter. No one had ever collected birds in this region before, but 
the avifauna is much the same as that of northwestern Yunnan, 
with the exception of a few species that have not been recorded from 
that Province to date. Doctor Kock returned to Yunnan to spend 
the winter and to prepare for a journey still farther north in the 
spring through an unexplored region of Szechwan. While winter- 
ing in Yunnan at Nguluko, on the east slopes of the Likiang Moun- 
tains, he had his men collect in tlie vicinity. 

With the return of spring, early in April, 1929, Doctor Rock and 
his party moved northward into Muli territory again on his way to 
explore the Minya Konka snow range to the northeast of the Yalung 
River and south of Tatsienlu. On this journey he went as far as 
Tatsienlu, which was reached some time in May. After a couple of 
weeks' rest there, he returned to the Yulonglisi Valley, south of Tat- 
sienlu, and went eastward to explore the Minya Konka Range, the 
highest peak of which reaches a height of 25,600 feet, with several 
others almost as high. To the westward of the Minya Konka Range 
there is another high parallel chain some 20,000 feet in height, and 
it is this ridge that is visible from the mountains to the westward 
of Tatsienlu and not the Minya Konka.^ 

The party then started the return journey by a route to the west- 
ward of the one pursued on the northward march, crossing the 
Yalung at Baurong in July, and were back in Yunnan by August. 

When the expedition reached Yungning on the return journey, 
Doctor Rock found all the ferries across the Yangtze River destroyed 
by rebels, and the party was marooned for two months on an island 
in Yungning Lake, but he managed to send some of his men to col- 
lect in the northwest corner of Yunnan in August, where they started 
operations in the Luddii Mountains west of the Yangtze ; they then 
moved northward to the Fuchuanshan, between the Mekong and the 
Salween, in September ; to Weihsi, between the Mekong and Yangtze, 
the same month; and during October collected at two stations on 
Ndamucho, on tlie divide between the Yangtze and Mekong, south of 
Liitien, at 11,000 and 14,000 feet. Being threatened by Konkaiing 
bandits from the northwest and rebel forces from the south, the 
party at Yungning Lake found themselves in a precarious position. 
Doctor Rock appealed to a friendly Mongol chief for aid, and the 
chief sent a number of his best swimmers with a lot of goatskins, 
These were inflated to form rafts, and the party managed to cross 
under great difficulties without losing any of its valuable collections 
and to reach its base again at Nguluko, on the east slopes of the 
Likiang Mountains. Doctor Rock's men collected some birds here 



' See Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. 58, pp. 385-437, 1930, many illustrations and a small 
map of the route; and vol. 60, pp. 1-65, 1981. 



AKX. 7 BIRDS FEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA EILEY 6 

in November, 1929, and some in January, 1930. This was the last 
collecting clone, and Doctor Rock was soon able to leave the country 
for the United States. 

On the whole journey the expedition collected something more 
than 1,700 birds, in addition to a very large number of botanical 
specimens. These have been generously presented to the United 
States National Museum by the National Geographic Society. Quite 
a number of the forms involved were not before represented in the 
National Museum collection. The study of this collection has 
enabled me to describe the following five birds : 

Cohnnha Q'upestris austHna; 

Garr-ulax alhogularis eous; 

Dryonastes herthemyi ricinus,' 

Fulvetta insperata; 

Spelaeormis rocM. 

A number of other specimens represent extensions of ranges of 
previously known forms. The collection as at present worked out 
consists of 254 forms. Doctor Rock was the first Caucasian to ex- 
plore much of the country under consideration. Nevertheless, while 
his explorations were still in progress, the well-known collector 
Henry Stevens passed through Muli on his way to Tatsienlu and 
traversed part of the country previously covered by Doctor Rock. 
He has published a short sketch of his route.* 

Doctor Rock is preparing an account of his travels for the National 
Geographic Society and a map of the country, but as he has returned 
to China to do the work neither is available to me in preparing this 
report. The only data at hand are the list of localities and the 
specimens and the article on the Minya Konka previously mentioned. 

LOCALITIES WHERE BIRDS WEKE COLLECTED 

The list of localities is given below as it may prove useful in the 
future. The altitudes are only the heights at which birds were 
collected and may or may not be the summit of a ridge or mountain. 
They are arranged alphabetically for ready reference. 

Aloching: 12,50(>-13,500 feet, north of Kulu, Szechwan, April, 1929. 

Barongomba (or Petien): One daj' northeast of Baurong in Ngunze Kong Val- 
ley, east of the Yalung, 11,000-12,000 feet, Szechwan. No date. [1929.] 

Baude-Shaya: Northeast of Muli, Szechwan, July, 1928. 

Baurong: 7,600 feet, on the Yalung, Szechwan, July, 1929. 

Bonti or vicinity: East of Waerhdje, 12,000-14,500 feet, Muli, Szechwan, July, 
1928. 

Briiolo-kong Valley : North of Druduron Pass in Chiu-lung-hsien territory, east 
of the Yalung, 13,000-15,900 feet, May, 1929. Chiu-lung-hsien is an 8 days' 
trip southwest of Tatsienlu, Szechwan. 

*Biill. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 50, pp. 46-54, 1930. 



4 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Chengtze: North of the Chiprinla and south of Mudju and Yulonghsi, 14,500- 

15,900 feet, Szechwan, May, 1929. Cheugtze is 5 days' trip south of 

Tatsienlu. 
Chide : 14,500 feet, east of Mull, Szechwan, July, 1928. 
Chinhaitze: 11,000-11,300 feet, northwest Yunnan, May, 1928. 
Chiprinla: 16,500 feet, north of Chiu-lung-hsien and Chuchulongba, Szechwan, 

July, 1929. 
Chiu-lung-hsien territory: East of the Yalung, 8 days' trip southwest of Tat- 
sienlu (halfway between Muli and Tatsienlu), May, 1929. 
Chiichulongba: A valley north of the hamlet of Tanku in CMu-lung-hsien ter- 
ritory, 13,000-14,000 feet, Szechwan. No date. [1929.] 
Chiitien: On the west bank of the Yangtze north of. Shiku, 6,500 feet, north- 
west Yunnan, October, 1929. 
Djago: Between Muli and Kulu lamaseries, 10,000-12,000 feet, Szechwan, April, 

1929. 
Djishi: Northeast of Muli, Yalung, 11,000-13,000 feet, July, 1928. 
Djishigotong: 12,500-13,000 feet, Muli, July, 1928. 
Djobi: 12,000 feet, Muli, Szechwan, July, 1928. 
Dshizhi: North of Aloching and Kulu, but west of the Yalung, 11,000-13,500 

feet, April, 1929. 
Dzampe: Grassland in Muli territory, west of the Yalung River, 14,000 feet, 

July, 1929. 
Fuchuanshan: Mekong-Salween divide, 9,800-12,000 feet, Yunnan, September, 

1929. 
Fungkou: 6,500-9,000 feet, Yunnan, May, 1928. 
Gauwua (or Gawua) : South of Yowabu Pass in Yungning territory, 11,000- 

11,500 feet, Yunnan, April, 1929. 
Gibboh, Mount: 12,500-14,000 feet, south of Muli lamasery, August, 1928; 

April, 1929. Mount Gibboh is a huge limestone range over which a pass 

leads from Yunnan into Muli teTritory, Szechwan. 
Gou-khii-ko: 13,000 feet, Yangtze loop, Yunnan, April, 1929. 
Gowa (forests of): 10,000 feet, south of Yulo, Yunnan, May, 1928. 
Jesila: 15,600-16,800 feet, pass across the Minya Konka snow range, 3 days' 

trip south of Tatsienlu, May, 1929. 
Jesilongba Valley: 14,300-16,000 feet, north of Yulonghsi and the Jesila, 2 

days' trip south of Tatsienlu and near the Minya snow, range, Szechwan, 

May, 1929. 
Kere: South of Kulu, 9,000 feet, Muli, December, 1928. 
Konka, Mount: Muli, 14,000-17,000 feet, June and August, 1928. 
Konkalongba: 14,500 feet, Minya snow range, east of Yulonghsi, Szechwan. 

No date. [1929.] 
Kopati (forests of): Muli, June, 1928. 
Kulu Mountains: East of Muli, 11,000-18,000 feet, December, 1928, and April. 

1929. 
Laitsolo (gorges of): 10,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, November, 1928. 
Lapo-laze: 9,000-10,000 feet, Yunnan, May, 1928. 
Lauoh: Upper slopes of Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, Yunnan, September, 

1929. 
Lautsolo Gorge: West of the Yangtze River, in Likiang territory, 9,000 feet, 

Yunnan, April, 1929. 
Likiang Mountains: 9,400-15,000 feet, Yunnan, September-October, 1928; 

January-February, 1929 ; and January, 1930. 
Luddvi Mountains: West of the Yangtze and Chungtien Rivers, 12,000-13,000 

feet, northwest Yunnan, August, 1929. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 5 

Liitien: West of the Yangtze and east of the Mekong, 10,000 feet, northwest 
Yunnan, September, 1929. 

Mbayiwua: North of Likiang in the Yangtze loop, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, April, 
1929. 

Mitzuga, Mount: 10,000-15,600 feet, Muli, June, 1928. 

Mudju: Between Chengtze and Yulonghsi, 11,000 feet, Szecliwan, June, 1929. 
Beyond Mudju are grasslands until one has crossed the Jesila over the 
Minya Range to the central part of Jesilongba, where the tree growth 
again occurs. 

Muli Mountains: 9,000-10,000 feet. May- June, 1928; April, 1929. 

Muli Valley: 9,500-10,000 feet, May and June, 1928. 

Mundon: East of the Yalung, overlooking the Yalung Gorge, 13,000 feet, border 
of Muli and Chiu-lung-hsien territory, Szechwan, May, 1929. 

Mutirong: In the Yalung Gorge, Muli, 7,000-7,800 feet, April, 1929. 

Ndamucho: South of Liitien and west of the Yangtze River on the Mekong- 
Yangtze divide, 11,000 and 14,000 feet, Yunnan, October, 1929. 

Nguluko: Eastern slopes of the Likiang Mountains, 9,600 feet, Yunnan, Novem- 
ber, 1929. 

Noon: Valley east of Muli, 10,500-11,000 feet, August, 1928. 

Peshui River: Eastern slopes of Likiang Mountains, 11,000 feet, Yunnan, March, 
1929. 

Petien: See Barongomba. 

Karonki: Northeast of Muli, 12,400-14,200 feet, August, 1928. 

Ronapien region: Shouchu Basin, Muli, 14,500 feet, August, 1928. 

Shangentze: South foot of the Druduron Pass, Tatsienlu territory, 14,500 feet, 
Szechwan, May, 1929. 

Shaya: Northeast of Muli, July, 1928. 

Shelan Forests: Between Muli and Kulu lamaseries, Muli, 13,400 feet, April, 
1929. 

Shenla Valley: 12,000 feet, Kulu-Djago, Muli, December, 1928. 

Shintsang: West of Weihsi and east of the Mekong, 11,000 feet, Yunnan, Sep- 
tember, 1929. 

Shouchu Valley: 11,300-12,000 feet, Muli, August, 1928. 

Tatsienlu: 9,500-10,000 feet, Szechwan, May, 1929. 

Tokesher Forest: 10,000 feet, Yunnan, May, 1928. 

Tsoso (between Tsoso and Kulu): 10,500 feet, Muli, December, 1928. I do 
not know whether this is north or south of Kulu, but it is not far from 
the latter. 

Tyon-kong Forests: 12,000 feet, Muli, July, 1928. 

Vudju Mountains: 10,000 feet, south of Muli, May, 1928, and April, 1929. 

Waerhdje, or vicinity: 14,000-15,000 feet, Muli, July and August, 1928. 

Watogomba: 12,500-14,000 feet, Yalung watershed, Muli, July, 1928. 

Weihsi: West of the Yangtze River, 8,000-9,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, Sep- 
tember, 1929. 

Wenronkong: East of Dzanpiran Pass in Muli territory, east of the Yalung, 
14,500 feet, April-May, 1929. 

Yalung River Gorge: 11,000-12,500 feet, Muli, July, 1928. 

Yankongran Pass: North of Kulu, Muli, 15,500 feet, July, 1929. 

Yanwekong Valley: East of the Yalung and north of Wanzanron, a pass that 
forms the Muli and Chiu-lung-hsien border, 10,000-12,000 feet. May, 1929. 

Yetsi Valley: North of Kulu (one day), 12,000 feet, Muli, April, 1929. 

Yuli Forest: 13,000 feet, Yunnan, May, 1928. 



6 PKOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Yulinggong: 11,000 feet, in the Jesilougba Valley, 10 miles south of Tatsienlu, 
May, 1929. This evidently is the same locality visited by the Kev. David 
C. Graham in 1923, who spelled the name " U Long Kong." ' 

Yulo: West of the Likiang Mountains, 7,000 feet, Yunnan, August, 1929. 

Yulonghsi Valley: Tatsienlu territory, 13,000-16,000 feet, May, 1929. Grass- 
lands resembling very much the grasslands of eastern Tibet and extreme 
western Kansu. Yulonghsi is separated from the Minya Konka snovp 
range by a high, grassy, rock-crowned spur but lies parallel to the snow 
range. It is 3 or 4 days' trip south of Tatsienlu and south of Jesila, the 
pass across the northern end of the Minya Range. 

Yungning: City and prefecture, in northwest Yunnan near the Szechwan 
border. Doctor Rock's men collected on the plain, in the mountains, and 
on the lake, at 9,000 to 13,000 feet, Jlay, November, and December, 1928, 
and January, 1929. 

Zimi Valley: West of Waerhdje, Muli, 14,000-15.000 feet, August, 1928. 

Family COLYMBIDAE, Grebes 

1. PROCTOPUS NIGRICOLLIS NIGRICOLLIS (Brehm) 

Podieeps nigricollis Brehm, Handbuch der Naturgeshichte aller Vogel Deutsch- 
lands, p. 963, 1831 (Germany). 

One male, Yungning Lake, 9,000 feet, Yunnan, December. 

2. POLIOCEPHALUS RUFICOLLIS POGGEI (Reichenow) 

Podieeps nigricans poggei Reichenow, Journ. f. Orn., 1902. p. 125 (Tscliili, 
China). 

Two males, Yungning Lake, 9,300-18,000 feet, Yunnan, May and 
November-December. 

The specimen taken in winter is considerably larger than the one 
taken in May, especially the bill. 

Family PHALACROCORACIDAE, Cormorants 

3. PHALACROCORAX CARBO SINENSIS (Shaw and Noddcr) 

Pelecanus sinensis Shaw and Nodder, The naturalist's miscellany, vol. 13, pi. 
529, text, 1801 (China). 

One female, Yungning Lake, 9,500 feet, Yunnan, December. 
Family ARDEIDAE, Herons 

4. ARDEOLA BACCHUS (Bonaparte) 

Buphus Mcchus Bonaparte, Conspectus generum avium, vol. 2, p. 127, 1855 
(Malay Peninsula). 

One immature female, northwest Yunnan (Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 
feet, September) ; one adult male and one adult female, southwest 
Szechwan (Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, April; Yanwekong, 
10,700 feet. May). 



See Auk, vol. 42, p. 423, 1925. 



ART. 7 BIRDS PROM TUNISTAlSr AND SZECHWAK, CHINA RILEY 7 

5. BUBULCUS IBIS COROMANDUS (Boddaert) 

Cancroma coromanda Boddaert, Table des plauches enlumin^ez d'histoire 
naturelle de M. d'Aubenton, p. 54, 1783 (Coroinandel). 

One female, Tatsienlii, 9,500-10,000 feet, Szechwan, May. 
Family CICONIIDAE, Storks 

6. CICONIA NIGRA (Linnaeus) 

Ardea nigra Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 142, 1758 (North Europe). 

One female immature, Yungning Plain, 9,500 feet, Yunnan, No- 
vember-December. 

Family ANATIDAE, Ducks, Geese, Swans 

7, MERGUS MERGANSER ORIENTALIS Gould 

Mergus orientalis Goxrr,D, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1845, p. 1 (Amoy, China). 

One female, Yungning Plain, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, November- 
December. The culmen measures 44.5 mm. 

8. CASARCA FERRUGINEA (Pallas) 

Anas fei^'uginea PAiXiVs, Vroeg's catalogue, Adumbratiuncula, p. 5, 1764, 
(Tartary). 

One adult female, Chide, east of Muli, 14,500 feet, Szechwan, July. 

9. NYROCA FULIGULA (Linnaeus) 

Anas fuligula Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 128, 1758 (Sweden). 
One adult male, Yungning Lake, 9,500 feet, Yunnan, December. 

10. NYROCA NYROCA NYROCA (Guldenstadt) 

Anas nyroca GtJLDKNSTADT, Nov! Comm. Acad. Sci. Imp. Petropolitanae, vol. 
14, pt. 1, p. 403, 1770 (South Russia). 

Two males and one female, Yungning Lake, 9,300 feet, May ; one 
female, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, September, Yunnan. 

11. DAFILA ACUTA ACUTA (Linnaeus) 

Anas acuta Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 126, 1758 (Sweden). 

One male, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 
This is just beginning to molt from the eclipse into the winter 
plumage. 

12. OUERQUEDULA QUERQUEDULA (Linnaeus) 

Anas querquedula Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 126, 1758 (Sweden). 
Two females, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

13. NETTION CRECCA CRECCA (Linnaeus) d 

Anas crecca Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 125, 1758 (Sweden). 
Three males, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

14, ANAS PLATYRHYNCHA PLATYRHYNCHA Linnaena 

Anas platyrhynchos Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 125, 1758 (Sweden). 

One adult female, Yungning Lake, 9,300 feet, Yunnan, May ; one 
adult male and one adult female, Dshizhi, 12,000 feet, southwest 
Szechwan, April. 

Family ACCIPITRIDAE, Hawks, Ospreys, etc. 

15. ACCIPITER NISUS NISOSIMILIS (Tickell) 

Falco nisosimilis Tickell, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 2, p. 571, 1833 (Borab- 
hum, Bengal). 

One adult male (marked female), Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, 
October. 

This specimen has the barring below much narrower than the typi- 
cal European bird, and above it is somewhat darker. The wing 
measures 217 mm. 

16. ACCIPITER NISUS MELANOSCHISTUS Hume 
Accipiter melanoschistus Hume, Ibis, 1869, p. 350 (Kotegart, northwest India). 

One subadult female, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, September. 

This specimen is not fully adult or at least has not acquired fully 
adult plumage. It is blackish brown above; below the bars are 
broad and blackish. Compared with the typical European race in 
the same stage of plumage, it is much darker above and the barring 
below is heavier. It evidently belongs to the resident breeding form. 
The wing measures 246 mm. 

17. MILVUS LINEATUS (Gray) 

Haliaetus lineatus Gray, Illustrations of Indian zoology chiefly selected from 
the collection of Major General Hardwicke, vol. 1, pi. 18, p. 1, 1832 
(China). 

One male, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February. 
Family FALCONIDAE, Falcons 

18. CERCHNEIS TINNUNCULUS INTERSTINCTUS (McClelland) 

Falco interstinctus McClelland, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1839, p, 154 (Assam). 

Two females, Likiang Mountains, October. 

The two above specimens belong to the pale migrant race of this 
falcon. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNlsTAN- AND SZECHWAN, CHIFA RILEY 9 

19, CERCHNEIS TINNUNCULUS SATURATUS (BIyth) 

Falco saturatus Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 28, p. 277, 1859 (Tenas- 
serini ) . 

Two females, Lildang Mountains, Yunnan, October ; three females, 
southwest Szechwan (Dzeru. Shouchu Valley, 11,300 feet, August, 
and Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, April). 

This is the dark resident race of this falcon that I formerly called 
CercTineis tiimunculus interstinctiM^^ following earlier authors. 

20. FALCO REGULUS LYMANI Bangs 

Falco aesalon lymani Bangs, Bull. Mus. Coinp. Zool., vol. 54, p. 465, 1912 
(Tchegan-Burgazi Pass, Altai). 

One female, Yungning Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, November- 
December. 

This specimen agrees with a female from the original typical 
series, except the streaks below are a little broader. 

Family TETRAONIDAE, Grouse 

21. TETRASTES SEWERZOWI SECUNDA Riley 

Tetrastes seicerzowi secunda Riley, Auk, vol. 42, p. 423, 1925 (near Tatsienlu, 
Szechwan). 

One adult female and three young, Ronapien region, Shouchu 
Basin, 14,500 feet, August. 

The young are just changing from the down into the first postnatal 
plumage and are probably not more than 2 weeks old at the most. 
Though the collector assigns all three of the above young to the adult, 
in my opinion he is in grievous error. One of the young belongs to 
the adult; the other two have a different color pattern, the tails 
about an inch long are brick red with a subterminal black spot and 
buffy tip ; the tarsi are unfeathered. I would suggest they belong to 
Perdix hodgsoniae sifanica. 

Family PHASIANIDAE, Pheasants 

22. PERDIX HODGSONIAE SIFANICA Przewalski 

Perdix sifanica Przewalski, Mongol i strana Tangut, vol. 2, p. 124, 1876 (moun- 
tains of Kansu) ; Rowley's Ornithological miscellany, vol. 2, p. 423, 1877. 

Two males and six females, southwest Szechwan (Mount Konka, 
15,700 feet, August; Yulonghsi Valley, 13,000-16,000 feet, May; 
Jesilongba Valley, 14,300 feet, June). 

The undoubted males, taken in the breeding season, have a bare 
space below the eye and extending back of the eye over the ear cov- 



'Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 11, 1926. 



10 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

erts; below the eye, separated from the subocular bare space by a 
narrow line of feathers, there is another bare space, and this second 
bare space contains some small wartlike structures, still red in the 
skin, and evidently in life capable of being inflated. According to 
the sexing of the collectors, both sexes have this inflatable skin, but 
the sexing of Rock's men is very unreliable and not to be trusted. I 
have no good seasonable material for comparison. 

23. ITHAGINIS CRUENTUS GEOFFROYI Verreaux 

Ithagmis geoffroyi Vebreaux, Bull. Soc. d'Acclim., ser. 2, vol. 4, p. 700, 1867 
(Mupin). 

Fourteen males and twelve females, southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Mitzuga, 12,500-14,500 feet, June; Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 14,500 
feet, July; forests of Raronki, 12,500 feet, Shouchu Basin, August; 
Aloching, 12,500-13,500 feet, April ; Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, April ; Wen- 
ronkong, 14,500 feet, Muli, April-May; Mundon, 13,000 feet, May; 
Shangentze, 14,500 feet, May; Jesilongba, 14,500-16,000 feet. May; 
Chengtze, 14,500-15,900 feet, south of Tatsienlu, May). 

The present form and Ithaginis c. clarkei are very much alike ; the 
only constant difference in a series of both forms appears to be the 
blackish or dark mouse-gray chin of geoffroyi, this part in clarkei 
being buffy tinged with a reddish wash. There are a number of 
average characters separating tlie two forms, however. The females 
appear to be indistinguishable. The ranges of the two forms are 
very close to each other in this region, apparently only separated by 
the valley of the Yangtze. 

Along with the rough skeletons sent in by the Rev. David C. Gra- 
ham from the Yulonghsi Gorge (written Ulongsi by Graham) there 
are two immature males, about half grown, taken August 9. They 
have already begun to assume the red under tail coverts and green of 
the adult plumage, while the tarsi are still small and delicate and 
the bills small and red. This seems to indicate that the adult plum- 
age of the male is assumed some time before adult growth is reached 
and explains the difference in size between Ithaginis wilsoni Thayer 
and Bangs and geo-ffroiji^ and the reason the two were both found on 
Washan. 

24. ITHAGINIS CRUENTUS CLARKEI Rothschild 

Ithaginis clarkei Rothschild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, a'oI. 40, p. 67, 1920 (Likiang 
Mountains, Yunnan). 

One male, Likiang Mountains, 12,500 feet, Yunnan, January. 

25. LERWA LERWA MAJOR Meinertzh.ngen 

Lerwa lertoa major Meinertzhagen, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 47, p. 101, 1927 
(Tatsienlu, Szechwan). 

One male, Lildang Mountains, 15,000 feet, Yunnan, January. 



AKT. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — RILEY 11 

I have no typical Szechwan birds for comparison, and only two 
old specimens oi Lerwa lerioa lerwa from the " Himalayas." From 
the latter the Yunnan specimen differs as follows : Above, the light 
crossbars are lighter and on the head white rather than buffy; the 
primaries are black rather than brownish black ; the chestnut of the 
lower parts is somewhat deeper ; the bill is larger. 

This seems to be a new record for Yunnan. 

20. PUCRASIA MEYERI MadarAsz 

Pucrasia meyeri Madarasz, Ibis, 1886, p. 145 (central Tibet). 

One male and one female, Likiang Mountains, 15,000 feet, January. 
These are the first specimens of this fine species received by the 
United States National Museum. 

27. TETRAOPHASIS SZECHENYII Madarasz 

Tetraophasis szeclienyii Madarasz, Zeitschr. ges. Oru., vol. 2, p. 50, pi. 2, 1885 
(East Tibet). 

Two males and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 14,000 feet, January) ; five males and five females, southwest 
Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 13,000-14,500 feet, Muli, June; forests 
of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 14,000 feet, July; Kulu Mountains, 
12,000-13,000 feet, April; Aloching, 12,500-13,500 feet, north of 
Kulu, April; Minya Mountains, Konkalongba, 14,500 feet, no date). 

28, TETRAOGALLUS TIBETANUS HENRICI Oustalet 

Tetraogallus henricl Oustalet, Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 7, vol. 12, p. 296, 1891 
( Tatsienlii, Szechwan ) . 

Two males, two females, and two downy young, Mount Konka, 
15,700-17,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, June and August. 

I have only a male of T. t. tibetanus with which to compare the 
present race, and it differs considerably from that form. In the first 
place henrici has a broad band of slaty gray across the chest sepa- 
rating the white throat from that of the chest, lacking in tibetanus,' 
henrici is darker above ; the upper tail coverts much lighter, without 
the rufous tone ; and there are other differences. 

The females differ from the males in having the sides of neck 
with black and buffy markings, the chest with some black markings 
also, and the chest band with fine black and buffy stippling on a 
gray background. The males have a little stippling on the chest 
band, but not to the same extent as in the females. The males (in 
the skin) have a yellow bill and cere, while in the female the cere 
and beak are dark grajdsh olive, becoming horn color at the tip. 

One young is in the downy stage, except for the wings and tail ; 
it was taken in June. The other young was taken in August and is 
in a more advanced stage of plumage; it still retains the down on 
the head and a little on the breast. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

29. CROSSOPTILON CROSSOPTILON (Hodgson) 

Phasianus crossoptilon Hodgson, Journ. Asiat. See. Bengal, vol. 7, p. 864, pi. 46, 
1838 (Tibet). 

Three males, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, October) ; 
six males, three females, and three unsexed, southwest Szechwan 
(forests of Tyon-kong, Watogomba, 14,000 feet, July; forests of 
Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 14,000 feet, July; Konkalongba, 14,500 feet, 
no date; Chengtze, 14,500—15,900 feet. May). 

All the specimens from the Likiang Mountains (four) examined 
by me have the middle of the back pure white, while four specimens 
from near Tatsienlu, Szechwan, have the middle of the back washed 
with pale neutral gray. At Tyon-kong and Konkalongba both styles 
of coloration were taken, so the two styles can not be geographic. I 
agree with Grant ^ that Crossoptilon drouynii Verreaux is probably 
only a synonym of C. crossoptilon. 

30. CHRYSOLOPHUS AMHERSTIAE (Leadbeater) 

Phasianus amlierstiae Leadbeater, Trans. Linn. Soc. London, vol. 16, p. 129, 
pi. 15, 1828 (mountains of Cochin Cliina). 

One adult male, forests of Kopati, southwest Szechwan, June 1; 
three adult males, one immature male, and two adult females, north- 
west Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, 9,400-12,500 feet, January; 
Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August; Ndamucho, 14,000 
feet, October). 

The immature male was taken in October. It has begun to assume 
the crown and nape plumage of the adult; the chin, center of the 
throat, and jugular patch are coming in; the breast and belly plum- 
age, but not the chest, of the adult have been assumed ; the new tail 
is coming in, only three outside feathers on each side of the previ- 
ous plumage remain, even the center feathers are not more than 
one-third developed, however; the wings and remainder of the 
upper plumage show no sign of being replaced as yet. 

31. PHASIANUS COLCHICUS ELEGANS Elliot 

Phasianus elcgans Elliot, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 4, vol. 6, p. 312, 1870 
(Szechwan). 

One adult male and one immature male, Likiang Mountains, 
9,400-13,000 feet, January and August. 

Family GRUIDAE, Cranes 

32. GRUS NIGRICOLLIS Przewalski 

Orus nigricollis Przewalski, Mongol i strana Tangut, vol. 2, p. 135, pi. 9, 1876 
(Kokonor) ; Rowley's Ornithological miscellany, vol. 2, p. 436, pi. 9, 1877 
(translation). 

Two females, Yungning Plain, 9,500 feet, Yunnan, December and 
January. 



^ Catalogue of birds in the British Museum, vol. 22, p. 294, 1893. 



ABT. 7 BIRDS FEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — EILEY 13 

Family CHARADRIIDAE, Plovers, etc. 

33. VANELLUS VANELLUS (Linnaeus) 

Tringa vaneUus Linnaeus, Sj'stema naturae, ed. 10, p. 148, 1758 (Sweden). 
One female, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

34. PLUVIALIS DOMINICUS FULVUS (Gmclin) 

Charadnus fulvus Gmelin, Systema naturae, vol. 1, pt. 2, p. 687, 1789 (Tahiti). 
One female, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000, Yunnan, September. 

35. CHARADRIUS DUBIUS DUBIUS Scopoli 

Charadrius duMus Scopoli, Deliciae florae et faunae Insubricae, pt. 2, p. 93, 
1786 (Luzon). 

One male, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

36. CHARADRIUS PLACmUS Gray 

Charadrius placidus Gbay, Catalogue of the specimens and drawings of mam- 
mals, birds, reptiles, and fishes of Nepal and Tibet, presented by B. H. 
Hodgson to the British Museum, ed. 2, p. 70, 1863 (Nepal). 

One male and one female, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, Janu- 
ary-February ; three males, two females, and one unsexed, Weihsi, 
8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

Family SCOLOPACIDAE, Snipe, etc. 

37. PISOBIA TEMMINCKII (Leisler) 

Tringa temminckii Leisler, NachtrJige zu Bechsteins Naturgeschichte Deutsch- 
lands, pp. 63-73, 1812 (near Hanau on the Main, Germany). 

Three males, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

38. ACTITIS HYPOLEUCOS (Linnaeus) 

Tringa hypoleucos Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 149, 1758 (Sweden). 
One male and one female, Yulo, 7,000 feet, Yunnan, August. 

39. TOTANUS TOTANUS EURHINUS Oberholser 

Totanus totamis eurliinus Oberholser, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 22, p. 207, 
1900 (Lake Tsomoriri, Ladak). 

One male, Jesilongba, 14,500-16,000 feet, Szechwan, May. 

40. TRINGA OCHROPUS Linnaeus 

Tringa ocJiropus Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 149, 1758 (Sweden). 

Two males and one female, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, 
September. 



14 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

41. RHYACOPHILUS GLAREOLA (Linnaeus) 

Tringa glarcola Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 149, 1758 (Sweden). 
One female, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

42. CAPELLA SOLITARIA (Hodgson) 

GalUnago solitaria Hodgson, Gleanings in science, vol. 3, p. 238, 1831 (Nepal). 

Three females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, Septem- 
ber and March; Liitien, 10,000 feet, September) ; one female, south- 
west Szechwan (Dshizhi, 12,000 feet, April). 

The specimen from Dshizhi is a bird of the previous year, I sup- 
pose, as it is quite different from the adult. The sides of the neck 
are buffy ; the chest feathers are tipped with white, and this region is 
more mottled than in the adult ; the scapulars are broadly margined 
with buffy; the five outer primaries are margined with white; and 
there are other differences. The wing measures 160 mm. 

43. SCOLOPAX RUSTICOLA RUSTICOLA Linnaeus 

Scolopax rusticola Linnaexts, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 146, 1758 (Sweden). 
One male, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, January. 

Family LARIDAE, Gulls, etc. 

44. LARUS RIDIBUNDUS SIBIRICUS Buturlin 

Larus ridihundus sibiricus Buturlin, Messager Orn., vol. 2, p. 66, 1911 (Kolyma 
Delta and Ussuriland). 

One immature female, Yungning Plain, 9,500 feet, November- 
December; one adult female, Yungning Lake, 9,500 feet, December; 
and one adult male, Likiang Mountains, 9,600 feet, January, Yunnan. 

45. LARUS FUSCUS TAIMYRENSIS Buturlin 

Larus affinis taimyrensis Butublin, Messager Orn., vol. 2, p. 149, 1911 (Gulf of 
Yenisei, Siberia). 

One immature male, Yungning Lake, 9,500 feet, Yunnan, January. 
This seems to be a new record for this Province. 

Family COLUMBIDAE, Doves, etc. 

46. SPHENURUS SPHENURUS YUNNANENSIS (LaTouche) 

Sphenocercus sphenurus yunnanensis LaTouche, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 
42, p. 13, 1921 (Lutukow, southeast Yunnan). 

One female, forests of Gowa, 10,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, May, 
and one female. Mount Mitzuga, 10,000 feet, Muli, southwest Szech- 
wan, June. 



AKT. 7 BIKDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA EILEY 15 

47. STREPTOPELIA CHINENSIS FORRESTI Rothschild 

Streptopelia chinensis forresU Rothschild, Nov. ZooL, vol. 32, p. 293, 1925 
(Tengyueh, Yunnau). 

One male and one female, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, Yun- 
nan, January-February. 

48. OENOPOPELIA TRANQUEBARICA HUMILIS (Temminck) 

Columta humilis Temminck, Nouveau recueil de planches colorizes d'oiseaux, 
liv. 44, pi. 259, 1824 (Bengal, Luzon). 

Six males and one female, Tatsienlu. 9.500-10,000 feet, Szechwan, 
May. 

The five adult males in the above series have been compared with 
seven adult males from Luzon. On the whole the Chinese series 
appears to be slightly darker, but there are individual birds that 
are so close that they can be distinguished only with difficulty. The 
Luzon birds have slightly shorter wings. The seven Luzon birds' 
wings measure: 130.5-140 mm. (136.9) ; while the five Chinese birds' 
wings measure: 139.5-142 mm. (140.7). On the whole the Luzon 
and Chinese series are too close to separate by name. 

49. COLUMBA HODGSONII Vigors 

Columl)a liodgsonii Vigors, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1832, p. 16 (Nepal). 
Two males, Muli Valley, 9,600 feet, southwest Szechwan, June. 

50, COLUMBA LEUCONOTA GRADARIA Hartert 

Columha leuconota gradaria Haetebt, Nov. Zool., p. 85, 1916 (Snngpan, Szech- 
wan). 

Three males and three females, southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Konka, 16,500 feet, June ; Ronapien, Shouchu Basin, 14,500 feet, Au- 
gust; Briiolo-kong Valley, 13,000-15,900 feet. May; Chengtze, 14,500- 
15,900 feet, May). 

Specimens from Yunnan and from the southern border of south- 
west Szechwan have the mantle somewhat darker than birds from 
farther north, but agree with northern birds in having lighter, grayer 
heads than the typical leuconota from Kashmir. On the whole the 
Yunnan specimens are better placed with the northern race, though 
somewhat intermediate. 

51. COLUMBA RUPESTRIS AUSTRIMA Riley 

Columha rupestris ausirina Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 43, p. 133, 
1930 (Chengtze, Szecliv/an). 

Three males, Chengtze, 14,500-15,900 feet, Szechwan, May. 
Besides the above, the United States National Museum contains 
three males and three females from Szechwan (TatsienlHi or vicinity. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIOIN'AL MUSEUM vol.80 

Nachuka, and Sungpan). From northeast Kansu and just over the 
border in Inner Mongolia it has four males and two females, and 
from the Eastern Tombs, Chihli, one female. 

The series from Szechwan is darker on the breast and belly and 
considerably darker on the upper tail coverts when compared with 
the Kansu and more northern specimens ; there seems to be no appre- 
ciable difference in size. The single male from Sungpan is somewhat 
intermediate; the upper tail coverts are slightly lighter than those 
of the more southern birds, but darker than in the northern race ; I 
would, however, place it with the southern form for the present. 

When the above race was described, I overlooked comparing it 
with Goluniba taczanowskii Stejneger.® The latter was founded upon 
a single adult male from southern Korea. This specimen is certainly 
darker than the series from Inner Mongolia and northeastern Kansu, 
which I regard as Goluniba ruyestris imfestris for the present, and 
the chest is more extensively suffused with a darker vinaceous-purple. 
Colmnba taczanowskii is certainly very close to Golumha t'upestris 
austnna; it is only slightly lighter and has the chest a little more 
extensively vinaceous-purple. If more material should make it ad- 
visable to recognize an eastern race of Golumha rupestris^ it seems to 
me the name Golumha leucosonura Swinhoe ^ described from Talien 
Bay, southern Manchuria, will have to be used for it. 

Family CUCULIDAE, Cuckoos 

52. CUCULUS CANORUS BAKERI Hartert 

Cuculus canorus Mkeri Hartert, Die Vogel der palilarktischen Fauua, vol. 2, 
Heft 7, p. 948, 1912 (Shillong, Assam). 

One female, Yangtze Gorge, Yungning, 10,200 feet, Yunnan, May ; 
three males and one female, southwest Szechwan (between Bonti 
and Waerhdje, 14,000 feet, July; Yulonghsi Valley, 13,000-16,000 
feet, May ; Tatsienlu, 9,500-10,000 feet. May) . 

If Stuart Baker's description ^° of Guculus optatus holds good, then 
the majority of the birds that were so identified previously from 
Yunnan" and the above belong to hakeri. All the specimens in 
the United States National Museum from the mountains of Yunnan 
and Szechwan, except three young of the year from Yunnan, have 
the carpo-metacarpal joint of the wing white, barred more or less 
with grayish or dusky. The only available specimens having the 
carpo-metacarpal joint white and unbarred are six from Japan (only 
two adults), one from Copper Island, two from near Shanghai, tAvo 

8 Proc. U. S. Nat. Mub., vol. 16, p. 624, 1893. 

"Ibis, 1861, p. 259. 

10 Fauna of British India, Birds, vol. 4, ed. 2, p. 141, 1927. 

" Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 15, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 17 

from Nanking, and three young of the year from Ymman. All 
the latter are smaller than those with the barred carpo-metacarpal. 
Now the birds that have the carpo-metacarpal barred are darker 
above and the barring below is heavier than in Guculus canoms 
telephonus and apparently represent the breeding form throughout 
the mountains of western China from northern Szechwan south into 
Yunnan and Assam. From the description, I believe this to be 
Guculus canorus hakeri Hartert. This constitutes only an exten- 
sion of the known range northward in the mountains. 

Rothschild ^- records takevi from Yunnan and Lonnberg ^^ from 
western Kansu, and Bangs and Peters ^* have recently not only 
recorded it from the mountains of Kansu but from eastern Tibet. 

The wings of the four undoubted adults of optatus measure : 2185 
213, 203, and 195 mm. Twelve males of the dark breeding birds from 
the mountains of Yunnan and Szechwan with barred carpo-meta- 
carpal feathers have wings measuring 213-231 (225) mm. Three 
females of the same form from the region have wings measuring 213, 
220, and 220 mm. Thus it will be seen that Guculus optatus ap- 
parently breeds in the mountains along with the present form, as 
the three immatures from Yunnan indicate. 

The four birds recorded by the author ^' from Kansu as Guculus 
canorus telephonus prove on reexamination to be both that form and 
hakeH. The adults from Ninghsia and Lanchow were correctly de- 
termined ; the immature and adult from 120 miles south of Lanchow 
belong to hakeri. It is probable that the latter is the breeding form 
and that telephonus is only a straggler in the Province. 

53. GUCULUS OPTATUS Gould 

Cuculns optatus Gottld, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1845, p. 18 (Port Essiugton, 
Australia). 

One immature female, Yulo, 7,000 feet, Yunnan, August. 

54. HIEROCOCCYX SPAEVERIOIDES (Vigors) 

Cuculus sparverioides Vigors, Proc. Zool. Soc. Loudon, 1832, p. 173 (Himalaya). 

One male, Lapo-laze, north of Likiang, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, May, 
and one male, Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, June. 

55. CACOMANTIS MERULINUS QUERULUS Heine 

Cacomantis querulus Heine, Journ. f. Orn., 1863, p. 352 (India, Nepal, Burma). 
One male, Weihsi, 11,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, September. 

^ Nov. Zool., vol. 33, p. 236, 1926. 

iMbis, 1924, p. 318. 

" Bull. Mus. Comp. Zo51., vol. 68, p. 331, 1928. 

« Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 77, art. 15, p. 13, 1930. 

70403—31 2 



Ig PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

56. CHALCITES MACULATUS MACULATUS (Gmelin) 

Trogon maculatus Gmelin, Systema naturae, vol. 1, pt. 1, p. 404, 1788 (Ceylon, 
error; Pegu). 
One female, Noon forests, 11,000 feet, east of Muli, southwest 
Szechwan, August. 

Family PSITTACIDAE, Parrots 

57. PSITTACULA SCHISTICEPS FINSCHI (Hume) 

Palaeornis finscM Hume, Stray Feathers, vol. 2, p. 509, 1874 (KoUidoo, Salwin 
River). 

One adult male, two immature males, one adult female, and one 
immature female, Yulo, 7,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, August. 

The adults are in molt. The tail is being renewed from the center 
outward, and in the female the plumage of the whole head and throat 
is being renewed and the two outer primaries on each side are coming 
in; the second primary is almost full grown; the outer primary is 
barely out of its sheath. 

58. PSITTACULA DERBIANA (Fraser) 

Palaeornis derhiana Frasek, Proc. Zcol. Soc. London, 1850, p. 245, pi. 25 (cage 
bird). 

Three males and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang- 
Yungning Lake, 10,200 feet. May; Lapo-laze, 9,000 feet, May); 
seven males and seven females, southwest Szechwan (Noon, east of 
Muli, 10,500 feet, August ; Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, Muli, August ; 
Shouchu Valley, 12,000 feet, August). 

In this large series there is quite a little variation. The males 
have the chest and breast ranging from Hay's lilac to a dull violet- 
blue. The birds with the latter color have the head almost as deep 
a violet as the chest, only the forehead next to the black frontal band, 
around the eye, and lores being washed with bremen blue. This 
stage of plumage, I think, is that of the old males. The males with 
lilac chests have the pileum washed with greenish and are probably 
younger birds, but they probably breed in this plumage as their 
tails are much worn. In the female the range of color of the lower- 
parts is not so great as in the male, varying from dark lavender to 
light vinaceous-lilac. The forehead and the sides of the head are 
more extensively washed with bremen blue. The females have the 
maxilla black, while in the males it is scarlet. Unfortunately, for 
my theory of the lighter breasted male being a j^ounger bird, there is 
a young male from Noon with maxilla black, only dull red at the 
base. The chest and breast are already quite dark, much darker 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 19 

than the lilac-breasted male, but not so dark as dull violet-blue. It 
is just becoming slightly bluish on the crown, the rest of the pileum 
is washed with greenish, grayish olive on the occiput. Nevertheless, 
I think the lilac-breasted male a younger stage than the dull violet- 
blue male; these parts have somewhat faded in the former. The 
dull violet-blue-breasted male was taken in May, but it never would 
have faded to the lilac stage. There is naturally some variation, 
either individual or age. 

Family MICROPODIDAE, Swifts 

59. COLLOCALIA LOWI PELLOS Thayer and Bangs 

Collocalia inopina pellos Thayer and Bangs. Mem. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 40, 
no. 4, p. 158, 1912 (Washan, west Szechwan). 

One female. Noon forests, east of Muli, 11,000 feet, southwest 
Szechwan, August. 

The above specimen agrees with skins from the type locality of the 
race. The wing measures 137 mm. 

60. MICROPUS PACIFICUS PACIFICUS (Latham) 

Uirundo pacifica Latham, Index oruithologicus, Suppl., p. 58, 1801 (Australia). 

One unsexed, Petien or Barongomba, one day's trip northeast of 
Baurong, 11,000-12,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, no date. 

61. mRUNDAPUS NUDIPES (Hodgson) 

Chaetura nudipes Hodgson, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 5, p. 779, 1836 
(Nepal). 

One adult male, Shouchu Valley, 12,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, 
August. 

This bird is very different in plumage from Hir^ndapus caudacu- 
tus, and their ranges apparently do not meet at any point. For these 
reasons it seems they should be treated as separate species. Hh^n- 
dapus nudipes resembles H. caudacutus in color but is much darker 
throughout ; the forehead is dark brown, only a little paler than the 
crown, not white ; and it is larger. The above specimen has a wing 
208 mm. long. 

Family ALCEDINIDAE, Kingfishers 

62. HALCYON PILEATA (Boddaert) 

Alcedo pileata Boddaert, Table planches des euluraineez d'histoire naturelle de 
M. d'Aubenton, p. 41, 1783 (Canton, China). 

One female, Yulinggong, 11,000 feet, 10 miles south of Tatsienlu, 
May. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

63. ALCEDO ATTHIS BENGALENSIS Gmelin 

Alcedo iengalensis Gmelin, Systema naturae, vol. 1, pt. 1, p. 450, 1788 (Bengal). 
One male, Yimgning Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, November- 
December; two males and one imsexed, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet,. 
Yunnan, September. 

Family PICIDAE, Woodpeckers 

64. THRIPONAX FORRESTI (Rothschild) 

Dryocopns forresti Rothschild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, p. 9, 1922 (Mekong 
"Valley, Yunnan). 

One male and one female, Ndamucho, 11,000 feet, Yunnan, October, 
The specimen formerly recorded as an adult male ^° was incor- 
rectly sexed. It is an adult female. The above male resembles the 
same sex of ThHponax nchardsi very closely. The only male speci- 
men of the latter available for comparison has a broad space above^ 
the eye black, while in forresti the red of the crown reaches th& 
eyelid posteriorly. This feature is not mentioned in the original 
description, and it may be only individual. 

The female of T. forresti has the occiput red, while in the same 
sex of T. richa/rdsi the whole crest is black without any red. Other- 
wise the two species are much alike superficially. 

65. PICOmES FUNEBRIS Verreaux 

Picoides fune'bris Verreaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 33, 1870 
(mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

Four males and five females, southwest Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 
13,500 feet, Muli, June; back of Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 feet, June; 
Mount Konka, 14,000 feet, June; forests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 
13,000 feet, July; Noon forests, 11,000 feet, east of Muli, August; 
Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, April; Mount Gibboh, 13,000-14,000 feet, April)! 

Only five of the above specimens are old adult birds. The rest 
are birds of the year in various stages of plumage, but none in the 
nestling stage. The youngest plumage of the male represented 
resembles the adult and has the yellow crown, but the breast and 
belly are without any white bars; the outer tail feathers have a 
few linear, irregular, white markings not quite reaching the margin 
distally; the white markings above are sparse; and the bill is 
shorter. As the bird becomes older, whitish bars appear below, the 
white markings increase above, and the white markings on the outer 
tail feathers become white ovoid spots mostly on the outer web, 
but one on the inner web, and a double spot subterminally, sepa- 

" Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 17, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 21 

rated by the black shaft. The next stage of the male is not repre- 
sented, but it is carried on in one of the immature females where 
the white markings above and below are only a little less numerous 
than in the adult and the barring on the outer tail feathers with the 
white bars farther apart than in the adult and interrupted prox- 
imally ; the pileum is without any white markings. Another female 
is acquiring white spots on the forehead. 

66. HYPOPICUS HYPERYTHRUS HYPERYTHRUS (Vigors) 

Picus liyperythrus Vigoks, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1831, p. 23 (Himalayan 
Mountains). 

Four males and three females, southwest Szechwan (forests of 
Djago, Muli, 10,000-12,000 feet, June and April; forests of Baude- 
Shaj^a, 12,500-13,000 feet, northeast of Muli, July; Noon forests, 
10,500 feet, east of Muli, August ; Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, Muli, 
August; Chiichulongba, 13,000-14,000 feet, no date). 

The above si3ecimens are darker and brighter than the north China 
form, Hypopicus hyperythtms suhruflnus. Two of the above speci- 
mens (male and female) are birds of the year with the underparts 
barred with black. The female taken in June has the throat and all 
the underparts barred; the male taken in August has the barring 
below much reduced and confined mostly to the chest and sides. One 
of the males in apparently adult plumage (Mount Gibboh, August) 
has the lower as well as the upper mandible black as in the immature 
specimens ; it may be a bird of the year also. 

67. DRYOBATES MAJOR STRESEMANNI Rensch 

Dryohates major stresemanni Rensch, Abh. Ber. Mus. Tierk. Volkerk. Dresden, 
vol. 16, no. 2, p. 38, 1924 (Tsalila, Szechwan). 

One female, Yungning Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, Yunnan, 
November-December ; three males and two females, southwest Szech- 
wan (Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, June; Djago, 11,200-12,000 feet, 
April; Shangentze, 14,500 feet. May; Chiichulongba, 13,000-14,000 
feet, no date) . 

68. DRYOBATES DARJELLENSIS DESMURSI (Verreaux) 

Picus desmursi Verreaux, Nouv. Arcb. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 33, 1870 
(mountains of Cbinese Tibet). 

One adult male, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, Yunnan, October. 

The United States National Museum contains an adult female from 
Yunnan and another from Mount Omei, Szechwan. They do not 
seem to differ appreciably. Specimens of typical D. darjellensis are 
not available for comparison. 



22 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

69. YUNGIPICUS SCINTILLICEPS CLEMENTII LaTouche 

lyngipicus pygmaens clemcntii LaTouche, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 40, p. 51, 
1919 (Chang-yang-hsien, Hupeh). 

Four males and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, January-February; Yulo, 7,000 feet, August; 
Fuchuanshan, 9,800 feet, September) ; one female, southwest Szech- 
wan (forests of Shaya, 13,000 feet, northeast of Muli, July). 

This series along with the four specimens previously recorded as 
Tungipicus scintilliceps omissus ^^ is darker and more heavily 
striped below than specimens from north China. Two males and one 
female from Yulo and a male from Fuchuanshan have a sulphur- 
yellow wash to the breast and belly not seen in the Likiang speci- 
mens, but a small series from Mount Omei almost exactly matches 
the Yulo specimens. One male and two females from Fukien, a male 
from Yochow, Hunan, and a male from Hsien-shan-hsien, Hupeh, are 
very similar in color to the Mount Omei birds. The lack of the yel- 
low wash to the breast and belly in the Likiang specimens is due to 
fading, I believe, as they are birds taken late in spring or in summer, 
while those with the yellow wash are fall or early-winter birds. All 
the birds from Yunnan, Szechwan, Hupeh, Hunan, or Fukien before 
me are equally heavily striped below, and there does not appear to be 
any appreciable difference in size. 

Seven males from northwest Yunnan measure : Wing, 99-106 mm. 
(101.6) ; culmen, 16.6-18 (17.7). Three males from Szechwan meas- 
ure: Wing, 99.5-101.5 (100.3); culmen, 17-18 (17.3). Three males 
from Fukien, Hunan, and Hupeh measure: Wing, 100-101 (100.3) : 
culmen, 18 mm. 

This would seem to indicate that the dark-breasted birds are a 
southern race stretching right across south China from southern 
Szechwan to Fukien. If this is the true situation, then it seems 
LaTouche's name is to be used for it, as it has three years priority 
over Dryobates pygmaeus omissus Kothschild.^^ Doctor Eensch^^ 
has named a race from Kwanhsien, Szechwan, Bryohates semicoTO- 
natus szetschuanensis. I have not seen any specimens from as far 
north in Szechwan, but his measurements are only slightly smaller 
than what I get for the more southern bird, and his description 
seems very close also. He does not refer to omissus or clementii, 
but only compares his supposed race with the northern form, scin- 
tilliceps. 



" Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 16, 1926. 

»8Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, p. 10, 1922. 

'»Al)h. Ber. Mus. Tierk. Volkerk. Dresden, vol. 16, no. 2, p. 39. 1924. 



AKT. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN" AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 23 

70. PICUS CANUS SORDIDIOR (Rippon) 

Gecinns sordidior Ripfon, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 19, p. 32, 1906 (Yangtze 
Big Bend). 

One male and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, 
September; forests of Lapo-laze, 10,000 feet, May); four males 
and two females, southwest Szechwan (Yalung River Gorge, 11,000 
feet, July; forests of Tyon-kong, Watogomba, 12,500 feet, Yalung 
watershed, July ; Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, Muli, April ; Cliengize, 14,500- 
15,900 feet, May). 

The greens in this species quickly fade, so that by the end of the 
breeding season the green has mostly or entirely disappeared from 
the iowerparts and the upperparts, except the wings. This makes 
it necessary to compare specimens taken at approximately the same 
time or in the same state of wear. The female taken at Likiang in 
September almost matches a female taken south of Suifu in Feb- 
ruary in color and size. Though the series from Yunnan and Szech- 
wan at my command is quite large, the majority of the specimens 
are in faded plumage and not good for comparison, but suitable for 
measurement. Ten males from northwest Yunnan and southwest 
Szechwan measure : Wing, 139-154 mm. (147.3) ; culmen, 33.5-40 
(35.9). Six males from Suifu, Mount Omei, and north Szechwan, 
measure: Wing, 139-158 (147) ; culmen, 36.5-41 (38.3). Wlien fresh 
unworn material is collected from northern Yunnan and western 
Szechwan and compared, I believe the supposed differences between 

the present race and Picus canus setschuanus Hesse -° will largely 
disappear. 

Family ALAUDIDAE, Larks 

71. OTOCORIS ALPESTRIS KHAMENSIS Bianchi 

Otocori/s eJicesi khamensis Bianchi, Ibis, 1904, p. 372 (Kliam, southeastern 
Thibet). 

Five males and two females, Yulonghsi Valley, 13,000-16,000 feet, 
May; two males and one female, Jesilongba Valley, 14,500-16,000 
feet. May; two females, Jesila, 15,600-16,300 feet, May; one male, 
Konkalongba, Minya Mountains, 14,500 feet, no date; one male, 
Yulinggong, 10 miles south of Tatsienlu, 11,000 feet, May. 

All the above localities are in Szechwan, to the south of Tatsienlu, 
from three to four days' trip to within 10 miles of the town. 

I have no good material of the related forms with which to com- 
pare this series, except one male of Otocoris alpestris przewalskii. 
The latter is a paler and apparently smaller race with the black 
frontal band much reduced. Otocoris alpestris khamensis is a rather 
richly colored race above with the black frontal band and black 

2«0in. Monatsb., vol. 19, p. 193, 1911. 



24 PEOCEBDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

coronal patch rather broad, the white separating these two areas 
rather narrow. 

The ten males measure: Wing, llT-124 mm. (120.5) ; culmen, 13.5- 
15 (14); the five females: Wing, 111-114 (111.9); culmen, 13-14 
(13.5). 

Weigold took a series in the same general region that was assigned 
to this form by Doctor Hartert.^^ 

72. CALANDRELLA BRACHYDACTYLA DUKHUNENSIS (Sykes) 

Alauda dukhunensis Sykes, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1832, p. 93 (Deccan). 

One male, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, Sep- 
tember. 
Apparently not recorded from the Province before. 

73. ALAUDA GULGULA COELIVOX Swinhoe 

Alauda coelivox Swinhoe, Zoologist, 1859, p. 6724 (Amoy) ; Journ. North 

China Branch Roy. Asiat. Soc, no. 3, p. 288, Dec, 1859. 
Alauda arverisis weigoJdi Haktebt, Abb. Ber. Zool. Anthr.-Ethn. Mus. Dresden, 

vol. 15, no. 3, p. 20, 1922 (Hankow, Hupeh). 

Two males and two females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, January-February and September; Yungning 
Plain, 9,300 feet. May). 

The wings of the above two males measure 100 and 103 mm.; the 
two females, 99 and 100. Another male taken on a previous trip in 
the Likiang Mountains in April has a wing measurement of 94 mm. 
Two males from the mouth of the Yangtze have wings measuring 
100 and 100.5 mm.; one male from Yochow, Hunan, has a wing of 
99 mm.; the wings of five males from southern Szechwan measure 
90, 91.5, 93, 95.5, and 98 mm. Two males from Hongkong measure : 
Wing, 91 and 92 mm. Thus the supposed difference between the 
Yangtze Valley bird and that of southern China does not seem to 
hold good, but the material at hand from the latter locality is small 
and not conclusive. 

Family HIRUNDINIDAE, Swallows 

74. PTYONOPROGNE RUPESTRIS (Scopoli) 

Hirundo rupestris Scopoli, Annus I historico naturalis, 1769, p. 167 (Tirol). 

One male, Kere, south of Kulu, 9,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, 
December. 

75. DELICHON URBICA CASHMERIENSIS Gould 

Delichon cashmeriensis Goxji.d, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1858, p. 356 (Kashmir). 

One male, Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, southwest Szechwan, 
April. 



I 



"Abh. Zool. Anthr.-Ethn. Mus. Dresden, vol. 15, no. 3, p. 21, 1922. 



AKT. 7 BIEDS FEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 25 

Specimens from the mountains of western China are somewhat 
smaller and have the tails less deeply forked than Kashmir birds ; the 
latter are a clearer white below and also on the rump. 

Family CAMPEPHAGIDAE, Cuckoo-shrikes 

76. PERICROCOTUS BREVIROSTRIS ETHOLOGUS Bangs and Phillips 

Pericrocotus 'brevlvostris ethologus Bangs and Phillips, Bull. Mus. Comp. 
Zool., vol. 58, p. 282, 1914 (Hsiensban, Hupeh). 

Three males and four females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, September ; Mbayiwua, 10,000 feet, April ; Liitien, 
10,000 feet, September; Yulo, 7,000 feet, August) ; two males and two 
females, southwest Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, Muli, 
June; Muli- Yunnan border, 11,000 feet, August). 

Family DICRURIDAE, Drongos 

77. CHIBIA HOTTENTOTA BREVIROSTRIS Cabanis 

Chibia hrevirostris Cabanis, Museum Heineanum, vol. 1, p. 112, 1850 (China). 
One adult female, Tatsienlu, 9,500-10,000 feet, southwest Szech- 
wan, May. 

78. DICRUEUS LEUCOPHAEUS NIGRESCENS Gates 

Dicrurus nigrescens Gates, in Hume's Nests and Eggs, ed. 2, vol. 1, p. 208, 1889 
(Rangoon). 

Two males, one female, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Likiang Mountains, January-February, September, and October; 
Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August) ; one female, south- 
west Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 10,000 feet, Muli, June). 

Family ORIOLIDAE, Old World Orioles 

79. ORIOLUS CHINENSIS TENUIROSTRIS Blyth 

Oriolus tenuirostris Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 15, p. 48, 1846 (cen- 
tral India). 

One adult male, one immature male, one adult female, and one 
immature female from northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, Sep- 
tember ; forests west of Yungning, 12,000 feet, May ; forests of Gowa, 
10,000 feet. May). 

Family CORVIDAE, Crows 

80. NUCIFRAGA CARYOCATACTES MACELLA Thayer and Bangs 

Nucifraga heinispila macella Thayer and Bangs, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 
52, p. 140, 1909 (Hsien-shan-hsien, Hupeh). 

Five males and two females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, January-February and September; Tokesher-Lapo, 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

10,000 feet, May; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October) ; three males and 
four females, southwest Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 13,500 feet, Muli, 
June; forests of Tyon-kong, Watogomba, Yalung watershed, July; 
Noon Valley, 10,000 feet, east of Muli, August). 

81. PYKRHOCORAX PYRRHOCORAX HIMALAYANUS (Gould) 

Fregilus himalayanus Gould, Proc. Zool. Soc. Loudon, 1862, p. 125 (Himalayas). 
One female. Mount Konka, 16,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, June. 

82. UROCISSA ERYTHRORHYNCHA ERYTKRORHYNCHA (Boddaert) 

Corvus erythrorhynchus Boddaert, Table plauclies des eulumineez d'histoire 
naturelle de M. d'Aubenton, p. 38, 1783 (China). 

Two males and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, January-February, and Yungning Mountains, 
12,000-13,000 feet, November-December). 

83. GARRULUS BISPECULARIS SINENSIS Swinhoe 

Garrulus sinensis Swinhoe, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1863, p. 304 (Canton to 
Ningpo). 

Tavo males and three females, southwest Szechwan (mountains 
south of Muli, 10,500 feet, December; between Tsoso and Kulu, 10,- 
500 feet, December; Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, June; Mount Mit- 
zuga, 12,500 feet, Muli, June; back of Mount Mitzuga, 10,000 feet, 
June). 

This series compared with a series from Fukien and Chekiang sub- 
stantiates the remarks made previously.^^ The western birds average 
more grayish on the mantle. Immature specimens are much more 
rufescent than the adult and lack the grayish cast to the mantle. 
Some specimens, apparently adult, taken in winter are more rufescent 
than others, and the grayish cast to the mantle is almost lacking. It 
might be that these are birds of the year in their first winter plumage. 

84. COLOEUS DAUURICUS KHAMENSIS Bianchi 

Coloeus clauricus khamensis Bianchi, Bull. Brit. Orn, Club, vol. 16, p. 68, 1906 
(Mekong River, Kham, southeast Tibet). 

One female, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February; 
and one male and two females, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, northwest 
Yunnan, Sei)tember. 

85. COLOEUS FUSCICOLLIS (Vieillot) 

Corvus fuscicollis Vieiixot, Tableau encyclopedique et methodique des trois 
r6gnes de la nature . . . Ornithologie, vol. 2. p. 880, 1823 (Lake Baikal). 

Corvus neglectus Schlegel, Bijdr. Dierk., Amsterdam, afl. 8, Corvus, p. 16, 1859 
(Japan). 



==■ Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 64, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FEOM YUNISTAN AND SZECHWAIST, CHIISTA EILEY 27 

Two males and two females, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, northwest 
Yunnan, October. 

LaTouche ^^ unites dauuricus and fuscicollis as other authors have 
done, but admits that he has no proof that they are the same and 
presents evidence for and against such a view. It is quite possible 
that the black bird, fuscicollis^ and the pied, dauuHcus, are only 
phases of the same species, but until this is proved to be undoubtedly 
the case the records had, in my oj)inion, better be kept separate. If 
the two are only color phases, it is rather queer that intermediates 
apparently are never or rarely found. 

Stresemann -* has called attention to the precedence Vieillot's name 
has over that of Schlegel. Lord Rothschild ^^ regards the present 
bird as a dimorphic form of dauuricus. 

Family PARADOXORNITHIDAE, Parrot-bills 

86. CONOSTOMA AEMODIUM AEMODIUM Hodgson 

Conostoma aemodius Hodgson, Joul'ii. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 10, p. 857, 1841 
(Nepal). 

Two males, six females, and one unsexed, Ndamucho, Yangtze- 
Mekong Divide, 14,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, October. 

No specimens are available from the Himalayas or western Szech- 
wan. The present series is referred to the above race on geographic 
grounds, rather than to C onostoma aemodium tmiibuseti Strese- 
mann -" from Waslian, Szechwan. Since the above was written an 
adult male has been received from the Rev. David C. Graham taken 
in Mupin. It is somewhat darker below and on the occiput; the 
differences are not great, however. 

The two males from Yunnan measure : Wing, 138.5-139 mm. ; tail, 
140-144; culmen, 26-26. The six females from Yunnan: "Wing, 
125.5-137.6 (131); tail, 137.5-145 (141.9); culmen, 22.5-25 (24). 
The single male from Mupin: Wing, 123.5; tail, 132; culmen, 22. 

This would seem to indicate that the more northern bird is some- 
wliat smaller, but one specimen, sexed by a native, is not sufficient to 
pass judgment on the validity of a race. 

87. SUTHORA UNICOLOR CANASTER Thayer and Bangs 

SutJiora unicolar canaster Thayee and Bangs, Mem. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 40, 
no. 4, p. 171, 1912 (Mount Wafc*hau, Szechwan). 

Four males, four females, and one unsexed, Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000 feet, Januarj^-February ; Luddii Mountains, 
12,000-13,000 feet, August; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October); two 

2« Handbook of Blrcls of Bast China, pt. 1, p. 11, 1925. 
2«Anz. Orn. Ges. Bayern, no. 2, p. 8, 1919. 
2SN0V. Zool., vol., 33 p. 341, 1926. 
28Journ. Orn., 1923, p. 366. 



28 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

males, five females, and two imsexed, Szechwan (Dshizhi, north of 
Kiilu and west of the Yalimg, 13,500 feet, April; Mount Gibboh, 
13,000 feet, Muli, December). 

88. SUTHORA FULVIFRONS CYANOPHRYS David 

Suthora cyanophnys David, Journ. Trois Voy. Emp. Chin., vol. 1, p. 345, 1875 
(Chensi meridion. ) . 

Three males and three females, Ndamiicho, Yangtze-Mekong 
Divide, 14,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, October; one male, Dshizhi, 
north of Kulu and west of the Yalung, 13,500 feet, southwest Szech- 
wan, April. 

This race is quite distinct from Suthora fulvifrons fulvifrons in 
being much lighter in color, the dark bands on each side of the crown 
being slaty gray, instead of tawny-olive, and there are other differ- 
ences. I have never seen a specimen from Shensi and do not believe 
any have been taken there in recent years. 

89. SUTHORA WEBBIANA RICKETTI (Rothschild) 

Paradoxornis webliana riclcetti Rothschild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, p. 11, 
1922 (Yangtze Valley, Yunnan). 

One adult male and four females or immature males (two marked 
males, the remainder unsexed), northwest Yunnan (Luddii Moun- 
tains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August; Yulo, west of the Likiang Moun- 
tains, 7,000 feet, August) ; one male and one female, southwest 
Szechwan (Yanwekong, 10,700 feet, May). 

The adult male has a much larger bill than the female. These 
do not exactly agree with the original description. The chest and 
throat have a slight vinaceous-fawn cast, though in the younger 
specimens they are white. I have not been able to examine a specimen 
of /Suthora webhiana styani, but I am under the impression that it 
and the present race do not belong to the webhiana group. 

Family PARIDAE, Titmice 

90. AEGITHALOS GLAUCOGULARIS VINACEA (Verreaux) 

Mecistura vinacea Veeeeaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus, Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 39, 1870 
(mountains of Chinese Tibet) ; Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 7, Bull., p. 76, 
1871 (type from Ourato). 

Two males, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, Janu- 
ary-February. 

When two specimens were recorded from the Lashipa Plain, 
Yunnan," Rothschild ^s questioned the identification, thinking they 

^ Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 50, 1926. 
»Nov. Zool., vol. 33, p. 396, 1927. 



AKT. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 29 

must belong to A. g. glaucogularis. They were identified correctly, 
however, as later material has proved. The United States National 
Museum contains a good series of A. g. glaucogularis, and it is a 
much smaller bird with a shorter wing and much shorter tail. The 
two Yunnan specimens listed above measure : Wing, 68-66 mm. ; tail, 
78-73. Bangs and Peters -^ record this race from the mountains of 
Kansu and Tebbuland, so it seems that it is the resident race of the 
high mountains of western China as far south as northern Yunnan 
and occurring also in northern China. 

91. AEGITHALISCUS BONVALOTI (Onstalet) 

Acredula honvaloti OusTAijrr, Ann. Sci. Nat., Zool., ser. 7, vol. 12, p. 286, pi. 9, 
fig 1, 1891 (Tatslenlu and Pendjama, Szechwan). 

Twenty-seven adults, both sexes, northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, January-February, September and October ; forests west 
of Yungning, 13,000 feet, May; forests of Chinhaitze, 11,000 feet, 
May; Gou-khii-ko, 13,000 feet, Yangtze loop, April; Luddii Moun- 
tains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August) ; six adults and nine immatures, 
southwest Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga and vicinity, 13,000 feet, June; 
forests of Djishigotong, northeast of Muli, 13,000 feet, July; forests 
of Tyon-kong, Watogomba, 12,000 feet. July; Dzampe, Muli, 14,000 
feet, July). 

The fine series of immatures in the present collection confirms my 
former doubtful action in assigning a single specimen of this plum- 
age to the present si)ecies.^° The immature plumage differs from 
that of the adult as there described. 

92. AEGITHALISCUS CONCINNUS TALIFUENSIS Rippon 

AegUhaUscus taUfuensis Rippon, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 14, p. 18, 1903 
(Gyi-dzin-shan, east of Talifu, Yunnan). 

One female and one unsexed, Yulo, west of the Likiang Moun- 
tains, 7,000 feet, August ; and one unsexed, Luddii Mountains, 12,000- 
13,000 feet, August, northwest Yunnan. 

93. PERIPARUS RUFONUCHALIS BEAVANI (Jerdon) 

LopJwphanes ieavani Jerdon (Blyth MS.), Birds of India, vol. 2, p. 275, 
1863 (Mount Tongloo, Sikkim). 

Two females from northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, 10,000 
feet, January-February; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, Au- 
gust) ; two males, one female, and three immatures from southwest 
Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, June; forests of Noon, 

2> Bull. Mus. Comp. Zo51., vol. 68, p. 363, 1928. 
so Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 50, 1926. 



30 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vul. 8u 

10,500 feet, east of Muli, August; alpine region of Zimi Valley, 
15,000 feet, August; Yulinggong, 11,000 feet. May). 

94. PERIPARUS ATER AEMODIUS (Hodgson) 

Parus aemodius Hodgson, Jouru. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 13, p. 943, 1844 
(Nepal). 

One adult male, Likiang Mountains, 10,500 feet, Yunnan, Septem- 
ber ; one young not long from the nest, alpine region of Zimi Valley, 
15,000 feet, west of Waerhdje, southwest Szechwan, August. 

95. LOPHOPHANES DICHROUS WELLSI (Baker) 

Panis dichrous tvellsi Baker, Bull. Brit. Orii. Club, vol. 38, p. 8, 1917 (Yangtze 
Big Bend, west Yunnan). 

Four males, three females, and one unsexed from northwest Yun- 
nan (Likiang Mountains, 10,000-11,000 feet, January-February and 
September ; Gou-khii-ko, Yangtze loop, 13,000 feet, April ; forests of 
Yungning, 13,000 feet, May, Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, 
August; five males, one female, and two unsexed from southwest 
Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, Muli, 13,000 feet, June ; back of Mount 
Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, June; forests of Djishigotong, Yalung Basin, 
13,000 feet, July; alpine region of Zimi Valley, 15,000 feet, west of 
Waerhdje, August; Ronopien region, west of Waerhdje, 15,000 feet, 
August; Mudju, 11,000 feet, June). 

96. PENTHESTES PALUSTRIS DEJEANI (Oustalet) 

Parua dejeani Oustalet, Bull. Mus. Paris, vol. 3. p. 209, 1897 (Tatsieulu, 
Szechwan). 

Two males and two females from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February; Luddii Mountains, 
12,000-13,000 feet, August; Ndamucho, Yangtze-Mekong Divide, 
14,000 feet, October) ; three males, three females, and one unsexed 
southwest Szechwan (forests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 12,500 feet, 
July; Watogomba, 12,500 feet, July; forests of Djishigotong, Ya- 
lung Basin, 13,000 feet, July; Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, south of 
Muli, August; forests of Noon, 10,500 feet, east of Muli, August). 

The specimen formerly recorded as of this form from Shanghai ^^ 
was an error; it is Penthestes palustrk henjmayri, as more ample 
material since received proves. Penthestes pahistris dejeani and 
Penthestes palmtris hellmayH are much alike; the former diffei-s 
only in being somewhat darker above and on the flanks. Three of 
the specimens taken in July have the backs very dark, more of a 
brown than gray, the flanks more stronglv washed with drab, and 



" Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 48, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 31 

the pileum more brownish, not so glossy a black. These are prob- 
ably immature. 

97. PENTHESTES SUPERCILIOSA (Przewalski) 

Poecile superciUosa Pkzewalski, Mongol i strana Tangut, vol. 2, p. 53, 1876 
(Alpine region of the mountains of Kansu) ; Rowley's Ornithological mis- 
cellany, vol. 2, p. 189, 1877 (translation). 

One adult male of this rare chickadee, Yulonghsi, 13,000-16,000 
feet, Szechwan, May. 

98. PARUS MAJOR TIBETANUS Hartert 

Parus major tihetanus Hartert, Die Vogel der paliiarktischen Fauna, vol. 1, 
Heft 3, p. 346, 1905 (Chaksam, Tsongpo Valley, Tibet). 

Eight males and one female from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000-12,000 feet, January-February; forests west of 
Yungning, 12,000 feet. May) ; one male and one female from south- 
west Szechwan (Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, April; Shang- 
entze, south base of Druduron Pass, 14,500 feet, May). 

In a former paper ^^ I assigned specimens from the vicinity of 
Suifu to tihetanus. This was a mistake; specimens from there be- 
long to artatus/ tihetanus is the form occurring at higher elevations 
and has the outer tail feathers more extensively white. The two 
forms do not differ greatly, however. 

99. PARUS MONTICOLUS YUNNANENSIS LaTouche 

Parus monticolus yunnanensis LaTouche, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 42, p. 51^ 
1922 (Milati, Yunnan). 

One female and one adult unsexed from northwest Yunnan 
(mountains of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, November-December, 
and Shintsang, west of Weihsi, 11,000 feet, September) ; four males 
and one female from southwest Szechwan (forests of Vudju, south 
of Muli, 10,000 feet. Mny : forests of Baude-Shaya, northeast of 
Muli, 12,500 feet, July; Noon forests, east of Muli, 10,500 feet, 
August; Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, April; Yanwekong Valley, 
10,000-12,000 feet, May). 

Family SITTIDAE, Nuthatches 

100. SITTA YUNNANENSIS Grant 

Sittfi yunnanen-^is Grant. Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 10, p. 37, 1900 (Weiyuan, 
south Yunnan). 

Fifteen adults, both sexes, from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February; mountains of Yungning, 

s^Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 77, art. 15, p. 21, 1930. 



32 PKOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

12,000-13,000 feet, November-December ; Lautsolo Gorge, 9,000 feet, 
April; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August) ; two females 
from southwest Szechwan (Vudju Mountains, 10,500 feet, May). 

This very distinct species resembles Sitta villosa of north China 
in general appearance, but there are numerous differences. ;S', yun- 
nanensis has a black line on the side of the head from the lores 
through the eye to the nape with a narrow white superciliary above 
it, the pileum bluish gray, while in the fully adult male S. villosa the 
whole top of the head is black with a white superciliary ; the latter 
is a smaller bird. 

The tail of S. yunnanensis is somewhat variable. The white on 
the outer tail feathers is reduced to a mere subterminal spot on the 
inner web in some specimens, while in others it is a narrow diagonal 
subterminal bar, extending across the feather. 

101. SITTA SINENSIS NEBULOSA LaTouche 

Sitta europaea nc'bulosa LaTotjche, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 42, p. 55, 1922 
(new name for Sltta europaea obscura preoccupied; Milati, Yunnan). 

Seventeen adults, both sexes, from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, January-February, September, and October; mountains 
of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, November-December; forests west 
of Yungning, 13,000 feet, May; forests of Lapo-laze, 10,000 feet, 
May; Tokesher, 10,000 feet, May; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 
feet, August; Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, September; Nda- 
mucho, 14,000 feet, October) ; 10 adults, both sexes from southwest 
Szechwan (Muli Eiver Valley, 9,800 feet. May; Mount Mitzuga, 
13,000 feet, June; Shouchu Valley, near Dzeru, 11,300 feet, August; 
Noon Valley, east of Muli, 10,500 feet, August; Mount Gibboh, 
13,000 feet, Muli, May and August). 

102, SITTA MAGNA Ramsay 

Sitta magna Ramsay, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1876, p. 677 (Karennee). 
One female, Mbayiwua, 10,000 feet, Yangtze loop, Yunnan, April. 

Family CERTHIIDAE, Creepers 

103. CERTHIA HIMALAYANA YUNNANENSIS Sharps 

Certhia yunnanensis Shabpe, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 13, p. 11, 1902 (Shayang, 
west Yunnan). 

Two adult males, one adult female, and one immature, not sexed, 
southwest Szechwan (Muli Mountains, Litang River Valley, 10,000 
feet. May; Mount Mitzuga, Muli, 13,000 feet, June; Yetsi Valley, 
north of Kulu, 12.000 feet, April; Mudju, 11,000 feet, June), and one 
adult female, northwest Yunnan (Luddii Mountains. 12.000-13.000 
feet, August). 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 33 

Two winter specimens from Chengtu, Szechwan, have a more rusty 
tinge to the upperparts. 

104. CERTHIA FAMILIARIS KHAMENSIS Bianchi 

Certhia khamensis Bianchi, in Sharpe's Handlist of the genera and species of 
birds, vol. 4, pp. 355, 360, 1903 (Kausu: Szechwan; southeast Tibet). 

One adult unsexed from Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, 
January-February) ; one male and one unsexed from southwest 
Szechwan (Mount Gibboh, Muli, 13,000 feet, May; Mount Mitzuga, 
Muli, 13,000 feet, June). 

105. TICHODROMA MURARIA (Linnaeus) 

Certhia muraria Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 12, p. 184, 1766 (south Europe), 

One male. Mount Konka, 15,700 feet, August; and one female, 
Djago, 11,200-12,000 feet, April, both in Muli, southwest Szechwan. 

Family TIMALIIDAE, Babbling- Thrushes 

106. lANTHOCINCLA MAXIMA (Verreaux) 

Pterorhinus maximus Verbeaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 36, pi. 3, 
fig. 1, 1870 (mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

Three males and two females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, January-February, and Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, 
October) ; seven males, five females, one unsexed, and one immature, 
southwest Szechwan (Muli, 10,000 feet, December; Mount Mitzuga, 
12,500 feet, June ; back of Mount Mitzuga, 12,000-13,000 feet, June ; 
Mount Konka, 14,600 feet, June; forests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 
12,500 feet, July; Mount Gibboh, 12,500-14,000 feet, south of Muli, 
August and April; Zimi Valley, 14,600 feet, west of Waerhdje, Au- 
gust; Chiu-lung-hsien, May; Shangentze, 14,500 feet, at the foot of 
Druduron Pass, May). 

The immature bird is not long from the nest and was taken in June. 
The plumage is almost a duplicate of that of the adult. The hazel 
of the throat and ear coverts is considerably lighter ; the neutral gray 
bases of the feathers of the jugulum show through, making a dark 
patch and the middle tail feathers are w^arm sepia. An older speci- 
men, but a bird of the year, taken in July, has the colors of the throat 
and ear coverts deepened; and the neutral gray jugular patch more 
pronounced. 

107. lANTHOCINCLA BIETI Oustalet 

lanthocincia hieti Oustalet, Bull. Mu;^. Paris, vol. 3, p. 163, 1897 (Tatsienlu, 
Szechwan). 

One male, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, Yunnan, October; and one 
female. Mount Gibboh, 13,000-14,000 feet, Muli, Szechwan, April. 
70403—31 3 



34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

The above female differs from any in the series previously reported 
upon ^^ as follows : The pileum is bister ; the throat and upper chest 
a light clove brown ; the feathers of the sides of the neck and chest 
merely fringed narrowly with white; the flank feathers without the 
subterminal black bar; and there are other differences. Whether 
these differences are sexual can not be determined, but I am in- 
clined to the belief that they are age characters. The females in 
Doctor Eock's earlier collection only differ from the males in being 
duller, if they differ at all. 

108. BABAX LANCEOLATUS LANCEOLATUS (Verreaux) 

Pterorhinus lanceolatus Vereeaux, Nouv. Arch. Mns. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 36, 
1871 (mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

Two males and two females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, Januarj^-February and September; Ndamucho, 
14,000 feet, October) ; five males and six females, southwest Szech- 
wan (forests of Watogomba, 12,500 feet, Yalung watershed, July; 
forest of Djishi, 11,000 feet, northeast of Muli, July; forests of 
Noon, 10,500 feet, east of Muli, August; mountains of Kulu, 11,000 
feet, December; Briiolo-kong Valley, 13,000-15,900 feet, eight days 
southwest of Tatsienlu, May ; Shangentze, 14,500 feet. May ; Yuling- 
gong, 11,000 feet. May). 

With a much larger series before me than when Doctor Rock's 
former collection from Yunnan was reported upon,^* I am unable 
to recognize ionvaloti as a valid race. The single specimen from 
Hupeh marked as a male upon which my remarks upon size were 
founded, I am convinced now is wrongly sexed and that it is really 
a female. The female is considerably smaller than the male. Since 
that paper was written, females have been received from Szechwan 
and Yunnan that are as small as the Hupeh specimen in question. 

109. GARRULAX ALBOGULARIS ECUS Riley 

Oarrulax albogularis eous Riley, Proe. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 43, p. 79, 
1930 (Fuchuanshan, Yunnan). 

Four males and two females, Fuchuanshan, 9,800 feet, Yunnan, 
September. 
This race was described as follows: 

Similar to Oarrulax albogularis albofjularis, but much lighter above, the 
forehead more strongly and extensively tinged with tawny; the cinnamon-bufE 
of the breast lighter ; the chest band a lighter brownish olive. Wing, 136 ; tail, 
136 ; culmen, 22 ; tarsus, 43 ; middle toe, 24 mm. 

»'Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 25, 1926. 
"Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 23, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA KILEY 35 

The above series is quite uniform and differs as described from 
an unsexed specimen from Nepal. When the original description 
was published, the United States National Museum only had four 
poor specimens from Szechwan. The Rev. David C. Graham has 
since sent to the Museum nine fine adults taken on Mount Omei, 
Szechwan. These are darker than eous^ but lighter than albogularis. 
On the whole the bird from Szechwan is nearer the race from Nepal 
{albogularis) than that from Yunnan (eous). The Szechwan form 
lias been named Garr'ulax albogularis laetus.^'^ Stresemann ^^ has 
reported it from as far north in the mountains of Szechwan as 
Kwan. 

no. DRYONASTES SANNIO (Swinhoe) 

Garrulajp sannio Swinhoe, Ibis, 1867, p. 403 (Amoy, China). 

Six males and seven females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, January-February, and September; Yulo, 7,000 feet, August; 
Weihsi, 8,000^9,000 feet, September; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, Octo- 
ber) ; one female without locality or date. 

With a larger series than formerly at my disposal ^" I am inclined 
to agree with Rothschild ^* in not recognizing albosuperciliaris, but 
I have not examined many specimens from Fukien. Birds from 
southern Szechwan (Suifu and Kiating) are darker above and below 
than either the Yunnan or Fukien specimens, but it is inadvisable to 
separate them by name. 

111. DRYONASTES BERTHEMYI RICINUS Riley 

Dnjonnstes hertheinyi rlc'wus Rii.ey, Pioc. Biol. Soc. Washiugton, vol. 43, p. 
80, 1930 (Ndamucho, Yunnan). 

One male and two females, Ndamucho, 14.000 feet, Yunnan, 
October, 

These three specimens, Avhen compared with an equal number from 
the type locality of berth^myi, Kuatun, Fokien, may be described as 
follows : 

Similar to Dryoiiasies berthemyi of the mountains of Fokieu, but lighter 
brown above and on the foreueck and jugulum ; breast and belly a much lighter 
gray. Wing, 126; tail, 1.32; eulmen, 20; tarsus, 42; middle toe, 24.5 mm. 

In tlie original description, I said that Dryoiiastes berthemyi had 
never been taken away from the mountains of northwest Fokien, 
overlooking for the moment Stresemann's ^^ record of a specimen 
from Mount Omei, Szechwan. This specimen is probably the same 

=^'Proe. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 4.3, p. 133, 1930. 

=«Abh. Ber. Mu.s. Tierk. Vfilkerk. Dresden, vol. 16, no. 2, p. L'5, 1024. 

"Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. r,, p. 27, 1926. 

38 Nov. Zool.. vol. 33, p. 267, 1926. 

'«'Abh. Ber. Mus. Tierk. Volkerk. Dresden, vol. 16, no. 2. p. 24, 1024. 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol. 80 

as that from Yunnan or will later be found to differ and need 
naming. 

The type of Dryonastes herthemyi came from the mountains of 
northwest Fokien, probably Kuatun. It is rather surprising to find 
a closely related form in the high mountains of northwest Yunnan, 
more than 1,000 miles from the type locality of the species. Nda- 
mucho is south of Liitien on the Yangtze-Mekong Divide. The 
United States National Museum contains an adult female of Dryon- 
astes herth^myi from the type locality, and the Museum of Com- 
parative Zoology has loaned me a pair from near the same place ; the 
three specimens are quite uniform. The three specimens from north- 
west Yunnan are also quite uniform and differ from the Fokien bird 
as described. The three specimens from Yunnan measure: Wing, 
120-128 mm. (124) ; tail, 125-132 (128) ; culmen, 20-22 (20.7). Two 
females and one male from Fokien measure: Wing, 116-118 (116.8) ; 
tail, 122-126 (123.5) ; culmen, 22.5-23 (22.Y). 

LaTouche *" makes herthemyi a race of poecilorhynchus of For- 
mosa, but I do not think he is right in doing so. They have both 
been derived from the same stock, but now are so distinct that it is 
misleading to treat them as forms of the same species. 

112. POMATORHINUS RUPICOLLIS SIMILIS Rothschild 

Pomatorlimus ruficollis similis Rothschild, Nov. Zool., vol. 33, p. 261, 1926 
(Teugyueb, Yunnan). 

Three males and four females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, January-February and September; mountains of Yungning, 
November-December; upper slopes of the Fuchuanshan, 10,000- 
12.000 feet, September; Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, September; 
Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October) ; one female, southwest Szechwan 
(Muli Valley, 9,500 feet, June). 

This is quite a distinct race, Saccardo's umber above ; quite differ- 
ent from PomatorJdnus mficollis eidos from Yangtze Valley farther 
east, which is strongly tinged with rufous above and has a smaller 
bill. The latter occurs in two ventral color phases : one in which the 
chest streaks are rufous and the other in which they are brownish 
olive, but no matter which phase the specimen is in, the upperparts 
are strongly tinged with rufous. P. i\ similis is quite uniform in j 
series and does not vary much ; specimens from the Mekong Valley I 
are Saccardo's umber above, while those from the Likiang Moun- 
tains are light brownish olive. Just where the ranges of similis and 
eidos meet it is impossible to say. The United States National 
Museum has the latter from the Szechwan border south of Suifu, 
Mount Omei, and the vicinity of Suifu, but not from farther west. 



*" Handbook of Birds of East China, pt. 1, p. 57. 192.5. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — EILEY 37 



P. r. similis was formerly recorded as P. r. iakeri *^ from Yunnan, 
following Rothschild's earlier papers, as no authentic specimens from 
Burma were available for comparison. 

113. POMATORHINUS ERYTHROGENYS DEDEKENSI Oustalet 

Pomatorhinus macciellandi var. dcdekcnsi Oustalet, Ann. Sci. Nat. Zool., 
ser. 7, vol. 12, pp. 276, 304, 1892 (Tsonghai, Tibet and Tatsienlu, 
Szechwan ) . 

Thirteen adults, both sexes, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, January-February and October; Yulo, 7,000 feet, August; 
Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October) ; two males and six females, south- 
west Szechwan (Muli Valley, 10,000 feet, June; Muli Mountains, 
10,000 feet, June; Mount Mitzuga, 12,500 feet-13,000 feet, Muli, 
June; Dzampe 14,000 feet, Muli, July; Djago, 11,200-12,000 feet, 
April; Tatsienlu, 9,500-10,000 feet. May); one female, without 
locality. 

The variations in a large series of this race are considerable. The 
specimens taken in the winter are light brownish olive above; by 
summer they become hair brown by fading. The male has a longer 
bill than the female. Three adults from Tatsienlu taken in the 
breeding season do not differ appreciably from three adults taken 
at the same season in Muli. 

In reporting on Doctor Rock's former collection from Yunnan *^ 
four specimens from the Mekong Valley were listed without specific 
comment. These four specimens have the black streaks on the chest 
very pronounced, especially in a male, U. S. N. M. No. 296712, which 
has even the breast spotted quite heavily with black spots, but as 
some of the specimens from farther north approach the lightest 
marked Mekong Valley specimen very closely, these heavily streaked 
birds had better be regarded as individual variations for the present. 

Two females from Mount Mitzuga are evidently birds of the year 
in nearly adult plumage; their bills are remarkably short, 23 and 24 
mm. against an adult measurement of 32-35. 

114. TROCHALOPTERON ELLIOTII ELLIOTIl Vcrrcaux 

Trochalopteron elliotu Verreaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 36, 
1870 (mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

Twelve males, eight females, and one immature not sexed, north- 
west Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, January-February, and Septem- 
ber; Mountains of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, November-Decem- 
ber; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October; Luddii Mountains, 12,000- 
13,000 feet, August) ; 11 males and 6 females, southwest Szechwan 

« Vtoc. V. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 26, 1920. 
*^ Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 27, 1926. 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

(Muli, 10,500 feet, December; back of Mount Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, 
Muli, June; Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, Muli, August; Baucle Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, northeast of Muli, July; Tyon-kong, Watogomba. 
Yalung watershed 12,000 feet, July ; Djago, 10,400-12,000 feet, be- 
tween Muli and Kulu, December and April; Vudju, 10,000 feet, south 
of Mount Gibboh, April ; Dsliizhi, 13,500 feet, April ; Yanwekong, 
10,000-12,000 feet. May; Yulonghsi, 13,000-16,000 feet. May; Mudju, 
11,000 feet, June; YuHnggong, 11,000 feet. May; Tatsienlu, 9,500- 
10,000 feet May). 

This species is much subject to fading. Specimens taken in the 
winter are much darker even than birds collected in early spring. 
The winter taken birds in the above series are dark like winter taken 
specimens from Szechwan. It will be noted that the series I formerly 
determined to be Trochaloptevon eUiofl i/unnanense *^ are spring or 
summer taken birds with the exception of several immatures. When 
breeding birds from Szechwan are compared with these spring taken. 
the lighter color of the supposed Yunnan race largely disappears. 
The gray or yellow middle tail feathers are also due to fading to 
some extent. All the specimens with gray middle tail feathers are 
in faded or worn plumage, but not all specimens in worn plumage 
have gray middle tail feathers. This is natural; it is well known 
some individuals of a species wear or fade quicker than others. There 
are a number of specimens in worn plumage in the United States 
National Museum from Szechwan with gray middle tail feathers. 
Taking all the above into consideration, I do not now believe that 
TTochalopteron elliotii yuniianense can be maintained as a valid race. 
Therefore Gan'ulax elliotii exyunnanensis Meinertzhagen ''^ proposed 
to supi^lant Rippon's name is unnecessary. 

115. TROCHALOPTERON AFFINIS OUSTALETI (Hartert) 

lanthocincla afflnis oustaleti Hartkbt, Die Vtigel der p;iliiai'ktisclien Fauna, vol. 
1, Heft 5, p. 633, 1909 (Tsekou, Yunnan). 

One male, southwest Szechwan (Litang River Valley, 9,900 feet, 
Muli, April) ; four males and four females, northwest Yunnan (Liki- 
ang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February; mountains of Yung- 
ning, 12,000-13,000 feet, November-December; Ndamucho, 14,000 
feet, October). 

With a larger series of T. a. hlythi before me than I formerly had 
available,*'^ the only constant difference between it and T. a. oustaleti 
seems to be the absence of the gray patch on the sides of the neck of 
the former. Just where the two forms meet, I do not know, but it 
must be somewhere in the mountains of western Szechwan. 

" ITof. U. S. Nat. Mils., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 24, 1926. 

■" Ibis, 1928, p. 510. 

*5 Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 24. 1926. 



ART. 1 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN" AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 39 

116. TROCHALOPTERON STYANI Onstalet 

Trochalopteron styuni Oustalet, Bull. Muss. Paris, vol. 4, p. 226, 1898 (Tatsien- 
lou, Szechwan). 

One male and five females from southwest Szechwan (Muli Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, June; Noon Valley, 10,000 feet, east of Muli, 
August) ; two males, three females, and one unsexed, north- 
west Yunnan (Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, September; Weihsi, 
11,000 feet, September; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October). 

These agree with specimens previously reported upon from Yun- 
nan.*" 

117. FULVETTA STRIATICOLLIS YUNNANENSIS (Rothschild) 

Proparus striathollis yunnanensls Rothschild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, 
p. 11, 1922 (Mekong-Salwin Divide, Yunnan). 

One male and one female, mountains of Kulu, 11,000 feet, Decem- 
ber: one male and one female, Muli, 10,500 feet, December; one male, 
Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, June ; two males and one female. Mount 
Mitzuga, Muli, 12,000-14,500 feet, June ; one female and one unsexed, 
Djishigotong, Yalung Basin, 13,000 feet, July; all in Szechwan. 

Two females and one unsexed from Sungpan, northwest Szechwan 
(all poor specimens), taken in July, when compared with the above 
series appear to be not very different. The streaks on the throat and 
nape are sparser and the brow^n on the inner primaries is not quite 
so bright and pronounced in the northern specimens. 

118. FULVETTA INSPERATA Riley 

Fulvetta insperata Rilet, Proc. Biol. Soc Washington, vol. 43, p. 123, 1930 
(Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, Yunnan). 

The type and only specimen w-as secured at Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, 
Yunnan, October. 

This specimen agrees with no described species of the genus so far 
as ascertained. It was described as follows: 

Similar to Fulvetta 7Hficapilla sordidiar, but pileum deep brownish drab, 
instead of light mars brown ; no whitish around the eye ; inner primaries 
and outer secondaries edged externally basally with buckthorn brown instead 
of Sudan brown ; rump and the base of the rectrices a much lighter brown ; 
throat more heavily streaked with dusky ; bill wholly black, instead of the 
base being lighter; feet considerably heavier. 

Description. — Pileum deep brownish drab, bordered on each side above the 
superciliary line and commencing just over the eye, by a black line extending 
on to the upper back ; the superciliary, lores, ear-coverts, and cheeks, light 
drab ; throat pale drab-gray with rather broad dusky streaks : chest and 
breast, light drab ; belly a little lighter than the breast ; flanks and under taii- 
coverts, buckthorn brown ; back, hair-brown ; lower back scapulars and rump, 

«Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 25, 1926. 



40 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

buckthorn brown ; tail, dark mouse gray, the outer feathers fringed externally 
basally with the color of the rump; wing-coverts deep mouse gray edged out- 
wardly with the color of the rump ; primaries and secondaries deep mouse 
gray, the four outer primaries edged outwardly with light olive-gray, the inner 
primaries, commencing with the seventh, and the secondaries edged externally 
basally with buckthorn brown; under wing-coverts and inner margins of the 
remiges basally, white; bill (in the skin) dull black; feet, blackish brown. 
Wing, 61 ; tail, 58 ; culmen, 9.5 ; tarsus, 24 ; middle-toe, 13 mm. 

Remarks. — The U. S. National Museum contains eight specimens of P. r. 
sordidior and all of the specimens, that are unstained around the head, have a 
narrow white line above the eye and below it, but not meeting behind. Fulvetta 
insperata does not show a trace of an eye-ring. In F. r. sordidior the black line 
bordering the pileum on each side extends further forwards. Dr. Rock's men 
took both F. r. sordidior and the present bird at the same locality, otherwise I 
should have considered them only forms of the same species. This can liardly 
be Fulvetta manipurensis Grant from Manipur, though judging from the inade- 
quate description of the original describer and that of Stuart Baker (Fauna 
Br. Ind., Birds, ed, 2, vol. I, 1922, p. 292) it is apparently closely related. The 
latter compares it with F. vinipecta, however, while F. insperata resembles F. 
ruficapillu more closely. 

119. FULVETTA RUFICAPILLA SORDIDIOR (Rippon) 

Proparus sordidior Rippon, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 13, p. 60, 1903 (Talifu, 
Yunnan). 

One male and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan (Yulo, 7,000 feet, 
August; and Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October); two males and one 
female, southwest Szechwan (Muli Mountains, 9,800-10,000 feet, 
June; Mount Mitzuga, Muli, 10,000 feet, June; and forests of Noon 
east of Muli, 10,500 feet, August). 

A poor female specimen of F. r. ru-ficapilla from Wenchwan, 
Szechwan, taken in August is very close to the above female from 
Noon, The pileum in ruftca'pillai is brighter, more russet, and the 
cheeks are more strongly washed with a deeper and more vinaceous- 
drab. 

120. FULVETTA VINIPECTA BIETI (Oustalet) 

Alcippe (Proparus) iieti Oustalet, Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 7, vol. 12, p. 284, pi. 9, 
flg. 2, 1892 (Tatsienlou.) 

Three males, seven females, and six unsexed specimens from Yun- 
nan (Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February and Sep- 
tember; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August) ; three males 
and six females from southwest Szechwan (Muli, 10,500 feet, Decem- 
ber; Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, Muli, May; Mount Mitzuga, 13,500 
feet, Muli, June ; Watogomba forests, 12,500 feet, Yalung watershed, 
July; forests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 12,500 feet, July; Zimi 
Valley, west of Waerhdje, 15,000 feet, August; Mundon, 13,000 feet, 
May). 

In the report of a previous collection by Doctor Rock,*'^ certain 
differences between this race and Fulvetta v. vinipecta were given. 

«Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus.. vol. 70, art. 5, p. 28, 1926. 



ABT. 7 BIEDS FEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — RILEY 41 

Though in the main these remarks are correct and could even be 
expanded, there is one mistake; the crissum in F. v. hieti is deep 
olive-buff and in some specimens there is a slight wash of buffy on 
the belly, but in comparison with Fulvetta v. vinipecta this is hardly 
noticeable. In F. v. hieti the white superciliary extends forward 
to the bill, while in F. v. vinipecta, it does not extend forward of the 
eye. It would seem as if Fulvetta hieti should be given specific 
rank, except I have not examined specimens of all the races, but 
from descriptions they seem to be quite distinct. 

121. LIOPARUS SWINHOII FORRESTI (Rothschild) 

Fulvetta chrysotis forresti Eothsohild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 46, p. 64, 1926 
(Shweli-Salween Divide, Yunnan). 

Five males and one female, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October. 

The above series has been compared with a poor specimen (male) 
from Wenchwan and an unsexed specimen from Mount Omei, 
Szechwan, of Liopay'us s. swinhoii. The Wenchwan bird is so poor 
that it may be disregarded, but it is much lighter in all its markings 
than the Mount Omei specimen and may represent a more northern 
race. The Yunnan series when compared with the Mount Omei speci- 
men is not strikingly different. The Mount Omei bird is darker in all 
its markings and the throat is dull black; the throat in forresti is 
slaty gray with silvery-gray tips to the feathers. The auricular 
region in fo7'resti is grayish; in the Mount Omei specimen of swin- 
hoii it is silvery white. The chief difference between the two races 
lies apparently in the different color of the throat and auricular 
region. 

In one specimen of forresti the whole throat is yellow like the 
breast instead of gray. It is marked as a male, but I think this 
is a mistake and that it is really a female. The specimen marked 
as a female has the lower throat tinged with yellow, but this color 
does not come as far forward as in the former. The works con- 
sulted, however, do not mention any difference in the sexes and 
the above differences may be due to age. 

The differences between L. chrysotis and L. swinhoii are suffi- 
ciently great, in my opinion, to warrant keeping them apart as 
species. 

122. ALCIPPORNIS NIPALENSIS YUNNANENSIS (Harington) 

Alcippe fratercula yminanensis Haeinqton, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 33, p. 63, 
1913 (Gyi-dzin-shan, east of Talifu, Yunnan). 

One male and one female, Muli forests, 10,000 feet. May ; one male, 
Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, June; one male, 
Shintsang, 11,000 feet, Yunnan. September. 



42 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

The three specimens from southwest Szechwan when compared 
with two males and one female from northwest Yunnan are consid- 
erably paler on the back and lowerparts, especially the latter. This 
may be due to fading, as the three Szechwan birds were taken in May 
while the Yunnan specimens were taken in September, November, 
and March. 

123. MOUPINIA POECILOTIS SORDIDIOR Rotlischild 

Moupinia poeoilotis sordidior Rothschild, Nov. Zool., vol. 28, p. 36, 1921 
(Likiang Range, Yunnan). 

Two males and one female from Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, 
January-February, September, and October) ; six males, one female, 
and two unsexed from southwest Szechwan (Kulu Mountains, 11,000 
feet, December; Muli Mountains, 10,000-11,000 feet, June; Zimi 
Valley, 15,000 feet, west of Waerhdje, August; Noon, 10,500 feet, 
east of Muli, August; Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, April). 

This series is barely separable from four skins from western 
Szechwan (Sungpan, Wenchwan, Tashiang-lin Pass, Mount Omei). 
The superciliaries in M. p. poecUotis are whitish, not so grayish as 
M. p. sordidior; the cheeks more tinged with bujffy. The throats in 
M. p. poeoilotis are not a clearer white as formerly stated *^ ; this 
was a slip of the pen. 

124. SCHOENIPARUS DUBIUS GENESTIERI (Oustalet) 

Aloippe geiiestieri Oustalbt, Bull. Mus. d'Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 3, p. 210, 1897 
(Tsekou, Yunnan). 

Three females, northwest Yunnan (Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, Octo- 
ber; Yungning Plain, 9,500 feet, December); four males and one 
female, southwest Szechwan (Noon Valley, 10,500 feet, east of Muli, 
A-ugust). 

In reporting upon an earlier collection *® made by Doctor Rock in 
Yunnan, I recognized Schoenipamis interniedius as a very distinct 
race of duMits. Since then Lord Rothschild says that he and Doctor 
Hartert have reached the firm opinion that intei^nedius is nothing 
more than an immature stage of plumage of genestieri.^^ 

This has caused me to reexamine my series. All the specimens I 
then called S. g. genestieri are apparently birds of the year taken in 
June and August with a rusty cast above, especially on the wings 
and tail. I have never seen a very young bird of this species, but 
the young of Schoeniparus hrwvneus olivaceus is more rufous than 
the adult and it is logical to suppose it would be also in genestieri. 

«»Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 29, 1926. 

• Idem. 

••Nov. Zool., vol. 33, p. 270, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — RILEY 43 

125. LIOPTILA DESGODINSI (David and Oustalet) 

Sibin desgodinsi David and Oustaxet, Bull. Soc. Philoui. Paris, ser. 7, vol. 1, 
p. 139, 1877 (Yerkalo, southwest Szechwan). 

Seven males, four females, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Likiang Mountains, September; Muli-Yungning border, 11,000 
feet, August; Gawua Mountains, 11,500 feet, Ynngning, April; 
Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August; Ndamucho, 14,000 
feet, October) ; four males and four females, southwest Szechwan 
(forests of Baude-Shaya, 12,000 feet, east of Muli, Jul}'; forests of 
Noon, 11,000 feet, east of Muli, August; between Tsoso and Kulu, 
10,500 feet, December). 

12G. SIVA CYANOUROPTERA WINGATEI Grant 

.S/ra ivlngatci Grant. Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 10, p. 38. 1000 (Yunnan City). 

Two males, five females, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Shintsang, 11,000 feet, September; and Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 
feet, September). 

All the above specimens, except two, have a primrose-yellow wash 
to the breast and belly ; quite decided in two or three cases. I have 
examined four fall taken birds from southern Szechwan in similar 
plumage. This color seems to fade out even before winter, as several 
specimens taken at that season are without it. 

127. SIVA STRIGULA YUNNANENSIS Rothschild 

Siva singula yunnanensis Rothschild, Nov. Zool., vol. 28, p. 40, 1921 (Likiang 
Mountains, Yunnan). 

One male, Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August; and two 
males and one unsexed, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October, both local- 
ities in northwest Yunnan. 

The three October specimens are in deep fresh plumage; quite 
different from the faded summer dress. 

128. MINLA IGNOTINCTA JERDONI Verrcaux 

Minla jcrdoni Vereeaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 38, 1870 
(Chpngtu, Szechwan). 

One female, upper slopes of the Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, 
Yunnan, September. 

In 1926 Lord Rotlischild '^^ gave a key to the races known to him 
at that time, but the allocation of jerdoni to the section, " breast 
white or cream," certainly does not agree with the series in the United 
States National Museum, which is quite an extensive one. All the 
males of jet'doni have the lowerparts mustard yellow, even the throat 
being suffused with this color, but in many specimens the throat is 
much lighter or even white. Minla ignotincta manae LaTouche 



Nov. Zool.. vol. ?,;?, p. 275, 1926. 



44 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

from southeast Yunnan is not a well-marked race; the back is 
browner and the breast a much lighter yellow than M. i. jerdoni. 
I should amend the key to read as follows : 

1. Back olive 2 

Back Mars brown ^ ignotincta 

2. Breast mustard yellow jerdoni 

Breast primrose yellow mariae 

Stresemann '- has recently named a race, Mmla ignotincia sini 
from the Yaoschan, Kwangsi, but I have seen no specimens of it. 



„^ji l->nf T ViflVA «pp-n Tin c:r>Pfimpn« r»f if 
129. LIOTHRIX LUTEUS YUNNANENSIS Rothschild 



Liothrlx luteus ynnnanensis Rothschild, Nov. Zool., vol. 28, p. 42, 1921 (Shweli- 
Salwin Divide, Yunnan). 

Three females, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, Yunnan, October. 

When a report was published ^^ on Doctor Rock's first collection 
from Yunnan and Szechwan, the United States National Museum 
possessed an inadequate series of LiothHx luteus luteus^ and my re- 
marks based upon a comparison of the present race with it are mis- 
leading and erroneous. Since then a large series of L. I. luteus has 
been acquired from Szechwan, and the differences between it and 
Z. I. yunnanensis are not so pronounced as appeared at first. Instead 
of being more highly colored, L. I. Tjunnmiensis is actually paler 
below, but above there is little difference. L. I. yunnanensis is a 
larger bird, but the chief difference between it and L. I. luteus lies in 
the color of the outer webs of the base of the outer primaries ; in the 
latter they are much deeper, not the reverse as formerly stated. 

In L. I. yunna^nensis the yellow outer margin to the inner prima- 
ries is interrupted near the middle, while in L. I. luteus no such inter- 
ruption occurs. L. I. yunnanensis is a well-marked race. 

130. PTERUXmUS AERALATUS RICKETTI Grant 

Pteruthiv^ rlcketti Grant, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 14, p. 92, 1904 (south 
China). 

Two unsexed specimens from the Yungiiing-Muli border, lUOOO 
feet, August; one female, upper slopes of the Fuchuanshan. 14.000 
feet, Yunnan, October. 

131. PTERUTHIUS XANTHOCHLORIS PALLmUS (David) 

Allotrius xanthochloris var. palUdus David, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 7, p. 
14, 1871 (Frontiers of Kookonor). 

One female. Shintsang, 11,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, September. 

s=Journ. f. Orn., vol. 77. p. 338, 1929. 

"Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5. p. 32, 19l'G. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 45 

132. YUHINA NIGRIMENTUM INTERMEDIA Rothschild 

Ytihina lUyriineiituni intermedia Eothschilu, Bull. Brit. Oru. Club, vol. 43, 
p. 11, 1922 (Mekong-Sal win Divide, Yunnau). 

Two males and one female, northwest Yunnan (Fuchuanshan, 
9,800 feet, September; and Shintsang, 11,000 feet, September). 

This series of three specimens is paler below, with whiter throats, 
than the same number of Y. n. 7iig rimentuim in the National Museum 
from Sikkim and Darjeeling. The National Museum has a series of 
seven specimens from Tseo J ia Keo, in Szechwan south of Suif u and 
just north of the Yunnan border, taken in March. The latter are 
paler tlian the three Yunnan specimens; more so, in fact, than the 
latter are from the Indian race. I have uamed this race Yiikina 
nigrhnentwn quartaJ"^ 

133. YUHINA GULARIS GRISEOTINCTA Rothschild 

YuMna gularis uriscotUwla Rothschild, Nov. Zool., vol. 28, p. 42, 1921 (Shweli- 
Salwiu Divide, Yunnan). 

One female, Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, Yunnan, 
August. 

This specimen is quite pale below, probabh' because of fading. Re- 
cently Doctor (nahain sent in three males taken on Mount Omei, 
Szechwan ; these were much paler than grlseotincta and were named 
YuJi'ma (julaHs omeienslsJ''' A race has also been found in Tonkin 
and named Yuhina gularis sordidlor Kinnear.^'' Yuhina gularis 
yangpiemls was originall^^ named from Yangpi on the Talifu Road, 
western Yunnan, and has never been taken there since, but has been 
taken on Mount Victoria, Burma, in some numbers. I have never 
seen a specimen, but Rothschild " says it is darker on the back and 
more strongly washed below Avith rufous than Yuhina gularis gularis. 

134. YUHINA OCCIPITALIS OBSCURIOR Rothschild 

Yuhina occivUalis obncurior Rothschild, Nov. Zool., vol. 28, p. 42, 1921 
(Likiang, Yunnan). 

One male and six females, northwest Yunnan (forests west of 
Yungning, 13.000 feet, May; Luddii Mountains, 12.000-13,000 feet, 
August). 

This series is very much worn and faded below. 

135. YUHINA DIADEMATA DIADEMATA Verreaux 

Yuhina diademnta Verekaux, Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 5, Bull., p. 35, 1869 
(Mupin). 



" Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 48, p. l.'H, 1930. 

'° Idem. 

6" Bull. Biit. Oru. Club, vol. 4.5, p. 74, 1925. 

"■ Nov. Zool., vol. Z?,. p. 276, 1926. 



46 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

A good series from northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, Jan- 
uary-February, September, and October; summit of Yuli water- 
shed, 13,000 feet. May; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October) ; two males 
and three females from Szechwan (Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, 
June; Noon, east of Muli, 10,500 feet, August; Yanwekong Valley, 
10,000-12,000 feet. May). 

This series compared with a small series taken at the same time 
of the year from farther north in Szechwan is slightly darker on an 
average, but there are individual specimens that seem to be identical. 
It seems to me that the differences are too slight to recognize by name. 
If Yuhina ampeUna Rippon is worthy of recognition at all. it will 
have to be restricted to western Yunnan and the Burma border. 
Rothschild ^^ says that some fresh unworn specimens of amyelhia 
are almost sooty black, but he seems to be somewhat in doubt as to 
the Yunnan bird from farther east. None of the above series is as 
dark as one would be led to expect from his remarks. No specimens 
are available for comparison from the type locality of amjyelina. 

Family PYCNONOTIDAE, Bulbuls 

136. MICROSCELIS LEUCOCEPHALUS (Gmelin) 

Turdus leticocephfilns Gmelin, S.vstema naturae, vol. 1, pt. 2. p. 829. 1789 
(China). 

Six males and five females, northwest Yunnan (forests west of 
Yungning, 12,000 feet. May; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet. 
August; Yulo, T.OOO feet, August; Shintsang, 11,000 feet, Septem- 
ber) ; three males and six females, southwest Szechwan (Litang River 
Valley, Muli, 10,000 feet. May; mountains of Muli, 10,000 feet, June; 
Muli Valley, 10,000 feet, June; forests of Noon, east of Muli, 10,500 
feet. August). 

All the phases of plumage, except the entirely black, are repre- 
sented in the above series. Three of the specimens are dark neutral 
graj^ above, the pileum shining black, the lowerparts a much lighter 
gray than the back, the middle of the breast and the belly with white 
markings on the feathers forming a line; two of the specimens are 
getting a few white feathers on the forehead. All three are evi- 
dently immature, assuming the first adult plumage; the two with 
white on the foreheads taken in May, the other in September. Three 
immatures with considerable of the brownish juvenal feathers still 
remaining were taken in August. All three are molting into a black 
plumage above; one into a black plumage below, but another into a 
gray one below. All three, however, have the feathers of the center 



'Nov. Zool., vol. 32, p. 277, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 47 

of the breast and belly with white markings, forming a line down 
the center. 

I have nothing to add to my former remarks.^** I would suggest, 
however, that the black-bieasted white-headed and gray-breasted 
white-headed birds might belong to different sexes. The sexing of the 
specimens available is too unreliable to prove this, however. 

137. SPIZIXOS CANIFRONS Blyth 

Spisixos canifrons Blyth, Jouru. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 14, p. 571, 1845 
(Cherra Punji). 

Two males and two females, northwest Yunnan (Gauwua, 11,000 
feet, January; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August; Liki- 
ang Mountains, September) ; four males, one female, and one un- 
sexed, southwest Szechwan (Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, April and 
June; Noon, east of Muli, August). 

138. PYCNONOTUS XANTHORHOUS Anderson 

Pyctionotus xanthorhous Andehison, Proc. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, p. 265, 1869 
(Manwyne, Yunnan). 

Three males and four females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, Januarj'^-February ; mountains of Yungning, 
12,000-13,000 feet, November-December; Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, 
September; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October); one male, southwest 
Szechwan (Noon, 10,500 feet, east of Muli, August). 

Family CINCLIDAE, Dippers 

139. CINCLUS PALLASII SOULIEI Oustalet 

Cinclits pallasii var. souliei Oustalet, Ann. Soc. Nat., ZooL, ser. 7, vol. 12, p. 299, 
1891 (1892) (Tatsienlou and Mupin). 

One female. Noon Valley, 11,000 feet, east of Muli, southwest 
Szechwan, August. 

140. CINCLUS CINCLUS BEICKI Meise 

Cinclus cinclus helcki Meise, Oni. Mouatsb., vol. 36, p. 138, 1928 (Langs-tang- 
scui-schlucht, north Kansu). 

Two males, southwest Szechwan (Djago, 10,400 feet, December, 
and Yetsi Valley, 12,000 feet, April). 

These two specimens are grayer on the back without the brownish 
wash, darker on the pileum and hind neck and much darker on the 
breast than Cinclus cinclus cashmeriensis. In these two specimens 
each feather on the back is outlined with a black border. Though 
this occurs also in cashmeriensis, it is not so pronounced. A male 

f^Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus.. vol. 70, ait. 5. p. 21, 1026. 



48 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

from the Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, and a female from Sungpan, 
Szechwan, are somewhat lighter than the two specimens listed above, 
especially the male from Yunnan, which has the pileum and hind 
neck much lighter, more like Kashmir specimens, but it is quite worn. 
On geographic grounds these birds should belong to Ginclus cinclus 
szetschwanensis Meise,^" but Mr. Bangs informs me that this is a 
synonym of heicki. I have examined no specimens from Kansu. 

Family TROGLODYTIDAE, Wrens 

141. SPELAEORNIS ROCKI Riley 

Spelaeornis rocki Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 42. p. 214, 1929 
(mountains of Hofuping, Mekong Valley, Yunnan). 

One female, west of Yungning, 13,000 feet, May, and one male, 
Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, October. 

During a previous expedition to Yunnan, Doctor Rock collected 
the type. This was originally assigned to Spelaeornis souliei as pos- 
sibly representing a young plumage.*^^ Later Doctor Rock sent in 
the female from west of Yungning, which, while differing from the 
type in minor details, evidently belongs to the same species. As 
these two specimens differed materially from the figure of the type 
of Spelaeornis souliei given by Hartert,*'^ and the supposition that 
they were young plumages of that species could no longer be main- 
tained, it was described as new as follows : 

Pileum argus brown, each feather rather broadly tipped with black and with 
a rather large sub-apical white spot; upper-parts sudan brown, each feather 
tipped narrowly with black and with a small triangular buffy-white spot ; cheeks 
and sides of neck a little lighter than the back, with huffy shaft streaks, the 
leathers with narrow black tips ; the feathers around the eye white posteriorly ; 
throat and jugulum white; breast, sides and flanks ochraceous-tawny, the 
feathers of the breast and abdomen with rather broad white shaft-streaks and 
rather narrow black tips; the flanks with a few narrow white shaft-streaks, 
the under tail-coverts a little darker than the flanks, each feather with a sub- 
apical white bar and black tip ; wing-coverts deep mouse gray with a brownish 
wash with a few white shaft-streaks and barred with black ; flight feathers 
snuff brown rather broadly barred with black ; tail snuff brown with narrow, 
irregular black bars; the upper mandible fuscous-black; the lower mandible 
chamois (in the skin). Wing, 48; tail, 50; culmen, 10; tarsus, 20; middle-toe, 
13 mm. The specimen from west of Yungning, 13,000 feet, Yunnan, May, 1928 
(U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 312284), differs from the type in having the forehead more 
profusely spotted with white; the white sub-apical spots and black tips to the 
feathers of the pileum smaller ; the basal color of the crown and occiput of the 
same color as the back; below, the white of the jugulum extends down the 
center of the breast, the black apical spots are obsolescent, and the white shaft- 
streaks on the flanks have almost disappeared. It measures : Wing, 47.5 ; tail, 
50.5 ; culmen, 10.5 ; tarsus, 19.5 ; middle-toe, 12 mm. 



"Orn. Monatsb., vol. 36, p. 139, 1928. 

« Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 33, 1926. 

«2Nov. Zool., vol. 17, pi. 7, flg. 1, 1910. 



AET. 7 BIEDS FEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — RILEY 49 

On Doctor Rock's return from his second Yunnan expedition for 
the National Geographic Society, he brought back the third specimen 
of this species received by the United States National Museum, 
namely, the male from Ndamucho, Above this specimen is similar to 
the Yungning female mentioned before, but below the white does not 
extend so far down the breast. It measures: Wing, 49; tail, 55; 
culmen, 11; tarsus, 19.5; middle toe, 13.5 mm. 

Comparing Spelaeornis rocki with Hartert's figure of the type of 
Spelaeornis souliei, the former is lighter above with the black apical 
spots more conspicuous; the flanks are lighter and the black apical 
spots smaller; and the white of the throat extends down on the 
jugulum and breast. It seems strange that this species should occur 
so near the type locality of /Spelaeornis souliei. 

Doctor Rock informs me that he found this species to be rather 
common in more or less open country where it frequented low 
scrubby growth. On being approached, it came toward the collector 
until it was too close to shoot. Out of numerous birds shot, he was 
able to save only the two listed above. 

142. NANNUS TROGLODYTES TALIFUENSIS (Sharpe) 

Anorthura talifucnsis Shaepb, Bull. Brit, Oru. Club, vol. 13, p. 11, 1902 (Gyi- 
dzin-shan, Yunnan). 

Three males, two females, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Likiang Mountains, 10,000-12,500 feet, January-February, 
March) ; two males and eight females, southwest Szechwan (back 
of Mount Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, Muli, June ; Mount Mitzuga, 14,500 
feet, June; Zimi Valley, 14,900 feet, west of Waerhdje, August; 
Raronki, 12,400 feet, Shouchu River Basin, August; Djago, 
11,200-12,000 feet, April). 

The present race and Nannus troglodytes szetschuanus from 
southern Szechwan, at least, are certainly very close, if not identical. 
It may be necessary to unite them when better material is available 
for study. A breeding bird from Tatsienlu almost, if not quite, 
matches breeding birds from the Likiang Mountains and Muli, in 
color and size. My series from northern and central Szechwan is 
poor, either taken in winter or immature, with one exception. 

Family PRUNELLIDAE, Accentors 

143. LAISCOPUS COLLARIS RIPPONI (Hartcrt) 

Prunella collaris ripponi Habtebt, Die Vogel der palaarlitisclien Fauna, vol. 1, 
Heft 6. p. 766, 1910 (Gyi-dzin-slian, Yunnan). 

One male and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 14,500-15,000 feet, January) ; 13 males, 11 females, and 5 im- 
70403—31 4 



50 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

mature specimens, southwest Szechwaii (Mount Konka, 16,500- 
17,000 feet, June and August; crags of Dzampe-Shoren, east of 
Waerhdje, 15,600 feet, July ; Mount Gibboh, 13,000-14,000 feet, Muli, 
April; Barongomba, 11,000-12,000 feet, no date; Yulonghsi Valley, 
13,000-16,000 feet, May; Chengtze, 14,500-15,900 feet. May). 

Two females in worn plumage from near Tatsienlu, July, re- 
ceived from the Rev. David C. Graham, agree with the above series 
in wing measurement and without much doubt belong to the same 
form. 

144. PRUNELLA IMMACULATA (Hodgson) 

Accentor immacnlatus Hodgson, Proc. Zool. Soc. London. 1845. p. 34 (Nepal). 

One female and one unsexed, southwest Szechwan (Briiolo-kong 
Valley, 13,000-15,900 feet. May; and Chiu-lung-hsien, halfway be- 
tween Muli and Tatsienlu, jNIay). 

145. PRUNELLA RUBECULOIDES FUSCA Mayr 

Pnmella rvbeculoides fusca Mayr. Orn. Monatsb., vol. 35, p. 148, 1927 (Bamu- 
tung, 2 days' trip southwest of Bantang, Szechwan). 

One male and one female, southwest Szechwan (Yulonghsi, 13,000- 
16,000 feet, May; and Yulinggong. 10 miles south of Tatsienlu, 11,000 
feet, May) . 

These two specimens agree fairh'^ well with a male from Choni, 
Kansu, and a female from the Kokonor near Radja. Both the 
Kansu and Szechwan specimens differ from three males and a female 
from Kashmir in being darker above, especially on the head; the 
throats are darker; and the breast is a deeper tawny. The Kashmir 
birds also have slightly longer wings. Bangs and Peters ^^ intimate 
that the Szechwan bird is somewhat darker than that from northern 
Kansu and northeastern Tibet, but the two specimens listed above 
do not seem to uphold this view. If Pt'unella 7nihecttloides heicki 
Mayr is to be recognized at all, it seems to me it must be for a form 
more to the northwest in Kansu and probably Mongolia. 

146. PRUNELLA STROPHIATA MULTISTRIATA (David) 

Accentor nniUistriatm David, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 4, vol. 7, p. 256, 1871 
(Mupin). 

Five males and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 10,000-11,000 feet. January-February; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, 
October) ; a good series of adults and young, southwest Szechwan 
(Mount Mitzuga, 13,500-14,500 feet. June; Mount Konka, 15,000- 
15,700 feet. June and August: forests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje. 
12,500, July; forests of Raronki, north of Muli, 12,400 feet, August; 



' Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 38, no. 7, p. 3.55, 192S. 



AKT. 7 BTEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — RILEY 51 

Ronopien region, Shouclm River Basin, 15,000 feet, August; Yu- 
longhsi Valley, 13,000-16,000 feet. May; Minya Mountains, 14,500 
feet, no date). 

Five males from Sungpan are less heavily streaked on the breast, 
but the difference is slight and may be more apparent than real. The 
Sungpan skins are not in very good condition. 

Family TURDIDAE, Thrushes 

147. HETEROXENICUS CRURALIS FORMASTER Thayer and Bangs 

Heteroxenicus cruralis formatter Thayer and Bangs. Mem. Mns. Comp. Zool.. 
vol. 40, no. 4, p. 169, 1912 (Mount Washan, Szeehwan). 

One adult female, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, October. 

When I published a paper on Doctor Rock's first expedition to 
Yunnan for the National Geographic Society a series of this form 
was doubtfully identified as Heteroijeenimis sinensis.^* At that time 
there was no specimen of the latter in the United States National 
Museum, and I relied upon descriptions for identification. Since 
then I have seen the series in the Museum of Comparative Zoology, 
and the National Museum has acquired by exchange a pair of H. 
sinensis from the type locality. The Likiang specimens are entirely 
different, much larger and darker; about as different as two species 
well could be. The male of sinensis is dark plumbeous above; slate 
gray below; the throat, middle of the breast, belly, and inider tail 
coverts tinged with white; lores slate color; superciliary white. 
The male of forinaster is dusky slate blue above; the tliroat either 
dusky slate blue or bluish black; the breast dusky slate blue; the 
middle of the abdomen barely tinged with deep neutral gray; lores 
black; superciliary white. The females of the two species are quite 
I listinct also. The female of formaster is rustier on the forehead and 
deeper colored above; the abdomen grayish; and tliere are many 
other differences, but size alone is sufficient. 

The bird listed at the head of this account is not quite the same 
as the previous series from Yunnan. It is more olivaceous above 
and below and not so rusty on the forehead. It is a fall bird, while 
the previous series were taken in summer, and the difference may be 
sea.sonal. 

The type of Heteroxenicus cruralis laurentei LaTouche "'' is now in 
(he Museum of Comparative Zoology and has been kindly loaned 
to me by tlie authorities of that institution for comparison. Without 
much doubt it is the same as the birds I formerly identified as H. 
sinensis^ and which is also the H. sinensis of Stuart Baker.®" La- 
I'ouche overlooked Thayer and Bangs's description of foiminster^ and 
evidently Stuart Baker did also. It is very doubtful to my mind if 

•^iProc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. .SO, 1926. 

'=5Bull. Brit. Oni. Club, vol. 42, p. 29. 1921. 

"■■s Fauna of British India, Birds, ed. 2, vol. 2, p, 1924. 



52 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Heteroxeuious sinensis ranges as far to the westward as Yunnan, but 
if it does it belongs to a different species and has nothing to do with 
the cniralis group. 

The single male of H. sinensis measures: Wing, 62.5; tail, 49; 
culmen, 12; tarsus, 28 mm. Five males of H. c. formaster measure: 
Wing, 68.5-73 (71.3); tail, 49-57 (51.9); culmen, 13-14 (13.5); 
tarsus, 31-33.5 (32 mm.). The type of H. c. laurentei measures: 
Wing, 71; tail, 50; culmen, 14.5; tarsus, 33 mm. 

The female of H. sinensis measures: Wing, 62.5; tail, 49; culmen, ^ 
12; tarsus, 26.5 mm. Four females of H. c. formaster measure; 
Wing, 67-70 (68.8) ; tail, 44-47 (45) ; culmen, 12-13.5 (12.9) ; tarsus, 
28.5-31 (29.9 mm.). 

Thayer and Bangs in the original description of H. c. fornmstery 
cited above, give the measurements of the male as: Wing, 73; tail, 
47; culmen, 14; tarsus, 34 mm.; and of the female as: Wing, 70; tail^ 
45; culmen, 13; tarsus, 32.5 mm. 

148. MYOPHONLS EUGENEI Hume 

Myiophoncus cugcnei Hume, Stv;i.v Featbert^, vol. 1, i>. 475, 1873 (Pegu). 

Five males and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, October; forests of Gowa, 10,000 feet, May; Fuchuanshan, 
10,000-12,000 feet, September; Ndamucho, 11,000 feet, October); 
one male and three females, southwest Szechwan (Shouchu Valley, 
near Dzeru, 11,300 feet, August; Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muii, 
April; Chiu-lung-hsien, halfway between Muli and Tatsienlu, May; 
Tatsienlu, 9,500-10,000 feet. May). 

Lord Rothschild *^' now regards this as a species, as he says that in 
certain areas tenwvinckii and eugenei occur together. In the quite 
extensive series of the latter in the United States National Museum 
from western China, there are no intermediates between it and tem- 
'minchii. Myophonus c. eaer-ideus and its western form imman^suctus 
are so distinct from eugenei and temminchii that hybrids between 
them must be very rare, though Lord Rothschild says there ai"e 
hybrids between femminckii and caeruleus. This must be excep- 
tional, however, because I am not aware that the ranges of the two 
latter meet at any point. Hybrids between eugenei and femminckii 
are not so surprising, as their ranges must meet at a number of points. 

149. GRANDALA COELICOLOR FLORENTES Bangs 

Grandala coelicolor florentcs Bangs, Pioc. New Ensliuid Zool. Club, vol. 9, p. 78, 
1926 (Tachienlu, Szeehwau). 

Thirteen adult males, two innnature males, and nine adult females, 
southwest Szechwan (Mount Konka, 16,500-17.000 feet, June and 

«• Nov. Zool., vol. 33, p. 256, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 53 

August; Yulono-lisi Valley, 13,000-16,000 feet. May; Briiolo-kong 
Valley, 13,000-15,900 feet. May; Chengtze, 14,500-15,900 feet, May; 
Chiichulongba Valley, 13,000-14,000 feet, no date; valley of Jesi- 
longba, 14,500-16,000 feet). 

This series of males is even a lighter, brighter blue than in the 
two males previously reported upon from Yunnan.*^^ Indian males 
are a darker, dingier blue. The female of florentes is darker than the 
same sex of coeJicolor; the shaft spots of the lowerparts and on the 
head, neck, and upper back are narrower and more of a pale olive- 
buff in florentes^ rather than the pinkish buff in coelicolor. It is 
rather astonishing to find the female when adult retaining the 
plumage of the young. 

The two immature males are exactly like the adult female, except 
they are assuming the blue of the adult on the belly, lower back, 
and lesser wing coverts ; they have already acquired the black tail and 
all the primaries are new or in growth, except the spurious and the 
second one; the secondaries are new internally, old externally; the 
greater wing coverts and primary coverts have been renew-ed; the 
middle coverts and the alula have not been renewed yet. These two 
young were taken in August. 

150. LARVSVORA BRUNNEA BRUNNEA Hodgson (?) 

Larvivora hrunnea IIodcson, .Juurii. Asiat. Soc. Beugal. vol. (>, p. 102, 1837 
(Nepal). 

One female, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, October. 

It is with a good deal of hesitation that I assign the above speci- 
men to this form. It does not agree with two females from the same 
locality previously listed as of this race.®^ 

It is darker above and below, but this may be due to the different 
season of the year at which it was secured. The under tail coverts 
are ochraceous-buff instead of white. It has a smaller bill, culmen 
12 mm., instead of 13 mm. It is extremely doubtful if it belongs to 
hinj>nnea at all, but it apparently belongs to this genus and there are 
no other species to which to assign it. It would not be advisable to 
name it on the material at hand. 

151. lANTHIA RUFILATA PRACTICA Bangs and Phillips 

'Ifinthia practica Bangs and Phillips, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 58, p. 292, 
1914 (Loukouchai, Yunnan). 

Two males and seven females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, October and Januarj^-February ; MbayiAvua, 10,000 feet, 
Yangtze loop, April; Gou-khii-ko, 13,000 feet. Yangtze loop, April; 

"sproc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 35, 1926. 
^I'roc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5. p. ."9, 1926. 



54 PROCEEDINGS OF THE ' NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Ndamiicho, 14,000 feet, October) ; two males, eight females, and two 
spotted young, southwest Szechwan (Mount Konka, 14,500 feet, 
June; Zimi Valley, 15,000 feet, Avest of Waerhdje, August; forests of 
Bonti, 12,500 feet, July; Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, April; Aloching, 
12,500-13,500 feet, Muli, April ; Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Yalung 
Gorge, Muli, April). 

Tlie males seem to exhibit two color phases. One a cyaninc blue 
above; the other marine blue. The former with the superciliary, 
rump, and lesser wing coverts very dark; the latter with these areas 
much lijrhter. Both stvles of coloration were taken at Mbayiwua. 

152. lANTHIA INDICA YUNNANENSIS (Rctlischild) 

Tarsiger indknis yunnanensis Rothschild, BuU. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, p. 10. 
1922 (Likiang Range, Yunnan). 

One male and one female, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, northwest Yun- 
nan, October; one male, valle}^ above Djishi, 12,000 feet, southwest 
Szechwan, July. 

Imithia indiea indiea is not represented in the United States Na- 
tional Museum, but two adult males of the present race from farther 
north and east in Szechwan (Washan and south of Suifu) are con- 
siderably darker on the chest and outer margins of primaries than 
the two males listed above. 

153. HODGSONIUS PHOENICUROmES PHOENICUROIDES (Gray) 

BradyiJterus plwenioaroides Gray, Catalogue of the specimen.s of Mammalia 
and Birds of Nepal and Thibet, presented by B. H. Hodgson to the British 
Museum, ed. 1, pp. 70, 153, 1846 (Nepal). 

Two males and one female, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, October; and Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August) ; 
four males and three females, southeast Szechwan (Yalung River 
Gorge below Reddo, 11,000 feet, July). 

Two of the specimens listed above as females are mucli darker 
above and below than the two that are undoubted females. One 
of these birds is acquiring blue feathers on the forehead, lesser wing- 
coverts, and sides of neck on the right side. In both specimens 
the white is restricted below to the belly, and the bills are black to 
base or nearly so. It would appear as if these dark-colored speci- 
mens were really young males. If this is so, then the young male 
must molt from the spotted plumage of the juvenal dress into a 
plumage resembling the female, but darker. Other specimens of 
immature males from SzechAvan in the National Museum seem to 
confirm this. In comparing females from widely separated locali- 
ties due care should be taken to see that the specimens are correctly 
sexed. The undoubted females have the lower mandible light col- 



ABT. 7 BIKDS FEOM YUNNAN" AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 55 

ored at the base, while in the immature male in the female plumage 
the lower mandible is black to the base. At least the color of the 
bill seems to change before the adult plumage begins to be assumed. 

154. NOTODELA LEUCURA LEUCURA (Hodgson) 

Muscisylria leucttra Hodgson, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1845, p. 27 (Nepal). 

One male, Litang River Valley, 10,000 feet, Muli, southwest 
Szechwan, June. 

Only one male from Arbre Broye, South Annam, and one male 
from Margherita, North Assam, are available for comparison. In 
the Annam male the blue tinge to the upperparts and on the belly 
is more pronounced; the white area at the base of the tail is of 
greater extent; the bill and tail are longer than in the male from 
Muli. The Annam specimen measures: Wing, 97; tail, 85; cul- 
men, 17 ; tarsus, 28.5 mm. The Muli male measures : Wing, 97 ; tail, 
75; culmen, 15.5; tarsus, 28 mm. The north Assam male when com- 
pared with the Muli male has the black underlying color of the 
body not so deep, but wnth a grayish tinge; the blue cast above is 
also lighter. The Assam male measures: Wing, 93; tail, 72; cul- 
men, 15; tarsus, 27.5 mm. 

155. TARSIGER CHRYSAEUS VITELLINUS Stresemann 

Tarsiger chrysaeus vitelUnus Stresemann, Jovu-n. f. Orn., 1923, p. 365 (Washan, 
Szechwan). 

One male, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, October; two males and 
three females. Mount Konka, 14,500 feet, June; one female. Mount 
Mitzuga, Muli, 13,000 feet, June; two males and one female, Djishi, 
northeast of Muli, 13,000 feet, July ; two males and one female, Zimi 
region, west of Waerhdje, 14,800 feet, August; the four latter in 
southwest Szechwan. 

The only Indian specimen that I have examined has the head and 
mantle much deeper in color (near medal bronze) and the lower 
parts, especially the throat and chest, a deeper cadmium yellow than 
any before me from Yunnan or Szechwan. 

156. RHYACORNIS FULIGINOSA FULIGINOSA (Vigors) 

Plwenicura fuliginosa Vigors, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1831, p. 35 (Himalaya). 
Three adult males, one immature male, and four females, north- 
west Yunnan (Likiang Mountains. 10,500-11,000 feet, September; 
Fungkou, 6,500 feet, Yangtze Gorge, May; Fuchuanshan, 10,000- 
12,000 feet, September ; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August ; 
Ndamucho, 11,000 feet, October) ; six adult males and two adult 
females, southwest Szechwan (forests of Baude-Shaya, 12,500 feet, 
northeast of Muli, July; forests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, July; 



56 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Noon forest, 10,500 feet, east of Muli, August; Mutirong, 7,000- 
7,800 feet, Muli, April; Yanwekong, 10,700 feet, May; Tatsienlu, 
9,500-10,000 feet. May). 

157. CHAIMARRHORNIS LEUCOCEPHALA (Vigors) 

Phoenicura leticocephala Vigors. Proc. Zool. Soc. London. 1830, p. 35 
(Himalayas). 

One male, one female, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan (Li- 
kiang Mountains, October and February; Chiitien, 6,500 feet, Octo- 
ber) ; two males and one unsexed, southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Konka Chanandodji, 15,800 feet, August; Noon stream, 10,500 feet, 
east of Muli, August; Tatsienlu, 9,500-10,000 feet, May). 

158. PHOENICURUS ERYTHROGASTER MAXIMUS Kleinschmidt 

Phoenicurus erytlirogaster maximiis Kleinschmidt, Abh. Ber. Miis. Tierk. Vol- 
kerk. Dresden, vol. 16, no. 2, author's separate, p. 8, 1923 (.Taueti, Rom- 
batsa, and Chuwo, Tibet) ; idem, 1924, p. 42. 

One adult female, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-Feb- 
ruary. 

This specimen is considerably darker above and below than two 
females from Kashmir of Phoenicurus erythrog aster grandis. The 
Likiang female measures : Wing, 103 ; tail, 75 ; culmen, 15 mm. The 
two females from Kashmir, measure: Wing, 95-102; tail, 71-73; 
culmen, 12-12.5 mm. The present race was founded upon size alone. 
It would appear to have a somewhat larger bill, and, if the color dif- 
ference pointed out above holds, it is well worthy of recognition. 

159. PHOENICURUS AUROREUS (Pallas) 

■MotaciUa aurorea Pallas, Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russischen 
Reichs, vol. 3, p. 695, 1776 (Selenka, Lake Baical). 

One male, forests of Lapo-laze, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, May; one 
young in the spotted plumage, forests of Noon, east of Muli, 10,500 
feet, August ; and one male, Yanwekong, 10,700 feet, May, southwest 
Szechwan. 

Though I am not now recognizing P. a. leucopterus, I am not 
sure but that eventually it will have to be done. All the specimens 
examined by me from the mountains of Szechwan and Yunnan 
appear to be darker below and on the head than the majority of the 
birds taken farther north. There appears to be little or no differ- 
ence in size. The majority of the adult specimens from the moun- 
tains are nonbreeding birds, and some of these differences may be 
due to the unworn condition of the plumage. Stuart Baker ^° is 
wrong when he states that the species breeds only from Lake Baical 

'" Fauna of British India, Birds, ed. 2, vol. 2, p. 72, 1924. 



AKT. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAX AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — RILEY 57 

eastwards to Korea, Japan, and northeast China. It breeds through- 
out the mountains of western China to Yunnan at least. Besides 
the spotted young recorded above, the United States National Mu- 
seum contains this plumage from the mountains of Szechwan 
(Wench wan, near Washan, and Mount Omei) and Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains). There is also a specimen in the spotted plumage from 
Cliangshowkai, Hunan; this bird, however, is much lighter colored 
and may belong to another race. The young taken near Washan had 
barely left the nest and could hardly have wandered far. 

160. PHOENICURUS SCHISTICEPS (Gray) 

Ruticilla schUticeps Gray, Catalogue of the specimens of Mainmalla and Birds 
of Nepal and Thibet, presented by B. H. Hodgson to the British Museum, 
ed. 1, pp. 69, 153, 1846 (Nepal). 

Eight males and 18 females from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February ; mountains of Yungning, 
12,000-13,000 feet, November-December; Gou-khii-ko, Yangtze loop, 
13,000 feet, April) ; three males and two females from southwest 
Szechwan (Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet. May; Mount Mitzuga, 
13,000 feet, June; mountains of Kulu, 11,000-13,000 feet, December 
and April; Djago, 10,400 feet, December). 

A series of seven males from Sungpan are as large as those from 
farther south. The wings of the Sungpan series of males measure : 
83, 86.6, 81.5, 86, 84.5, 83, and 85 mm. The wings of the males from 
the Likiang Mountains measure : 83.5, 85.5, 85, 83, 88, and 87.5 mm. 
This agrees with the results obtained by Bangs and Peters,^^ who 
do not regard Phoenicurus schisticeps heicki Stresemann as a valid 
race. 

161. PHOENICURUS HODGSONI (Moore) 

Ruticilla hodgsoni Moore, Proc. Zool Soc. Londou, 1854, p. 2(5, pi. 58 (Nepal). 

Two males, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February; 
one male, mountains of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, December ; and 
two females, Ndamucho, 14,000 feet. October; all in Yunnan. 

162. PHOENICURUS FRONTALIS Vigors 

Phoenicura frontalis Vigors, Proc. Zool. Soc. Loudon, 1832, p. 172 (Himalaya). 

Two males, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February; 
and October) ; six males, four females, and three young in the spotted 
plumage from southwest Szechwan (Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, 
May; Mount Konka, 16,000 feet, Jane; back of Mount Mitzuga, 
13,000 feet, Muli, June; Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, Muli, June; 
Raronki, Shouchu basin, 12,400 feet. Muli, August; Dshizhi, 13,500 



" Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 68, p. 352, 1928. 



58 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

feet, April; Yuloiiirhsi Valley, 13,000-10,000 feet, May; Shangentze, 
14,500 feet, May; Yulinggong, 11,000 feet, ten miles south of Tat- 
sienlu, May). 

Though a large series of specimens is available from China, only 
two adult males have been examined from the Himalayas. They are 
certainly very close to if not identical with some of the Chinese speci- 
mens in the same stage of wear, but the series is too small to decide 
the status of P. f. sinae^ especially as I have examined no typical 
specimens of the latter from Kansu. Rothschild ^- says the Yunnan 
specimens do not differ from those from the Himalaj^as, and Bangs 
and PetersJ^ who examined Kansu specimens, doubt the existence of 
a northern race. 

163. SAXICOLA TORQUATA PRZEWALSKIl (Pleske) 

Pratincola maura var. przetvaUkii Pi.eske, Wissenschaftliche Resultate der von 
N. M. Przewalski nach Central-Asien unteiuommenen Reisen, Vogel. vol. 1, 
p. 46, pi. 4, fiss. 1-3, 1889 (Kansu). 

Six males and five females. Yunnan (Likiang Mountains. January- 
February and September ; mountains of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, 
November-December) : two males, southwest Szechwan (Mutirong, 
7.000-7.800 feet, Yalung Gorge. April; Yulonghsi Valley, 13,000- 
16,000 feet, May). 

164. SAXICOLA TORQUATA STEJNEGERI (Parrot) 

Pratincola riihicola stejnegeri Parrot, Verli. Orn. Ges. Bnyeru, vol. 8, p. 124. 
1908 (Iteriip and Jesso, Japan). 

One male. Mutirone. Yalung Gorge. 7.000-7.800 feet, southwest 
Szechwan, April. 

165. RHODOPHILA FERREA HARINGTONI (Hartcrt) 

Oreicola ferrca haringtxyni Hartert, Die Vo.sel der paliiarktischen Fauna, vol. 1, 
Heft 6. p. 711, 1910 (Lien-kinng boi Futschau, China). 

Two adult males and one immature male, northwest Yunnan (Liki- 
ang Mountains. September: Yulo. 7.000 feet, August; and Luddii 
Mountains, 12,000-13.000 feet, August) ; one female, forests of Shay a, 
northeast of Muli, 14.300 feet, southwest Szechwan, July. 

166. MONTICOLA SOLITARIA PANDOO (Sykcs) 

Petrocincla pandoo Sykes, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1832, p. 87 (western Ghats). 

Four males, Likiang Mountains. Yunnan, September and October, 
1928. 



"Nov. Zool.. vol. 33, p. 252, 1926. 

"Bull. Mus. Comp. Zo81., vol. 68, p. 351, 1928. 



ART. 7 BIRDS PEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 59 

One specimen (U.S.N.M. No. 312428) has the under tail coverts 
chestnut and a median bar of the same color on some of the feathers 
of the center of the breast. 

167. CALLIOPE TSCHEBAIEWI Pizewalski 

Calliope tscheiatewi Pkzewalski, Mongol i strana Taugut, vol. 2, p. 44, pi. 9, 
fig. 1, 1870 (mniintain.s of Kansu) ; Rowley's Ornithological miscellany, 
vol. 2, pt. 6, p. ISO, pi. 54, fig. 1, 1877. 

Seven males and four females, Mount Konka, 16,000 feet, June; 
seven males and three females, Mount Mitzuga, Muli, 15,000 feet, 
June; one male, forests of Raronki, Shouchu Basin, 14,200 feet, 
August; one male, forests of Bonti, 13,500 feet, east of Waerhdje, 
July; one immature in the spotted plumage, Mount Konka (Mount 
Chanandodji), 15,600 feet, August; one male and two females, 
Yulonghsi, 13,000-16,000 feet, May; all in southwest Szechwan. 

168. OREOCINCLA MOLLISSIMA MOLLISSIMA (Blyth) 

Tiirdus mollissmivs Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 11, p. 188, 1842 
(Durjeeling). 

One adult male, one adult female, and one young female, north- 
west Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February; 
Ndamucho. 14,000 feet, October; and Chiitien, 6,500 feet, October); 
one young not long from the nest, southwest Szechwan (forests of 
Raronki, 12,400 feet, Shouchu Basin, north of Muli, August). 

169. CICHLOSELYS SIBIRICUS SIBIRICUS (Pallas) 

Turdus sibiricniS Pallas, Reise durcli verscluedeue Provinzen cles russischen 
Reichs, vol. 3, p. 694, 1776 (Dauria). 

One adult female, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, October, 1928. 
Apparently the first record for Yunnan. 

170. TURDUS EUNOMUS Teniminck 

TiirdUH eunomus Temminck, Nouveaii recueil de planches colorizes d'oiseanx, 
pi. 514, 1831 (Japan). 

One female, gorges of Lautsolo, 10,000 feet, November, and one 
female, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February, both in 
northwest Yunnan. 

171. TURDUS ATROGULARIS Temminck 

Turdtis atrogularis Tkmminck, Manuel d'ornitliologie, vol. 1, p. 169, 1820 
(rarely in Austria and Silesia). 

One adult male. Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-Feb- 
ruary. 

In this specimen the tail feathers are suffused with ochraceous- 
tawny on the inner web on the underside; very pronounced on the 



60 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 8a 

outer feather, where it shows from above also as an irregular blotch 
at the tip. 

172. TURDUS RUFICOLLIS Pallas 

Turdus rufivollis Pallas, Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russi.sclien 
Reichs, vol. 3. p. 694. 1776 (Dauria). 

Eighteen males and seven females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000-11,000 feet, January-February; Yungning Moun- 
tains, 12,000-13,000 feet, November-December ; and Yungning Plain, 
9,500 feet, November-December) ; three males and three females, 
southwest Szechwan (Muli, 10,500 feet, December; Mutirong, Muli, 
7,000-Y,800 feet, April; Vudju, south of Muli and Mount Gibboh, 
10,000 feet, April ; Yetsi Valley, 12,000 feet, one day north of Kulu, 
April). 

173. TURDUS GOULDII (Verreaux) 

Merula gouldii Vebreaux, Nouv. Arch. Miis. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 34, 1870 
(West Szechwan). 

Three males and two females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, 11,000 feet, January; Gauwua Mountains, 11,500 feet, Yung- 
ning April; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August): four 
males, three females, and one immature, southwest Szechwan (Muli 
Mountains, 11,000 feet. May; Mount Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, June; for- 
ests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 13,000 feet, July; forests of Dshizhi, 
13,500 feet, April; Yetsi Valley, one day north of Kulu, 12.000 feet, 
April; Briiolo-kong. 13.000-1 5.*900 feet. May; Chiichulongba, 13.000- 
14,000 feet, no date). 

A male from Mount Mitzuga (U. S. N. M. No. 312522) is very 
dark on the chest and flanks (somewhat darker than auburn), deep- 
ening on the breast and belly to dull black wdth auburn fringes to the 
feathers; the head and upperparts are somewhat darker than nor- 
mal. In another male (U. S. N. M. 314332), the tips of the feathers 
of the mantle are tipped rather broadly w'ith black. These are only 
abnormal, however. 

There is no indication in the large series of this species in the 
United States National Museum of intergrades 'toAvard casfaneus, ' 

174. TURDUS KESSLERI (Przewalski) 

Merula kessleri Przewalski, Mongol i strana Tangut, p. 62, pi. 10, 1876 (Kau:- 
su) ; Rowley's Ornithological miscellany, vol. 2, pt. G, p. 199. 1877. 

One male. Mount Mitzuga, 14,600 feet, Muli, June; one male, 
Yulonghsi, 13,000-16,000 feet. May; and one male, Chengtze, 14,500- 
15,900 feet, May, all in southwest Szech^van. 

175. TURDUS OBSCURUS Gmclin 

Turdus obscurus Gmelin, Systeinu naturae, vol. 1, pt. 2, p. 816, 1789 (east of 
Lal<e Baikal), 

One male, Shintsang, 11,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 



AKT. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 61 

Family SYLVIIDAE, Old World Warblers 

176. OLIGURA CASTANEOCORONATA DEJEANI (Oustalet) 

Cryptolopha dejeaiii Oustalet, Bull. Mus. Paris, 1896, p. 316 (Tatsienlu, 
Szechwan). 

One female, back of Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 feet, Muli, southwest 
Szechwan, June. 

Two males, and four females before me from China agree in being 
more olive-green above, the pileum lighter chestnut, and the lower- 
parts a lighter yellow than a single specimen examined from Sikkim 
The Chinese specimens are considerably larger. The wings of the six 
Chinese specimens measure 52.5-56 mm. (54.7) ; the single Sikkim 
specimen, 47.5 mm. 

177. SUVA CRINIGERA CATHARIA (Reichenow) 

I'rinia catharia Reichenow. Oiii. Monatsb., vol. 16, p. 13, 1908 (Ta-.sieng-lii- 
ting, Szechwan). 

Six males and one unsexed, southwest Szechwan (Mutirong, 7,000- 
7,800feet, Muli, April'). 

The above series belongs with the birds that I formerly identified 
as S. c. yunnanensisJ* This is not surprising, as the above locality 
is not so very far off across the Yangtze in the Yalung Gorge. A 
male from Ningyuanfu, Szechwan, in the National Museum, also 
seems to belong here. A male from Kiating has the margins of the 
feathers of the upperparts more brownish than in the Muli series, but 
it was taken late in June, and this difference may be seasonal. It 
matches a male from the Likiang Mountains taken in July. If S. c. 
yunnanensis is recognizable, it must be confined to western Yunnan 
and eastern Burma. The six males from Muli measure : Wing, 46-48 
(47) ; culmen, 10.5-11 (10.7) mm. 

178. CISTICOLA JUNCIDIS CURSITANS (Franklin) 

Pnnia cursitans Feanklin, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1831, p. 118 (between 
Calcutta and Benares). 

One male, Yungning Plain, 9,300 feet, northwest Yunnan, May. 

This specimen does not differ appreciably from birds from 
Shanghai, in size or color. I have examined only one bird from 
India, but Stuart Baker ^^ assigns Yunnan birds to this race. If the 
eastern Chinese specimens belong to the same race, as the material 
in the United States National Museum seems to show, then Calaman- 
thelJa tinnaboilnns Swinhoe ''■'" must become a synonym. The wing 

'< Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 46, 192G. 

■^5 Fauna of British India, Birds, ed. 2, vol. 2, p. 422, 1924. 

'^'' .Tourn. Asiat. Soc. North China Branch, vol. 1. p. 225. 1859. 



62 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

of the above specimen measures 51 mm. The wings of seven males 
from the vicinity of Shanghai measure 51-55 (53.3) mm. Since the 
above was Avritten, Lynes's review of the genus Cisticola'^^ has ap- 
peared, and he recognizes t'mnabulans as the name to use for the 
breeding bird of southeast China, but on page 96 he says that in 
western Yunnan the birds fuse with the Burmese races. 

179. DUMETICOLA THORACICA THORACICA Blyth 

Dumcticola thoracica Blyth, Jouru. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 14, p. 584, 1846 
(Nepal). 

Four males and one female, southwest SzecliAvan (Mount Mitzuga, 
13,000-15,000 feet, Muli, June ; back of Mount Mitzuga, 13,500 feet,. 
June; forests of Karonki. 14.200 feet, Shouchu Basin, August). 

The above female practically lacks the dusky spots on the jugu- 
lum; there is another specimen (I'. S. N. M., No. 297122) that ap- 
proaches it from the Likiang Mountains. The female seems to have 
fewer spots on the jugulum. anyway, but they are rarely lacking. 

180. HOREITES BRUNMFRONS UMBRATICUS Baker 

Horeites Wunnifrons umlyraticus Bakeb, Bull. Brit. Oni. Club, vol. 44, p. 63,. 
1924 (Sheweli-Salwin Divide, Yuunau). 

One male and one female, Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 feet, Muli, south- 
west Szechwan, June. 

181. HORORNIS MAJOR (Moore) 

Horeites major Moore, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1854, p. 105 (Nepal). 

One male, Mount Mitzuga, 13,500 feet, Muli, southwest Szechwan^ 
June. 

It measures: Wing, 65; tail, 50; culmen, 12 mm. 

182. HORORNIS ACANTHIZOIDES ACANTHIZOmES (Vcireaux) 

Abroinls' ncanthizoidcs A'ehreaux. Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 37, 
1870 (mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

One female, forests Avest of Yungning, 13,000 feet, Yunnan, May^ 
and one female, Mount Gibboh. 13,000 feet, soutli of Muli. 13,000 
feet. s()iithwest SzechAvan. August. 

183. SEICIRUS BURKII DISTINCTUS (LaTouchc) 

Cryi)tolopha biirkii distincia LATcrcHB, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 32, p. 41, 
1922 (Mengtz, Yunnan). 

One adidt nuile, Mount Mitzuga. 11.000 feet, Muli, June, and one 
immature male, Noon forests, east of Muli, 10,500 feet, southwei^t 

■•Ibis, suppl. no., Sept.. 1930. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 63 

Szechwan, August; one adult, Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, 
Yunnan, September. 

The wing of the adult male measures 53.5 nun. Two males 
from the Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, taken in May and August, 
measure: Wing, 54-55.5 mm.; one male, apparently of this race, 
from near Ningyuanfu, Szechwan, has the wing 50 mm. This is a 
slight extension northward of the breeding range. Just where the 
present race meets valeritini is not known; the United States Na- 
tional Museum has breeding specimens of the latter from Mount 
Omei, near Washan, and Wenchwan, Szechwan, but they are prob- 
ably not typical, as the wing measurement is not so great as that 
given by Bangs for the form.^' Breeding birds are much lighter 
below than before the breeding season. 

184. SEICIRCUS BURKII VALENTINI (Hartert) 

Cryptolopha burkii ralentint Hartekt, Die Vcigel der palaarktisclien Fauna, vol. 
1, Heft 4, p. 497, 1907 (Taipaishan, Shensi). 

Three males, one female, and one unsexed, Likiang Mountains. 
Yunnan, October. 

These are evidently migrants from the north. Two of the adult 
males have a wing measurement of 63 and 61 mm. ; the female, 57 
mm. The foreheads of all are tinged with yellowish green. 

185. PHAEORHADINA FUSCATA ROBUSTA (Stresemann) 

Phylloscopus fuscatus robustu-s Stresemann, Abh. Ber. Mus. Tieik. Volkerk. 
Dresden, vol. 16, no. 2, p. 16, 1924 (Sungi^an, Szechwan). 

One male, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, September, 
This specimen is darker above and paler below than the form 
that migrates through eastern China. It is a bird of the year; the 
belly slightly tinged with very pale yellow and may not belong here 
at all, but I do not think it belongs with the east China form 
{fuscata). 

186. PHAEORHADINA AFFINIS (Tickell) 

Motacilla afflnis Tickell, Joiu*n, Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 2, p. 576, 18.33 (jungles 
of Borabhum and Dholbum). 

Five males and one female, southwest Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 
Muli, 12,500 feet, June; Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, April; 
Yanwekong, 10,700 feet. May; Yulonghsi, 13,000-16,000 feet. May). 

187. PHAEORHADINA SUBAFFINIS (Grant) 

Oreopneustc subaffinis Grant, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 10, p. 37, 1900 (Pu-an- 
ting, southwest Kweichu). 

One unsexed, Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, southwest Szech- 
wan, April. 

'•Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 11, p. 3, 1929. 



64 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

188. OREOPNEUSTE ARMANDI (Milne-Edwards) 

Abrornis arrnandl Milne-Edwakds, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 1, Bull., p. 22, 
pi. 2, fig. 1, 1865 (north China). 

Two females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, October; 
and Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, September) ; one male and 
one female, southwest Szechwan (Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, 
April; Chiu-lung-hsien, halfway between Muli and Tatsienlu, May). 

189. PHYLLOSCOPUS TROCHILOIDES (Sundevall) 

Acanthiza trochiloldes Sundevall, Physiographiska Sallskapets Tidskrift, vol. 1, 
p. 76, 1837 (Calcutta, India). 

One female, Likiang Mountains, 11,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

This specimen was taken with P. magnirostris, which it greatly 
resembles in color, but is smaller. It measures: Wing, 55; culmen. 
10; tarsus, 19 mm. 

Count Gyldenstolpe has recently shown ^^ that Phylloscopus lugu- 
bris auct. and Acanthiza trochiloldes Sundevall are the same. 

190. PHYLLOSCOPUS REGULOIDES CLaUDIAE (LaTonche) 

Acanthop7ieuste trochilwdes claudiae LaTouchb, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, 
p. 22, 1922 (Mengtz, Yunnan). 

Five males, three females, and two unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Likiang Mountains, September and October; Luddii Mountains, 
12,000-13,000 feet, August; Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, Septem- 
ber; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, October) ; two males and six females, 
southwest Szechwan (Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 12,500 feet, July; 
forests of Baude, northeast of Muli, 13,000 feet, July ; Noon forests. 
east of Muli, 10,500 feet, August). 

The United States National Museum contains specimens of this 
race from as far north in Szechwan as Wenchwan taken in early 
August. Doctor Rock's specimens from southwest Szechwan taken 
in summer are also evidently breeding birds, and on a previous trip 
he took it in the breeding season in the Likiang Mountains, Yunnan. 
This would make it the breeding form over the high mountains of 
western China from northern Szechwan, at least, to northwest 
Yunnan. 

191. PHYLLOSCOPUS MAGNIROSTRIS BIyth 

Phylloscopus magnirostns Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 12, p. 9G0, 
1843 (Calcutta, India). 

One male, three females, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Likiang Mountains, September; forests of Gowa, 10,000 feet. May; 

"Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 46, p. 47, 1925; and Arkiv fiir Znol., Band 19A, no 1, 
p. 47, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 65 

and Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August) ; seven males 
and three females, southwest Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 13,500 feet, 
Muli, June; Mount Konka, 14,000 feet, June; forests above Djishi, 
Yalung watershed, northeast of Muli, July; forests of Bonti, east of 
Waerhdje, 12,500 feet, July; and Tatsienlu, 9,500-10,000 feet, May). 
The male (U. S. N. M. No. 314417) from Tatsienlu has a large 
yellowish-white partially concealed patch on the occiput. It is unique 
in a large series of the species in the National Museum. 

192. REGULOIOES PROREGULUS FORRESTI (Rothschild) 

PhyUoscopus proregulus forr-esti Rothschild, Nov. Zool., vol. 28, p. 45, 1921 
(Likiang Mountains, Yunnan). 

One male, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, September, and three 
males and one female from southwest Szechwan (Mount Gibboh, 
13,000 feet, Muli, May; Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 feet, Muli, June; 
Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, April). 

The United States National Museum contains specimens of this 
race from as far north as Sungpan, Szechwan. 

193. REGULOroES PULCHER PULCHER (Blyth) 

PhyUoscopus tmlcher Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 14, p. 592, 1845 
(Nepal). 

One male and one female, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, October; 
one male, Mount Konka, 14,500 feet, June; and one unsexed, Yan- 
wekong Valley, 10,000-12,000 feet. May, southwest Szechwan. 

I can not distinguish between breeding specimens taken in the 
Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, and at Sungpan, Szechwan. It may be 
that all Chinese records of this species should belong to Reguloides 
pulcher vegetus Bangs,'^ but for the present I am following Stuart 
Baker,^° as no specimens from Nepal have been examined by me. 

194. REGULUS REGULUS YUNNANENSIS Rippon 

Regiilus ynnnanensis Rippon, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 19, p. 19, 1906 (Yangtze 
River, west Yunnan). 

Six males and three females, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, north- 
west Yunnan, January-February. 

This dark race extends north as far as Sungpan at least, as the 
United States National Museum contains a male and two young 
from there. 

195. LEPTOPOECILE SOPHIAE OBSCURA Przewalski 

Leptopoecile obsciira Pkzewalski, Zapiski Imp. Akad. Nauk St. Petersbui'g, 

vol. 55, p. 80, 1887 (northeast Tibet). 
Leptopoecile henrioi Oustalet, Ann. Sci. Nat., ser. 7, vol. 12, p. 287, pi. 10, fig. 

1, 1891 (Aktaroma, between Kurla and Lob-nor, Tibet). 

TOProc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 26, p. 95, 1913. 

» Fauna of British India, Birds, ed. 2, vol. 2, p. 464, 1924. 

70403—31 5 



QQ PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Five males and seven females from southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Mitzuga, 14,500-15,000 feet, Muli, June; Mount Konka, 14,800- 
16,000 feet, June and August; forests above Djishi, 12,000 feet, July; 
forests of Raronki, 12,400 feet, north of Muli, August; Yulonghsi, 
13,000-16,000 feet, May; Chengtze, 14,500-15,900 feet. May; Yanwe- 
kong, 10,700 feet. May). 

This bird is so different in color from Leptopoecile sophiae that 
it seems to me it should be recognized as a species. Sex for sex it 
is much darker, and the blue of the rump is not so bright ; the breast 
and belly are a vinaceous-brown with a blue wash instead of a 
pinkish buff. It is also smaller. 

Family MUSCICAPIDAE, Flycatchers 

196. CULICICAPA CEYLONENSIS CALOCHRYSEA Oberholser 

Culicicapa ceylonensis calochrysea Obekholser, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 

76, no. 6, p. 8, July 16, 1923 (Quaymos, Tenasserim). 
Culicicapa ceylonensis orientalis Stuakt Baker, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club. vol. 44, 

no. 281, p. 11, Nov. 5, 1923 (Szechwan). 

One male and two females, northwest Yunnan (forests of Gowa, 
10,000 feet, May; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August; 
Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, September). 

In the report upon Doctor Rock's previous collection from Yun- 
nan,^^ I assigned a single specimen from the Likiang Mountains to 
Culicicapa ceylonensis orientalis Baker, overlooking the fact that 
Culicicapa ceylonensis calochinjsea Oberholser was an earlier name 
proposed for the same form. The United States National Museum 
now contains a fair series of this species from western Szechwan. 
These and the Yunnan specimens when compared with Tenasserim 
birds do not seem to differ racially in color or size. 

197. EUMYIAS THALASSINA THALASSINA (Swainson) 

Muscicapa thalassina Swainson, Natural history of flycatchers, Naturalist's 
Library, vol. 10, Ornithology, p. 252, 1838 (India). 

One male, Likiang Mountains, September ; and two females, Yulo, 
7,000 feet, Yunnan, August. 

198. CYORNIS RUBECULOIDES GLAUCICOMANS Thayer and Bangs 

Cyornis tickelUae glaucicomans Thayer and Bangs, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., 
vol. 52, p. 141, 1909 (Tanswioyah, Hupeh, China). 

One male, Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, May. 

The above specimen has the lesser wing coverts a shining Venetian 
blue, but this seems to vary considerably in three males from Mount 
Omei ; the wing measures 76 mm. 



«i Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus.. vol. 70. art. 5, p. 19, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA EILEY 67 

199. NILTAVA SUNDARA DENOTATA Bangs and Phillips 

Niltava svndara denotata Bangs and Phillips, Bull. Miis. Comp. Zoul., vol. 58, 
p. 280, 1914 (Mengtsze, Yunnan). 

Three adult males, two immature males, and one immature female, 
northwest Yunnan (Likiang Mountains, October; Fungkou, 9,000 
feet, May; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, August; Fuchuan- 
shan, 10,000-12,000 feet, September) ; one adult male and one imma- 
ture female, southwest Szechwan (Yanwekong, 10,000-12,000 feet, 
May; forests of Noon, east of Muli, 10,500 feet, August). 

The two immature males and the two immature females are in the 
spotted plumage. The United States National Museum contains 
two additional immature males in the spotted plumage from Doctor 
Rock's first expedition in Yunnan. The immature males vary some- 
what in plumage and are probably not quite the same age, though 
approximately so. Irrespective of the slight age variations in these 
immature males, they all have the blue tail like the adult. One 
specimen is acquiring a blue rump and has a few blue feathers on 
the nape and lesser wing coverts; the Mars-yellow breast is being 
acquired in the two lateral feather tracts; the remiges are new and 
are blue outwardly at the base only, brownish toward the tip. The 
adult male plumage evidently is acquired at the first molt, except for 
the remiges. The two immature females in the spotted plumage of 
apparently the same age aS the above spotted immature males have 
the tail brown like the adult female; they also have the white jugular 
patch and the white belly of the adult female. None of the spotted 
males has the jugular patch or belly white, but fulvous. Now in 
these two spotted females the remiges are new and resemble those 
of the adult female. All these spotted young, whether male or 
female, have acquired the tail of the first winter plumage. The in- 
teresting point is that the sexes become differentiated at a very early 
stage. They are probably only similar in the nestling plumage and 
the series of young before me seems to indicate that the female even 
then differs from the male in having the jugular patch and belly 
white. 

200. SIPHIA STKOPHIATA Hodgson 

Siphla strophiafa Hodgson, Indian Rev., vol. 1, p. 651, 1837 (Nepal). 

One male from northwest Yunnan (Yungning, 12,000 feet, May) ; 
three males and three females from southwest Szechwan (forests of 
Muli, 10,000 feet. Ma}'; forests of Djishigotong, Yalung Basin, north- 
east of Muli, 13,000 feet, July; Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, April; Yanwe- 
kong, 10,000-12,000 feet. May). 



68 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol. 80 

201. SIPHIA PARVA ALBICILLA (Pallas) 

Muscicapa albicilla Pallas, Zoographia Rosso-Asiatica, vol. 1, p. 462, 1811 
(Dauria). 

Four males and two females, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, Octo- 
her and September. 

202. DIGENEA TRICOLOR CERVINIVENTRIS Sliarpe 

Digenea cerv-iniventris Sharpe, Catalogue of birds iu the British Museum, 
vol. 4, p. 460, 1879 (Manipnr Hills). 

One male, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan, October. 

203. MUSCICAPULA SUPERCILLA.RIS ASTIGMA (Hodgson) 

Muscicapa astigma Hodgson, in Gray's Zoological miscellany, p. 84, 1844 
(Nepal). 

Two males and one female from southwest Szechwan (Mount Mit- 
zuga, 13,000 feet, Muli, June; forests of Shaya, northeast of Muli, 
July; forests above Baude, 12,500 feet, northeast of Muli, July); 
one female, Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, 
September. 

204. POLIOMYIAS HODGSONI (Verreaux) 

SipMa hodgsoni Verreaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 34, 1870 
(Mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

Six adult males, one adult female, and two immature males, south- 
west Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 feet, Muli, June; forests 
of Djishi, 11,000 feet, northeast of Muli, Yalung watershed, July; 
Mount Konka, 14,500 feet, August; Yulinggong, 10 miles south of 
Tatsienlu, 11,000 feet. May). 

205. CHELIDORYNX HYPOXANTHA (Blyth) 

Rhipidura hypoxantha Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 12, p. 935, 1843 
(Darjeeling, India). 

One adult male and one unsexed from northwest Yunnan (forests 
of Yungning, 13,000 feet. May; Likiang Mountains, October); one 
male from southwest Szechwan (Djishigotong, Yalung River water- 
shed, northeast of Muli, 12,500 feet, July). 

206. HEMICHELroON SIBIRICA ROTHSCHILDI Baker 

Hemichelidon sibirica rothschildi Baker, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, p. 156, 
1923 (Likiang Range, Yunnan). 

One adult unsexed and one immature male, northwest Yunnan 
(Lapo-laze forests, 10,000 feet. May; Likiang Mountains, Septem- 
ber). 



ART. 7 BIRDS FEOM YUNNAN" AND SZECHWAN, CHINA — RILEY 69 

The United States National Museum contains specimens of this 
race from as far north as Sungpan, Szechwan. 

207. HEMICHELIDON FERRUGINEA Hodgson 

Hemichelidon ferruginea Hodgson, Proc. Zool. Soe. London, 1845, p. 32 (Nepal). 

One male and two females, southwest Szechwan (Mount Mitzuga, 
12,000 feet, Muli, June; forests of Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 12,000 
feet, July; Noon forest, 11,000 feet, east of Muli, August). 

208. RHIPIDURA ALBICOLLIS ALBICOLLIS (Vieillot) 

PlatijrhyncJvus albicollis Vieillot, Nouv. Diet. d'Hist. Nat., vol. 27, p. 13, 1818 
(Bengal). 

One female, Shintsang, 11,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, Septem- 
ber; and one male, Muli Valley, 10,000 feet, southwest Szechwan, 
June. 

These specimens are darker even than the three specimens pre- 
viously reported upon from Yunnan,*^ and are quite different from 
the only two Indian skins available for comparison. It probably 
represents an unnamed race. 

Family MOTACILLIDAE, Wagtails, Pipits 

209. ANTHUS SPINOLETTA JAPONICUS Temminck and Schlegel 

Anthus pratensis japonicus Temminck and Schlegel, Fauna Japonica, Aves, 
p. 59, pi. 24, 1847 (Japan). 

One male, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, January-Feb- 
ruary. 
This seems to be the first record for Yunnan. 

210. ANTHUS HODGSON! Richmond 

Anthus Jiodgsoni Richmond, in Blackwelder, Research in China, vol. 1, part 2, 
p. 493, 1907 (new name for Pipastes macuJatus Jerdon, preoccupied; 
Nepal). 

Four females, northwest Yunnan (Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 
feet, August; Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, September; Ndamu- 
cho, 14,000 feet, October) ; one male and two females, southwest 
Szechwan (Djishi, 11,500 feet, northeast of Muli, July; Mount Gib- 
boh, 13,000 feet, Muli, August; Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, 
April). 

The July specimen is in very worn plumage; the olive wash has 
almost entirely disappeared from the upperparts, a little only re- 
maining on the outer surface of the wings. All species of this 
genus undergo great changes in plumage in the breeding season. 

« Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 19, 1926. 



70 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Partly on this account it is very difficult to make out geographic 
forms. I am quite in sympathy with Bangs and Peters's ®^ conclu- 
sions in regard to the nonrecognition of A. h. yunnanensis and A. h. 
herezowshli. The majority of specimens in collections have been 
taken on migration; enough breeding birds have not been examined 
to reach am- definite conclusions in regard to the status of the forms. 

211. ANTHUS ROSEATUS Blyth 

Anthus roseatus Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 16, p. 437, 1847 (Nepal). 

One adult male, Mount Mitzuga, 15,000 feet, Muli, June; one adult 
male, one immature male, and two immature females, Mount Konka, 
16,000-16,500 feet, June and August; two males, Dshizhi, Muli, 
13,500 feet, April ; one male, Mutirong, Muli, 7,000-7,800 feet, April ; 
two males, Briiolo-kong Valley, 13,000-15,900 feet. May; one male, 
two females, and one unsexed, Shangentze, 14,500 feet, May; one 
female, Chengtze, 14,500-15,900 feet. May; one male, Barongomba, 
11,000-12,000 feet, no date; all the above localities in southwest 
Szechwan. Tw^o males, Ndamucho, Yangtze-Mekong Divide, 14,000 
feet, Yunnan, October. 

212. ANTHUS RICHARDI RICHARDI VieiUot 

Anthill richardi Vieillot, Nouv. Diet, d' Hist. Nat., vol. 36, p. 491, 1818 (France). 
One female, Likiang Mountains, Yunnan. September. 

213. ANTHUS RICHARDI GODLEWSKII (Taczanowski) 

Agrodroma godlewskii Taczanowski, Bull. See. Zool. France, 1876, p. 128 
(south Dauria). 

One male, Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, Muli, southwest Szechwan, 
August. 

This specimen is much more richly colored, esj^ecially below, than 
the specimen listed above as Anthus r. 7ichardi; the streaks on the 
chest are heavier; and the hind claw is shorter. It measures: Wing, 
91 ; hind claw, 13 mm. A male and an unsexed specimen taken near 
Kiating, Szechwan, in worn breeding plumage, June 2 and 27, are in 
the United States National Museum. They both have short hind 
claws, measuring 13 mm. in the male and 11.5 mm. in the unsexed 
specimen, and belong to the present form. A female from Tabool, 
eastern Mongolia, August 9, three males and one female from Kansu 
(near Ningsia, May 7 and 19, to the vicinity of Lanchow, July 16, 
and Labrang, August 31) are also of the short-clawed form. Two 
males and one unsexed from the vicinity of Ningsia, Kansu, May 7, 
are of the long-clawed variety. Either the two forms occur together 
on migration or else the short-clawed variety is only an individual 

s'Bull. Mils. Comp. Zool., vol. 68, p. 368, 1928. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECH WAN, CHINA EILEY 71 

variation. I am inclined to the latter belief, but breeding material is 
lacking to show that the two forms occur together in summer. 

214. BUDYTES CITREOLA WEIGOLDI (Rensch) 

Motacilla citrcola weujoldi Rensch, Abh. Ber. Tierk. Volkenk. Mus. Dresden, 
vol. 16, no. 2, p. 55, 1924 (Sungiian, Szechwan). 

One male (marked female), Mount Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, Muli, 
southwest Szechwan, June. 

This specimen does not have the black of the back extending so far 
posteriorly as in typical specimens from Sungpan, but has the lower 
back and rump deep neutral gray. Three males of typical iveigoldi 
from Sungpan are not so deep a sooty black as calcarata^ and the 
rumps are more extensively neutral gray. B. c. weigoldi does not 
appear to differ in size from B. o. calcarata. The above specimen 
measures : Wing, 88 ; culmen, 14 mm. 

215. BUDYTES CITREOLA CITREOLA (Pallas) 

Motacilla citreola Pallas, Reise durch verschiedene Provinzeu des riissischen 
Reichs, vol. 3, p. 696, 1776 (east Siberia). 

One immature, not sexed, northwest Yunnan (Ndamucho, 14,000 
feet, October) ; three males and one female, southwest Szechwan 
(Dshizhi, 12,000 feet, April ; Briiolo-kong Valley, 13,000-15,900 feet, 
May; Tatsienlu, 9,500-10,000 feet. May). 

The spring adults are evidently on their way to the breeding 
grounds farther north. The immature bird may not belong to this 
form. It is darker above than the only immature specimen of about 
the same age that I have been able to compare it with; the bill is 
equally small, however. 

216. MOTACILLA CINEREA CASPICA (S. G. Gmelin) 

Parus caspicus S. G. Gmexin, Reise dutch Russland, vol. 3, p. 104, pi. 20, fig. 2, 
1774 (Enzeli, Caspian Sea). 

Five males, one female, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Likiang Mountains, September and October ; Fuchuanshan, 10,000- 
12,000 feet, September). 

217. MOTACILLA LUGUBRIS LEUCOPSIS Gould 

Motacilla leucopsis Goitld, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1837, p. 78 (India). 

One male and two females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, September and October; Fuchuanshan, 10,000-12,000 feet, 
September). 

218. MOTACILLA LUGUBRIS ALBOIDES Hodgson 

Motacilla alhoides Hodgson, Asiat. Res., vol. 19, p. 191, 1836 (Nepal), 

Five males and three females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, January-February and September; Yungning Mountains, 



72 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

12,000-13,000 feet, November-December; Ndamucho, 14,000 feet, Oc- 
tober) ; one male, southwest Szechwan (Noon forests, east of Muli, 
10,500 feet, August). 

The single specimen from Ndamucho, Yunnan, though marked as 
a male is probably a female, as the bill is quite small, measuring 
14 mm. 

Family ENICURIDAE, Fork-tails 

210. ENICURUS LESCHENAULTI SINENSIS Gould 

Enicurus sinensis Govu), Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1865, p. 665 (Shanghai). 

Two males and one female from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February, and forests of Gowa, 
10,000 feet. May) ; one male and one female, southwest Szechwan 
(Noon forests, east of Muli, 10,500 feet, August; and Vudju, 10,000 
feet, south of Muli and Mount Gibboh, April). 

Family LANIIDAE, Shrikes 

220, LANIUS SPHENOCERCUS GIGANTEUS Przewalski 

Lanius gigantcus Pezewalski, Zapiski Imp. Akad. Nauk St. Petersburg, vol. 55, 
p. 86, 1887 (Gelben River). 

Two females, southwest Szechwan (Muli, 10,000 feet, December, 
and Bonti, 14,300 feet, July). 

The above two females are larger and darker above than L. s. 
sphenocercus, and the chest and breast are a pale vinaceous-fawn. 
A few specimens of L. s. sphenocercus sometimes have a faint tinge 
of the latter color below, but as a rule they are more or less pure 
white on the chest and breast. The two Szechwan females measure '. 
Wing, 137.5 and 139 mm. 

The specimen taken in July is probably a breeding bird and com- 
prises considerable extension of the range to the southward. It is 
probably a local breeding bird at high elevations in western China 
from western Kansu to southwest Szechwan and probably northwest 
Yunnan. 

221. LANIUS TEPHRONOTUS (Vigors) 

Collurio tephronotus Vigors, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1831, p. 43 (Himalaya). 

Four males, one female, and one unsexed, Yunnan (Likiang Moun- 
tains, January-February, September and May 8) ; five adult males, 
two adult females, and three immatures, southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Mitzuga, 12,000 feet, Muli, June; Djishi, 11,000 feet, Yalung basin, 
July; Muli- Yunnan border, 11,000 feet, August; Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, 
April; Yulonghsi, 13,000-16.000 feet. May; Briiolo-kong Valley, 
13,000-15,900 feet, May; Yulinggong, 11,000 feet, May); one adult 
female, without locality. 



ABT. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 73 

Family STURNIDAE, Starlings 

222. ACRIDOTHERES TRISTIS TRISTIS (Linnaeus) 

Paradisea tristis Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 12, p. 167, 1766 (Philippine 
Islands, error; Calcutta). 

One male, mountains of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, November- 
December; and one male, Ndamncho, 14,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, 
October. 

Family NECTARINIIDAE, Sun-birds 

223. AETHOPYGA DABRYII DABRYII (Verreaux) 

Nectarlnia dahryii Vebreaitx, Rev. Mag. Zool, p. 173, pi. 15, 1867 (Szechwan). 

Two males and one female, Yunnan (Chinhaitze, Laposhan, 11,300 
feet. May; Mbayiwua, 10,000 feet, April; Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet^ 
September) ; 10 males and 3 females, southwest Szechwan (Vudju 
Mountains, south of Muli, 10,000 feet, May; back of Mount Mitzuga, 
Mnli, 12,000 feet, June; Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 feet, June; Muli 
Mountains, 10,000 feet, June; forests of Baude-Shaya, 12,500 feet, 
northeast of Muli, July; Dshizhi, 13,500 feet, April; Shangentze, 
14,500 feet. May; Yanwekong Valley, north of Wanzanron, 10,000- 
12,000 feet. May). 

The specimen from Weihsi, though marked as a female, is prob- 
ably a young male. The feathers of the chest are becoming faintly 
tinged with orange, and the base of the lower mandible for about 
two-thirds of its length is chamois. Possibly it may not belong to 
this species. 

Family DICAEIDAE, Flower-peckers 

224. PACHYGLOSSA MELANOZANTHA Blyth 

Pachyglossa melanozantha Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 12, p. 1010, 
1843 (Nepal). 

Fourteen males and three females, northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 12,000 feet, September; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 
feet, August; Yulo, 7,000 feet, August; and one immature male, 
southwest Szechwan (Noon forests, 10,500 feet, east of Muli, August). 

225. DICAEUM IGNIPECTUM IGNIPECTUM (Blyth) 

Myzantlie igni pectus Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 12, p. 983, 1843 
(Nepal and Bhutan). 

Two males and five females from southwest Szechwan (Muli Moun- 
tains, 10,000 feet, June; Mount Mitzuga, Muli, 10,000 feet, June; 
forests of Noon, 11,000 feet, east of Muli, August). 



74 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM VOL. 80 

Family ZOSTEROPIDAE, White-eyes 

226. ZOSTEROPS PALPEBROSA SIMPLEX Swinhoe 

Zosterops simplex Swinhoe, Ibis, 1861, p. 331 (Amoy, China). 

One male and two females, Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, southwest 
Szechwan, June; one male, Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 feet, 
Yunnan, August. 

Family FRINGILLIDAE, Sparrows 

227. MYCEROBAS CARNIPES (Hodgson) 

Coccothraustes carnipcs Hodgson, Asiat. Res., vol. 9, p. 151, 1836 (Nepal). 

One male and six females, Yunnan (forests of Gowa, 10,000 feet, 
south of Yuli, May; Likiang Mountains, 9,600-13,500 feet, January) ; 
eight adult males, one immature male, and four females, Szechwan 
(Mount Mitzuga, 13,000-13,600 feet, June; Briiolo-kong Valley, north 
of the Druduron Pass, 13,000-15,900 feet. May; Yulinggong, 10 miles 
south of Tatsienlu, 11,000 feet. May). 

228. MYCEROBAS MELANOXANTHUS (Hodgson) 

Coccothraustes melanoxanthus Hodgson, Asiat. Res., vol. 9, p. 150, 1836 (Hima- 
layas). 

One male from northwest Yunnan (forests of Gowa, 10,000 feet, 
south of Yuli, May) ; two males and two females from southwest 
Szechwan (Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet, June; Mount Mitzuga, 
13,000 feet, Muli, June; back of Muligomba, 10,000 feet, Muli, June). 

229. PERISSOSPIZA AFFINIS (Blyth) 

Hesperiphona afflnis Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 24, p. 179, 1855 
(Sikkim). 

One male, southwest Szechwan (back of Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 
feet, Muli, June) ; two males and four females. Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 13,500 feet, January; Luddii Mountains, 12,000-13,000 
feet, August). 

230, PROCARDUELIS RUBESCENS SATURATIOR Rothschild 

Procarduelis ruMscens saturatior Rothschild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 32, 
p. 12, 1922 (Sheweli-Salwin Divide, Yunnan). 

One adult male, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, Yunnan, January- 
February; and one adult female, Mount Mitzuga, 13,000 feet, Muli, 
southwest Szechwan, June. 

23L PROCARDUELIS NIPALENSIS INTENSICOLOR Baker 

Procarduelis nipalensis inteiisicolor Bakes, Bull. Brit. Oru. Club, vol. 45, p. 92, 
1925 (Mekong-Salwiu Divide, Yunnan). 

One adult male and two females, valley above Djobi, 12,000 feet, 
southwest Szechwan, July. 



ART. 7 BIEDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 75 

232. CARPODACUS MURATI Delacour 

Carjwdacus erythrinus muratl Delacour, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 47, p. 20, 
1926 (Noug-Het, Laos). 

One adult male, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, Sep- 
tember. 

As this specimen was unlike any species of the genus known to me 
from China, I took it to be an unnamed form and forwarded it to 
Outram Bangs for his opinion. He has identified it as above and 
writes : " Your bird is just completing its autumnal molt. It is 
rather darker above than the run of the series and the back feathers 
have rather less brownish edges. All this may be due to the freshness 
of the plumage or it may not." 

He also says that the Museum of Comparative Zoology has a series 
from southern Yunnan (Mengtsz). It apparently is only a winter 
visitor to southern Yunnan and Laos. Where it breeds is apparently 
unknown. The present record is the farthest north point from which 
it has been taken, so far as I am aware, and would seem to point to a 
breeding range in eastern Tibet or the high mountains of western 
Szechwan. 

This bird is so very different from Carpodacus erythrinus or any 
of its known forms that I am of the opinion that it is really not a 
race of that species at all but a distinct species. In G. murati the 
pileum is near acajou red and the throat alizarine pink, while in G. 
erythr^inus roseatus the pileum and throat are near spectrum red ; the 
two birds are of about the same size, however. The above specimen 
of G. 77iurati measures : Wing, 81 ; tail, 52 ; culmen, 12 mm. 

It seems to me that the type of Garpodacus laetissimus Walton^* 
from Chaksam, Tibet, should be compared with the present species. 

233. CARPODACUS EOS (Stresemann) 

Erythrina eos Steesemann, Orn. Monatsb., vol. 38, p. 75, 1930 (Suugpan, 
Szechwan). 

Three males and five females from southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Mitzuga, 14,500 feet, Muli, June; Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 13,000 
feet, July; Mount Konka, 15,700-16,000 feet, August; Shelan, 13,400 
feet, Muli, April ; Mundon, 13,000 feet. May ; Chiichulongba Valley, 
north of Tanku, 13,000-14,000 feet, no date). 

The wings of the three males measure 75, 75, and 75.5 mm.; the 
five females, 71.5, 72, 73, 73.5, and 73.5. The females of the present 
species and the same sex of G. argyrophrys are extremely hard to 
oifferentiate, and for the present their identification will have to de- 
pend upon size. The five females identified above as this species are 
certainly lighter below and less heavily streaked than the females 

«Bul]. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 3 5, p. 93, 1005. 



76 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol.80 

listed as G. argyrophrys, but whether these differences would hold in 
a larger series is problematical. 

234. CARPODACUS ARGYROPHRYS Berlioz 

Carpodacus argyrophrys Berlioz, Bull. Mus. Paris, ser. 2, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 131, 
1929 (new name for Carpodacus davidianus Authors, not Milne-Edwards). 

Three males and six females from southwest Szechwan (forests of 
Djishigotong, 12,500-13,000 feet, northeast of Muli, July; valley of 
the Yalung River above Reddo, 11,000 feet, July ; forests of Bonti, 
east of Waerhdje, 13,000 feet, July ; Raronki, Shouchu Basin, north 
of Muli, August; Yulonghsi Valley, 13,000-16,000 feet, May); one 
female, Yunnan (Mbayiwua, Yangtze loop, 10,000 feet, April). 

Bangs and Peters ^^ have recently given the differential characters 
between the present species and G arpodacus pulcherrimus {eos Strese- 
mann), so they need not be repeated here. The wings of the three 
males measure 82-85 (83.7) mm.; the seven females, 80.5-83.5 (82), 

235. CARPODACUS THURA FEMININUS Rippon 

Carpodacus fcmininus Rippon, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 19, p. 31, 1906 
(Yangtze River, west Yunnan). 

Twenty-one males and nineteen females from southwest Szechwan 
(mountains of Kulu, 11,000-13,000 feet, December and April; Muli 
Mountains, 10,000 feet. May; Mount Gibboh, 13,000 feet, Muli, May; 
Mount Mitzuga, 13,000-15,500 feet, Muli, June ; back of Mount Mit- 
zuga, 14,500 feet, June; Mount Konka, 15,600-16,500 feet, June; 
Watogomba, Yalung watershed, 12,500 feet, July; Djishigotong, 
12,500-13,500 feet, northeast of Muli, July; Chide, 14,500 feet, north- 
east of Muli, July; Bonti, east of Waerhdje, 12,500 feet, July; Rona- 
pieji, Shouchu Basin, north of Muli, August; Raronki, Shouchu 
Basin, 12,600 feet, north of Muli, August; Shelan, Muli, 13,400 feet, 
April; Aloching, north of Kulu, Muli, 12,500-13,500 feet, April; 
Briiolokong Valley, north of the Druduron Pass, 13,000-15,900 feet, 
May ; Shangentze, base of Druduron Pass, 14,500 feet. May ; Yanwe- 
kong Valley, north of the Wanzanron Pass, 10,000-12,000 feet, May) ; 
one male and one female, Likiang Mountains, 11,000 feet, Yunnan, 
January. 

Three males from Kansu are lighter above and smaller than speci- 
mens from the mountains farther south. With more ample material 
than available when the Yunnan collection of Doctor Rock was 
worked up,*" I now think that the breeding bird of western Szechwan 
as far north as Sungpan will have to be assigned to the southern 
form. The 3 males from Kansu have wings 80-82 (81.3) mm.; 6 

5= Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 68, p. 374, 1928. 

^ Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 57, 1926. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FEOM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA EILEY 77 

males from western Szechwan (near Tatsienlu, 2; Sungpan, 4), 
84^86.5 (85.5) ; 18 males from southwest Szechwan (Muli or vicin- 
ity), 83-90 (86). 

This brings up a complication in the name for the southern form, 
for Oustalet named Garpodacus duhius var. minor from Rata, Tibet, 
and Tatsienlu, Szechwan.^^ He gives the wing as 83 mm., and it may 
be that his type was only a migrant from farther north. 

Males taken in winter are more of an old rose below without the 
carmine wash observable in breeding males, and the silvery pink shaft 
lines of the throat become much reduced by wear until they almost 
entirely disappear in July birds. This makes it necessary to use 
specimens taken at approximately the same season or in the same 
state of wear when comparing the various supposed geographic 
forms. 

236. CARPODACUS EDWARDSII SATURATUS Blanford 

Carpodacus saturatus Blanford, Jouru, Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 41, pt. 2, p. 168, 
pi. 8, 1872 (Tonglu). 

One adult female, mountains of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, 
Yunnan, November-December. 

In a former paper *^ an unsexed specimen from the Tseh Chung 
Mountains, Mekong Valley, Yunnan, was referred doubtfully to 
Oarpodacus ripponi {=^verreauxli) ', this was a mistake. It is a 
female of the present form. 

237. CARPODACUS RUBICILLOmES RUBICILLOmES Przewalski 

Carpodacus ruhiciUoides Przewalski, Mongol i strana Tangut, vol. 2, 90, pi. 
12, 1876 (mountains of Kansu) ; Rowley's Ornithological miscellany, vol 2, 
p. 299, pi. 54, 1877 (translation). 

Two males and one female, Yulonghsi, 13,000-16,000 feet, May ; one 
female, Minya Mountains, east of Yulonghsi, 14,500 feet, Szechwan, 
no date. 

The above have been compared with a single male from Kansu. 
The Szechwan males have slightly larger bills, and the plumules over 
the nostrils are whitish; the same color as the forehead (pome- 
granate purple) in the Kansu male. 

238. CARPODACUS VERREAUXII (David and Oustalet) 

Propasser verreauxii David and Oustalet, Les oiseaux de la Chine, p. 355, 1877 

( Moupin ) . 
Propasser ripponi Sharpe. Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol, 13, p. 11, 1902 (Gyi-dzin- 

shan, West Yunnan). (See Berlioz, Bull. Mus. Paris, ser. 2, vol. 1, p. 129, 

1929.) 

s'Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, ser. 3, vol. 6, p. 31, 1894. 
88 Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 70, art. 5, p. 58. 1926. 



78 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

One male and two females, Mount Mitzuga, 12,500-13,000 feet, 
Miili, southwest Szechwan, June; one male, Luddii Mountains, 
12,000-13,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, August. 

239, CARPODACUS VINACEUS Verreaux 

Carpodacus vinaceus Verreaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 39, 
1870 (mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

One adult female, forests of Shaya, northeast of Muli, 14,000 feet, 
southwest Szechwan, July; one adult female, Luddii Mountains, 
12,000-18,000 feet, northwest Yunnan, August. 

240. CARPODACUS TRIFASCIATUS Verreaux 

Carpodacus trifasciaius Verreaux, Nouv. Arch. Mus. Paris, vol. 6, Bull., p. 39, 
1870 (mountains of Chinese Tibet). 

One adult male, valley of Shenla, Kulu-Djago, 12,000 feet, south- 
west Szechwan, December. 

241. PYRRHOSPIZA PUNICEA SZETSCHUANA Bianchi 

Pyrrhospisa pnnieea szetschuana Bianchi, Bull. Acad. Sci. St. Petersburg, 
1907, no. 6, p. 189 (southeast Kansu and northern Szechwan). 

Thirteen males and twelve females from southwest Szechwan 
(Mount Mitzuga, 15,200-15,600 feet, Muli, June; Mount Konka, 
16,000-16,500 feet, Muli, June; Mount Gibboh, 13,000-14,000 feet, 
Muli, April ; Briiolo-kong Vallej' , north of Druduron Pass, 13,000- 
15,900 feet, May; Yankongran Pass, 15,500 feet, Muli, May; Chip- 
rinla, 16,500 feet, July; Chengtze, 14,500-15,900 feet. May). 

This series is being assigned to the above race upon geographic 
grounds. I have been able to compare it with Pyrrhospiza punicea 
hii/mii from Kashmir and East Turkestan, from which it differs in 
being much darker above; the red below and on the rump deeper 
and more brilliant; and the bill is longer. Nine males from south- 
west Szechwan measure: Wing, 112-119 (115.7); culmen, 17.5-19.5 
(18.3) mm. The 10 females: Wing, 104.5-112.5 (109.4); culmen, 
18-19 (18.4) mm. This is a considerably longer culmen than Stuart 
Baker gives for Pyrrhospisa punicea pimicea from Nepal, etc. Pyr- 
rhospiza punicea longlrostrls was described from northwestern 
Kansu, the only definite locality mentioned in the translation of 
Przewalski *^ is Gadjur, a mountain near the Tatung, northeast of 
Sining. Bianchi"" confines its range to the mountains of northeast- 
ern Tibet and the Sining Mountains, eastern Nanshan (Tetung 
Mountains). Pyrrhospiza punicea szefschuana was described from 
southeastern Kansu and northern Szechwan, but the only definite 

■» Rowley, Ornithological Miscellany, vol. 2, d. 304, 1877. 
o^Bull. Acad. Sci. St. Petersburg, no. 6, p. 191, 1907, 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 79 

locality mentioned for Szechwan is Shih-nan-n'ei-wo, near Lungan. 
From descriptions alone, longirostrls and szetschuana must be very 
similar. The present series was taken a long way south of the known 
range of szetschuana and it may not represent the race at all, but 
only a direct comparison can decide ; something I am unable to do at 
present. 

The Stotzner Expedition brought back five specimens of this race 
from Szechwan, but Jacobi,^^ who reported upon the sparrows, does 
not seem to have been able to make a direct comparison with Pyrrho- 
spiza punicea and recognizes no races at all. His measurements of 
the culmen of his specimens are smaller than those I obtain for the 
series before me. 

242. PROPYRRHULA SUBHIMACHALA INTENSIOR Rothschild 

PropyrrhuUi subhhnacJiala intcnsior Rothschild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, 
p. 12, 1922 (Likiaug Range, Yunuau). 

One male and one female from northwest Yunnan (Fungkou, 
Yangtze Gorge, 6,500 feet. May ; and Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, 
Januar3^-February) ; two females from southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Konka, 15,000 feet, Muli, June; Mount Gibboh, 13,000-14,000 feet, 
Muli, April). 

243, LOXIA CURVIROSTRA HIMALAYENSIS Blyth 

Lo-iia MmalayensU Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 13, p. 952, 1S44 
(Nepal). 

Seven males, five females, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan 
(Likiang Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February ; and Ndamucho, 
Yangtze-Mekong Divide, 14,000 feet, October) ; five males and three 
females, Barongomba, one day east of Baurong, 11,000-12,000 feet, 
Szechwan, no date. 

Nine males measure : Wing, 85.5-90 (87.9) ; culmen, 15-17.5 
(16.4) mm. Three females measure: Wing, 84—85.5 (84.7); culmen, 
15-16.5 (16). The male and female from Ndamucho are smaller than 
the average in the series measured above. The male measures : Wing, 
82; culmen, 15.5; the female: wing, 80; culmen, 14.5. Crossbills are 
known to vary considerably in size. Whether the two mentioned 
represent individual variation or a local race can not be decided at 
present with the material available. 

244. PYRRHULA ERITHACA ALTERA Rippon 

PytThula altera Rippon, Bull. Biit. Orn. Club, vol. 19, p. 19, 1906 (Shayang, 
west Yunnan). 

Three males and one female from southwest Szechwan (Mount 
Mitzuga, 10,000-13,000 feet, Muli, June; Zimi Valley, 15,000 feet, 

M Abh. Ber. Mus. Dresden, vol. 16. no. 1, p. 29, 1923. 



80 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol.80 

west of Waerhdje, August) ; one male and one female, Likiang 
Mountains, 12,500 feet, Yunnan, January. 

245. LEUCOSTICTE WALTERI (Hartert) 

MontifringiUa Jyrandti walteri Habtert, Die Vogel der palaarktischen Fauna, 
vol. 1, Heft 2, p. 138, 1904 (Sungpan, Szechwan). 

Five males and seven females, Jesila (three days' trip south of 
Tatsienlu) 15,600-16,330 feet. May; two males and seven females, 
Mount Konka, 16,000-17,000 feet, June, Szechwan. 

This is not a typical member of the genus Leucosticte Swainson. 
The nasal plumules are not so dense or do not cover the nostrils so 
thoroughly. It has the same long wing tip, emarginated tail, and 
other characters of the genus, however. 

Hellmayr,^- the latest author to review the races of Leucosticte 
hrandti^ makes the present bird only a race of that species, but it 
is so much darker in every way that, it seems to me, to make it a form 
of that species is to obscure these great differences; the rosy margins 
to the rump feathers in walteri are much reduced. 

Mount Konka seems to be the most southern locality from which 
the species has been reported so far. The United States National 
]\Iuseum also has a series from the vicinity of Tatsienlu collected by 
the Rev. David C. Graham. The two series are essentially alike. 

246. FRINGALAUDA NEMORICOLA NEMORICOLA Hodgson 

Fringalauda nemoricoJa Hodgson, Asiat. Res., vol. 19, p. 158, 1836 (Nepal). 

Two males. Mount Mitzuga, 14,500 feet, Muli, June; one male 
and two females, Mount Konka, 16,500 feet, June; two males, 
Mutirong, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, April ; three males and two females, 
Yulonghsi, 13,000-16,000 feet. May; one female and one unsexed, 
south base of the Druduron Pass, 14,500 feet, May; two females, 
Minya Mountains, 14,500 feet, no date; all the above localities in 
western Szechwan. 

All have the streaked heads of the adult plumage. 

247. SPINUS AMBIGUUS (Oustalet) 

Chrysomitris ambigua Oustalet, Bull. Mus. Paris, vol. 2, p. 186, 1896 (Yunnan). 

Thirteen adults, both sexes, from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, January-February, September, October, and November) ; 
one immature male in the streaked plumage from southwest Szech- 
wan (Noon forests, 10,500 feet, east of Muli, August). 

•2 Field Mus. Nat. Hist. Publ. 263, Zool. Ser., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 51-57, 1929. 



ART. 7 BIRDS FROM YUNNAN" AND SZECHWAN, CHINA RILEY 81 

248. EMBERIZA ELEGANS ELEGANTULA Swinhoe 

Eniberiza elegantvla Swinhoe, Proc. Zool, Soc. London, 1870, p. 134 (near 
Kweichow, Hupeh). 

One female, Mount Gibboh, Muli, 13,000 feet, August; two males, 
Likiang Mountains, 11,000 feet, January; and one female, Fucliuan- 
shan, 10,000-12,000, Yunnan, September. 

249. EMBERIZA PUSILLA Pallas 

Eniberiza pusilla Pallas, Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russischen 
Reichs, vol. 3, p. G97, 1776 (Daurian Alps). 

One male, one female, and one unsexed, Likiang Mountains, 10,000 
feet, January-February; one male and one female, Weihsi, 8,000- 
9,000 feet, September; one male and one female, Ndamucho, Yangtze- 
Mekong Divide, 11,000 and 14,000 feet, October; all in Yunnan. 

250. EMBERIZA SPODOCEPHALA MELANOPS Blyth 

Emberiza melanops Blyth, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, vol. 14, p. 554, 1845 
(Tipperah, India). 

One male, Weihsi, 8,000-9,000 feet, Yunnan, September. 

251. EMBERIZA FUCATA ARCUATA Sharpe 

Emberiza arcuata Shaepe, Catalogue of birds in the British Museum, vol. 12, 
p. 494, 1888 (Himalayas). 

One male and one unsexed, Weihsi, 8,0CK3-9,000 feet, September. 

252. EMBERIZA GODLEWSKII YUNNANENSIS Sharpe 

Emberiza yunnanensis Sharpe, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 13, p. 12, 1902 (Gyi- 
dzin-shan, west Yunnan). 

Six males, one female, and one unsexed, northwest Yunnan (Liki- 
ang Mountains, 10,000-11,000 feet, January-February, and moun- 
tains of Yungning, 12,000-13,000 feet, November-December) ; four 
males, three females, and one immature female, southwest Szechwan 
(Muli Mountains, 10,000 feet. May ; Shouchu River, Muli, 8,500 feet, 
June; forests of Raronki, 12,500 feet, north of Muli, August; Muti- 
rong, Yalung Gorge, 7,000-7,800 feet, Muli, April; Yanwekong, 
10,700 feet. May). 

All these belong to the dark southern race. 

253. FRINGILLA MONTIFRINGILLA Linnaeus 

Fringilla montifringiUa Linnaetjs, Systema naturae, ed. 10, p. 179, 1758 (Swe- 
den ) . 

Four males and two females from northwest Yunnan (Likiang 
Mountains, 10,000 feet, January-February ; mountains of Yungning, 
12,000-13,000 feet, November-December). 
70403—31 6 



82 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vul. SO : art. 7 

254. PASSER RUTILANS INTENSIOR Rothschild 

Passer rutilans intensior Rothschild, Bull. Brit. Orn. Club, vol. 43, p. 11, 1922 
(Mekong Valley, Yunnan). 

Three males and one female, Yunnan (forests of GoAva, 10,000 
feet, May; Ndamucho, Yangtze-Mekong Divide, 14,000 feet, Octo- 
ber) ; three males, southwest Szechwan (mountains of Djago, 10,800 
feet, Muli, June; Mutirong, Yalung Gorge, 7,000-7.800 feet, Muli, 
April; Baurong, 7,600 feet, July). 



INDEX 



Abrornis acantliizoides, 62. 

armandi, 64. 
Acanthiza trochiloides, 64. 
acanthizoides, Abrornis, 62. 

Horornis acanthizoides, 62. 
Acanthopneuste trochiloides claudiae, 

64. 
Accentor immaculatus, 50. 

multistriatus, 50. 
Accentors, 49. 
Accipiter melanoschistus, 8. 

nisus melanoschistus, 8. 

nisus nisosimilis, 8. 
Accipitridae, 8. 
Acredula bonvaloti, 29. 
Acridotheres tristis tristis, 73. 
Actitis hypoleucos, 13. 
acuta, Anas, 7. 

Dafila acuta, 7. 
Aegithaliscus bonvaloti, 29. 

concinnus talifuensis, 29. 
Aegithalos glaucogularis glaucogularis, 
29. 

glaucogularis vinacea, 28. 
aemodium, Conostoma aemodium, 27. 
aemodius, Conostoma, 27. 

Parus, 30. 

Periparus ater, 30. 
Aethopyga dabryii dabryii, 73. 
affinis, Hesperiphona, 74. 

Motacilla, 63. 

Perissospiza, 74. 

Phaeorhadina, 63. 
Agrodroma godlewskii, 70. 
Alauda arvensis weigoldi, 24. 

dukhunensis, 24. 

coelivox, 24. 

gulgula coelivox, 24. 
Alaudidae, 23. 
albicilla, Muscicapa, 68. 

Siphia parva, 68. 
albicollis, Rhipidura albcollis, 69. 

Platyrhyuchus, 69. 
albogularis, Garrulax albogularis, 34. 
alboides, Motacilla, 71. 

Motacilla lugubris, 71. 
albosuperciliaris, Dryonastes sannio, 

35. 
Alcedinidae, 19. 
Alcedo atthis bengalensis, 20. 

bengalensis, 20. 

pileata, 19. 
Alcippe fratercula yunnanensis, 41. 

genestieri, 42. 
Alcippornis nipalensis yunnanensis, 41. 
AUotrius xanthochloris var. pallidus, 

44. 
altera, Pyrrhula, 79. 

Pyrrhula erithaca, 79. 



ambigua, Chrysomitris, 80. 
ambiguus, Spinus, 80. 
amherstiae, Chrysolophus, 12. 

Phasianus, 12. 
ampelina, Yuhina, 46. 
Anas acuta, 7. 

crecca, 8. 

ferruginea, 7. 

nyroca, 7. 

platyrhyncha platyrhyncha, 8. 

platyrhynchos, 8. 

querquedula, 7. 
Anatidae, 7. 

Anorthura talifuensis, 49. 
Anthus hodgsoni, 69. 

hodgsoni berezowskii, 70. 

hodgsoni yunnanensis, 70. 

pratensis japonicus, 69. 

richardi godlewskii, 70. 

richardi richardi, 70. 

roseatus, 70. 

spinoletta japonicus, 69. 
arcuata, Emberiza, 81. 

Emberiza fucata, 81. 
Ardea nigra, 7. 
Ardeidae, 6. 
Ardeola bacchus, 6. 
argyrophrys, Carpodacus, 75, 76. 
armandi, Abrornis, 64. 

Oreopneuste, 64. 
artatus, Parus major, 31. 
astigma, Muscicapula superciliaris, 68. 
atrogularis, Turdus, 59. 
auroreus, Phoenicurus, 56. 
austrina, Columba rupestris, 3, 15. 

Babax lanceolatus lanceolatus, 34. 

lanceolatus bonvaloti, 34. 
Babbling thrushes, 33. 
bacchus, Ardeola, 6. 

Buphus, 6. 
bakeri, Cuculus canorus, 16, 17. 

Pomatorhinus ruficoUis, 37. 
bambuseti, Conostoma aemodium, 27. 
beavani, Lophophanes, 29. 

Periparus rufonuchalis, 29. 
beicki, Cinclus cinclus, 47. 

Phoenicurus schisticeps, 57. 

Prunella rubeculoides, 50. 
bengalensis, Alcedo, 20. 

Alcedo atthis, 20. 
berezowskii, Anthus hodsoni, 70. 
berthemyi, Dryonastes, 35, 36. 
bieti, Fulvetta vinipecta, 40, 41. 

lanthocincla, 33. 
blythi, Trochalopteron affinis, 38. 
bonvaloti, Acredula, 29. 

Aegithaliscus, 29. 

Babax lanceolatus, 34. 

83 



84 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 8 



Bradypterus phoenicuroides, 54. 
brandti, Leucosticte, 80. 
brevirostris, Chibia, 25. 

Chibia liottentota, 25. 
brunnea, Larvivora, 53. 

Larvivora brunnea, 53. 
Bubulcus ibis coromandus, 7. 
Budytes citreola calcarata, 71. 

citreola citreola, 71. 

citreola weigoldi, 71. 
Bulbuls, 46. 
Buphus bacchus, 6. 

Cacomantis merulinus querulus, 17. 

querulus, 17. 
caeruleus, Myophonus caeruleus, 52. 
Calamanthella tinnabulans, 61. 
Calandrella bracliydactyla dukhunen- 

sis, 24. 
calcarata, Budytes citreola, 71. 
Calliope tschebaiewi, 59. 
calochrysea, Culicicapa ceylonensis, 66. 
Campephagidae, 25. 
canaster, Suthora unicolor, 27. 
Cancroma coromanda, 7. 
canifrons, Spizixos, 47. 
Capella solitaria, 14. 
carnipes, Coccothraustes, 74. 

Mycerobas, 74. 
Carpodacus argyrophrys, 75, 76. 

davidianus, 76. 

dubius var. minor, 77. 

edwardsii saturatus, 77. 

eos, 75. 

erythrinus, 75. 

erythrinus murati, 75. 

erythrinus roseatus, 75. 

femininus, 76. 

laetissimus, 75. 

murati, 75. 

pulcherrimus, 76. 

ripponi, 77. 

rubicilloides, 77. 

rubicilloides rubicilloides, 77. 

saturatus, 77. 

thura femininus, 76. 

trifasciatus, 78. 

verreauxii, 77. 

vinaceus, 78. 
Casarca ferruginea, 7. 
cashmeriensis, Cinclus cinclus, 47. 

Delichon, 24. 

Delichon urbica, 24. 
caspica, Motacilla cinerea, 71. 
caspicus, Parus, 71. 
castaneus, Turdus, 60. 
catharia, Prinia, 61. 

Suya crinigera, 61. 
caudacutus, Hirundapus, 19. 
Cerchneis tinnunculus interstinctus, 8, 
9. 

tinnunculus saturatus, 9, 
Certhia familiaris khamensis, 33. 

himalayana yunnanensis, 32. 

khamensis, 33. 

yunnanensis, 32. 
Certhiidae, 32. 



cerviniventris, Digenea, 68. 

Digenea tricolor, 68. 
Chaetura nudipes, 19. 
Chaimarrhornis leucocephala, 56. 
Chalcites maculatus maculatus, 18, 
Charadriidae, 13. 
Charadrius dubius, 13. 

dubius dubius, 13. 

fulvus, 13. 

placidus, 13. 
Chelidorynx hypoxantha, 68. 
Chibia brevirostris, 25. 

hottentota brevirostris, 25. 
Chrysolophus amherstiae, 12. 
Chrysomitris ambigua, 80. 
chrysotis, Lioparus, 41. 
Cichloselys sibiricus sibiricus, 59. 
Ciconia nigra, 7. 
Ciconiidae, 7. 
Cinclidae, 47. 
Cinclus cinclus beicki, 47. 

cinclus cashmeriensis, 47. 

cinclus szetschwanensis, 48. 

pallasii souliei, 47. 

pallasii var. souliei, 47. 
Cisticola juncidis cursitans, 61. 
citreola, Budytes citreola, 71. 

Motacilla, 71. 
clarkei, Ithaginis, 10. 

Ithaginis cruentus, 10. 
claudiae, Acanthopneuste trochiloides, 
64. 

Phylloscopus reguloides, 64. 
clementii, lyngipicus pygmaeus, 22. 

Yungipicus scintilliceps, 22. 
Coccothraustes carnipes, 74. 

melanoxanthus, 74. 
coelicolor, Grandala, 53. 
coelivox, Alauda, 24. 

Alauda gulgula, 24. 
Collocalia inopina pellos, 19. 

lowi pellos, 19. 
Collurio tephronotus, 72. 
Coloeus dauuricus khamensis, 26. 

fuscicollis, 26. 
Columba hodgsonii, 15. 

humilis, 15. 

leuconota gradaria, 15. 

leucozonura, 16. 

rupestris austrina, 3,15. 

rupestris rupestris, 16. 

taczanowskii, 16. 
Columbidae, 14. 
Colymbidae, 6. 
Conostoma aemodium aemodium, 27. 

aemodium bambuseti, 27. 

aemodius, 27. 
Cormorants, 6. 
coromanda, Cancroma, 7. 
coromandus, Bubulcus ibis, 7. 
Corvidae, 25. 
Corvus erythrorhynchus, 26. 

fuscicollis, 26. 

neglectus, 26. 
Cranes, 12. 
crecca. Anas, 8. 

Nettion crecca. 



ABT. 7 



INDEX 



85 



Creepers, 32. 

Crossoptilon crossoptilon, 12. 

drouynii, 12. 
Crows, 25. 
Cryptolopha burkii distincta, 62. 

burkii valentini, 63. 

dejeani, 61. 
Cuckoos, 16. 
Cuckoo-shrikes, 25. 
Cuculidae, 16. 
Cuculus canorus bakeri, 16,17. 

canorus telephonus, 17. 

optatus, 16, 17. 

sparverioides, 17. 
Culicicapa ceylonensis calochrysea, 66. 

ceylonensis orientalis, 66. 
cursitans, Cisticola juncidis, 61. 

Prinia, 61. 
cyanophrys, Suthora fulvifrons, 28. 
Cj'ornis rubeculoides glaucicomans, 66. 

tickelliae glaucicomans, 66. 

dabryii, Aethopyga dabryii, 73. 

Nectarinia, 73. 
Dafila acuta acuta, 7. 
darjellensis, Dryobates, 21. 
davidianus, Carpodacus, 76. 
dedekensi, Pomatorhinus erythrogenys, 
37. 

Pomatorhinus macclellandi var., 
37. 
dejeani, Cryptolopha, 61. 

Oligura castaneocoronata, 61. 

Parus, 30. 

Penthestes palustris, 30. 
Delichon cashmeriensis, 24. 

urbica cashmeriensis, 24. 
denotata, Niltava sundara, 67. 
derbiana, Palaeornis, 18. 

Psittacula, 18. 
desgodinsi, Lioptila, 43. 

Sibia, 43. 
desmursi, Dryobates darjellensis, 21. 
diademata, Yuhina, 45. 

Yuhina diademata, 45. 
Dicaeidae, 73. 

Dicaeum ignipectum ignipectum, 73. 
Dicruridae, 25. 
Dicrurus leucophaeus nigrescens, 25. 

nigrescens, 25. 
Digenea cerviniventris, 68. 

tricolor cerviniventris, 68. 
Dippers, 47. 

distincta, Cryptolopha burkii, 62. 
distinctus Seicirus burkii, 62. 
Doves, 14. 
Drongos, 25. 

drouynii, Crossoptilon, 12. 
Dryobates darjellensis, 21. 

darjellensis desmursi, 21. 

major stresemanni, 21. 

pygmaeus omissus, 22. 

semicoronatus szetschuanensis, 22. 
Dryocopus forresti, 20. 



Dryonastes albosuperciliaris, 35. 

berthemyi, 35, 36. 

berthemyi ricinus, 3, 35. 

poecilorhynchus, 36. 

sannio, 35. 
dubius, Charadrius, 13. 

Charadrius dubius, 13. 
Ducks, 7. 
dukhunensis, Alauda, 24. 

Calandrella brachydactyla, 24. 
Dumeticola thoracica thoracica, 62. 

eidos, Pomatorhinus ruficollis, 36. 
elegans, Phasianus, 12. 

Phasianus colchicus, 12. 
elegantula, Emberiza, 81. 

Emberiza elegans, 81. 
elliotii, Trochalopteron, 37. 

Trochalopteron elliotii, 37. 
Emberiza arcuata, 81. 

elegans elegantula, 81. 

elegantula, 81. 

fucata arcuata, 81. 

godlewskii yunnanensis, 81. 

melanops, 81. 

pusilla, 81. 

spodocephala melanops, 81. 

yunnanensis, 81. 
Enicrurus leschenaulti sinensis, 72. 

sinensis, 72. 
Enicuridae, 72. 
eos, Carpodacus, 75. 

Erythrina, 75. 
eous, Garrulax albogularis, 3, 34. 
Erythrina eos, 75. 
erythrinus, Carpodacus, 75. 
erythrorhyncha, Urocissa erythrorhyn- 

cha, 26. 
erythrorhynchus, Corvus, 26. 
ethologus, Pericrocotus brevirostris, 25. 
eugenei, Myiophoneus, 52. 

Myophonus, 52. 
eunomus, Turdus, 59. 
Eumyias thalassina thalassina, 66. 
eurhinus, Totanus totanus, 13. 
exyunnanensis, Garrulax elliotii, 38. 

Falco aesalon lymani, 9. 

interstinctus, 8. 

nisosimilis, 8. 

regulus lymani, 9. 

saturatus, 9. 
Falconidae, 8. 
Falcons, 8. 
femininus, Carpodacus, 76. 

Carpodacus thura, 76. 
ferruginea. Anas, 7. 

Casarca, 7. 

Hemichelidon, 69. 
finschi, Palaeornis, 18. 

Psittacula schisticeps, 18. 
florentes, Grandala coelicolor, 52, 53. 
Flower-peckers, 73. 
Flycatchers, 66. 



86 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



Fork-tails, 72. 

formaster, Heteroxenicus cruralis, 51, 52 

forresti, Dryocopus, 20. 

Fulvetta chrysotis, 41. 

Lioparus swinhoii, 41. 

Reguloides proregulus, 65. 

Streptopelia chinensis, 15. 

Thriponax, 20. 
Fregilus himalayaiuis, 26. 
Fringalauda nemoricola, 80. 

nemoricola nemoricola, 80. 
Fringilla montifringilla, 81. 
Fringillidae, 74. 
frontalis, Phoenicura, 57. 

Phoenicurus, 57. 
fuliginosa, Phoenicura, 55. 

Ryacornis fuliginosa, 55. 
fuligula, Nyroca, 7. 
Fulvetta chrysotis forresti, 41. 

insperata, 3, 39. 

manipurensis, 40. 

ruficapilla, 40. 

ruficapilla sordidior, 39, 40. 

striaticoUis yunnanensis, 39. 

vinipecta bieti, 40, 41. 

vinipecta vinipecta, 40, 41. 
fulvifrons, Suthora fulvifrons, 28. 
fulvus, Charadrius, 13. 

Pluvialis dominicus, 13. 
funebris, Picoides, 20. 
fusca, Prunella rudeculoides, 50. 
fuscata, Phaeorhadina fuscata, 63. 
fuscicollis, Coloeus, 26. 

Corvus, 26. 

Gallinago solitaria, 14. 

Garrulax albogularis albogular's, 34. 

albogularis eous, 3, 34. 

albogularis laetus, 35. 

elliotii exyunnanensis, 38. 
Garrulus bispecularis sinensis, 26. 

sinensis, 26. 
Gecinus sordidior, 23. 
genestieri, Alcippe, 42. 

Schoeniparus dubius, 42. 
geoffroyi, Ithaginis, 10. 

Ithaginis cruentus, 10. 
giganteus, Lanius, 72. 

Lanius sphenocercus, 72. 
glareola, Rhyacophilus, 14. 

Tringa, 14. 
glaucicomans, Cyornis rubeculoides, 66. 

Cyornis tickelliae, 66. 
glaucogularis, Aegithalos glaucogularis, 

29. 
godlewskii, Agrodroma, 70. 

Anthus richardi, 70. 
gouldii, Turdus, 60. 
gradaria, Columba leuconota, 15. 
Grandala ooelicolor, 53. 

coelicolor florentes, 52, 53. 
grandis, Phoenicurus erythrogaster, 56. 
Grebes, 6. 

griseotincta, Yuhina gularis, 45. 
Grouse, 9. 
Gruidae, 12. 
Grus nigricoUis, 12. 
GuUs, 14. 



Halcyon pileata, 19. 
Haliaetus lineatus, 8. 
haringtoni, Oreicola ferrea, 58. 

Rhodophila ferrea, 58. 
Hawks, 8. 

hellmayri, Penthestes palustris, 30. 
Hemichelidon ferruginea, 69. 

sibirica rothschildi, 68. 
henrici, Leptopoecile, 65. 

Tetraogallus, 11. 

Tetraogallus tibetanus, 11. 
Herons, 6. 

Hesperiphona afiinis, 74. 
Heteroxenecus cruralis formaster, 51, 52. 

cruralis laurentei, 51. 

sinensis, 51, 52. 
Hierococcyx sparverioides, 17. 
himalayanus, Fregilus, 26. 

Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax, 26. 
himalayensis, Loxia, 79. 

Loxia curvirostra, 79. 
Hirundapus caudacutus, 19. 

nudipes, 19. 
Hirundinidae, 24. 
Hirundo pacifica, 19. 

rupestris, 24. 
hodgsoni, Anthus, 69. 

Phoenicurus, 57. 

Poliomyias, 68. 

Ruticilla, 57. 

Siphia, 68. 
hodgsonii, Columba, 15. 
Hodgsonius phoenicuroides phoeni- 

curoides, 54. 
Horeites brunnifrons umbraticus, 62. 
Horornis acanthizoides acanthizoides, 
62. 

major, 62. 
humii, Pyrrhospiza punicea, 78. 
humilis, Columba, 15. 

Oenopopelia tranquebarica, 15. 
hyperythrus, Picus, 21. 

Hypopicus hyperythrus, 21. 
hypoleucos, Actitis, 13. 

Tringa, 13. 
Hypopicus hyperythrus hyperythrus, 
21. 

hyperythrus subrufinus, 21. 
hypoxantha, Chelidorynx, 68. 

Rhipidura, 68. 

lanthia indica indica, 54. 

indica j'unnanensis, 54. 

practica, 53. 

rufilata practica, 53. 
lanthocincla bieti, 33. 

maxima, 33. 
ignipectum, Dicaeura ignipectum, 73. 
ignipectus, Myzanthe, 73. 
ignotincta, Minla ignotincta, 44. 
immaculata, Prunella, 50. 
immaculatus, Accentor, 50. 
immansuetus, Myophonus caeruleus, 

52. 
indica, lanthia indica, 54. 
insperata, Fulvetta, 3, 39. 
intensicolor, Procarduelis nipalensis, 74 



ART. 7 



INDEX 



87 



intensior, Passer rutilans, 82. 

Propyrrhula subhimachala, 79. 
intermedia, Yuhina nigrimentum, 45. 
intermedius, Schoeuiparus, 42. 
interstinctus, Cerchneis tinnuuculus, 
8,9. 

Falco, 8 
Ithagiuis clarkei, 10. 

cruentus clarkei, 10. 

cruentus geoflfroyi, 10. 

geoffroyi, 10. 

wilsoni, 10. 
lyngipicus pygmaeus clementii, 22. 

japonicus, .\ni,hus pratensis, 69. 

Anthus spinoletta, 69. 
jerdoni, Minla, 43. 

Minla ignotincta, 43. 44. 

kessleri, Merula, 60. 

Turdus, 60. 
khamensis, Certhia, 33. 

Certhia familiaris, 33. 

Coloeus dauuricus, 26. 

Otocoris alpestris, 23. 

Otocorys elwesi, 23. 
Kingfishers, 19. 

laetissimus, Carpodacus, 75. 
laetus, Garrulax albogularis, 35. 
Laiscopus coUaris ripponi, 49. 
lanceolatuE, Babax lanceolatus, 34. 
Laniidae, 72. 
Lanius giganteus, 72. 

sphenocercus giganteus, 72. 

sphenocercus sphenocercus, 72. 

tephronotus, 72. 
Laridae, 14. 
Larks, 23. 
Larus aflBnis taimyrensis, 14. 

fuscus taimyrensis, 14. 

ridibundus sibiricus, 14. 
Larvivora brunnea, 53. 

brunuea brunnea, 53. 
laurentei, Heteroxenicus cruralis, 51. 
Leptopoecile henrici, 65. 

obscura, 65. 

sophiae, 66. 

sophiae obscura, 65. 
Lerwa lerwa lerwa, 11. 

lerwa major, 10. 
leucocephala, Chaimarrhornis, 56. 

Phoenicura, 56. 
leucocephalus^ Microscelis, 46. 

Turdus, 46. 
leucopsis, Motacilla, 71. 

Motacilla lugubris, 71. 
leucopterus, Phoenicurus auroreus, 56. 
Leucosticte brandti, 80. 

waiter i, 80. 
leucozonura, Columba, 16. 
leucura, Muscisylvia, 55. 

Notodela leucura, 55. 
lineatus, Haliaetus, 8. 

Milvus, 8. 



Lioparus chrysotis, 41. 

swinhoii, 41. 

swinhoii forresti, 41. 

swinhoii swinhoii, 41. 
Lioptila desgodiusi, 43. 
Liothrix luteus luteus, 44. 

luteus yunnanensis, 44. 
Localities, list of, 3. 

longirostris, Pyrrhospiza punicea, 78, 79. 
Lophophanes beavani, 29. 

dichrous wellsi, 30. 
Loxia curvirostra himalayensis, 79. 

himalayensis, 79. 
lugubris, Phylloscopus, 64. 
luteus, Liothrix luteus, 44. 
lymani, Falco aesalon, 9. 

Falco regulus, 9. 

macella, Nucifraga caryocatactes, 25. 

Nucifraga hemispila, 25. 
maculatus, Chalcites maculatus, 18. 

Pipastes, 69. 

Trogon, 18. 
magna, Sitta, 32. 
magnirostris, Phylloscopus, 64. 
major, Horornis, 62. 

Lerwa lerwa, 10. 
manipurensis, Fulvetta, 40. 
mariae, Minla ignotincta, 43, 44. 
maxima, lanthocincla, 33. 
maximus, Phoenicurus erythrogaster, 
56. 

Pterorhinus, 33. 
Mecistura vinacea, 28. 
melanops, Emberiza, 81. 

Emberiza spodocephala, 81. 
melanoschistus, Accipiter, 8. 

Accipiter nisus, 8. 
melanoxanthus, Coccothraustes, 74. 

Mycerobas, 74. 
melanozantha, Pachyglossa, 73. 
Mergus merganser orientalis, 7 

orientalis, 7. 
Merula kessleri, 60. 
meyeri, Pucrasia, 11. 
Micropodidae, 19. 
Micropus pacificus pacificus, 19. 
Microscelis leucocephalus, 46. 
Milvus lineatus, 8. 
Minla ignotincta ignotincta, 44. 

ignotincta jerdoni, 43, 44. 

ignotincta mariae, 43, 44. 

ignotincta sini, 44. 

jerdoni, 43. 
minor, Carpodacus dubius var., 77. 
mollissima, Oreocincla mollissima, 59. 
mollissimus, Turdus, 59. 
Monticola solitaria pandoo, 58. 
Montifringilla brandti walteri, 80. 
montifringilla, Fringilla, 81. 
Motacilla affinis, 63. 

alboides, 71. 

cinerea caspica, 71. 

citreola, 71. 

citreola weigoldi, 71. 



88 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



Motacilla, leucopsis, 71. 

lugubris alboides, 71. 

lugubris leucopsis, 71. 

leucopsis, 71. 
Motacillidae, 69. 
Moupinia poecilotis poecilotis, 42. 

poecilotis sordidior, 42. 
multistriata, Prunella strophiata, 50. 
multistriatus. Accentor, 50. 
muraria, Tichodroma, 33. 
murati, Carpodacus, 75. 

Carpodacus erythrinus, 75. 
Muscicapa albicilla, 68. 

thalassina, 66. 
Muscicapidae, 66. 

Muscicapula superciliaris astigma, 68. 
Muscisylvia leucura, 55. 
Mycerobas carnipes, 74. 

melanoxanthus, 74. 
Myiophoneus eugenei, 52. 
Myophonus caeruleus caeruleus, 52. 

caeruleus immansuetus, 52. 

eugenei, 52. 

temminckii, 52. 
Myzanthe ignipectus, 73. 

Nannus troglodytes szetschuanus, 49. 

troglodytes talifuensis, 49. 
nebulosa, Sitta europaea, 32. 

Silta sinensis, 32. 
Nectarinia dabryii, 73. 
Neotariniidae, 73. 
neglectus, Corvus, 26. 
nemoricola, Fringalauda, 80. 

Fringalauda nemoricola, 80. 
Nettion creoca crecca, 8. 
nigra, Ardea, 7. 

Ciconia, 7. 
nigrescens, Dicrurus, 25. 

Dicrurus leucophaeus, 25. 
nigricoUis, Grus, 12. 

Podiceps, 6. 

Proctopus nigricoUis, 6. 
nigrlmentum, Yuhina nigrimentum, 45. 
Niltava sundara denotata, 67. 
nisosimilis, Accipiter nisus, 8. 

Falco, 8. 
Notodela leucura leucura, 55. 
Nucifraga caryocatactes macella, 25. 

hemispila macella, 25. 
nudipes, Chaetura, 19. 

Hirundapus, 19. 
Nuthatches, 31. 
nyroca, Anas, 7. 
Nyroca fuligula, 7. 

nyroca nyroca, 7. 

obscura, Leptopoecile, 65. 

Leptopoecile sophiae, 65. 

Sitta curopoca, 32. 
obscurior, Yuhina occipitahs, 45. 
obscurus, Turdus, 60. 
ochropus, Tringa, 13. 
Oenopopelia tranquebarica humilis, 15. 
Oligura castaneocoronata dejeani, 61. 



olivaceus, Schoeniparus brunneus, 42. 
oraeiensis, Yuhina gularis, 45. 
omissus, Yungipicus scintilliceps, 22. 
optatus, Cuculus, 16, 17. 
Oreicola ferrea haringtoni, 58. 
Oreocincla mollissima moUissima, 59. 
Oreopneuste armandi, 64. 

subafl5nis, 63. 
orientalis, Culicicapa ceylonensis, 66. 

Mergus, 7. 

Mergus merganser, 7. 
Orioles, Old World, 25. 
Oriolidae, 25. 
Oriolus chinensis tenuirostris, 25. 

tenuirostris, 25. 
Ospreys, 8. 
Otocoris alpestris khamensis, 23. 

alpestris przewalskii, 23. 
Otocorys elwesi khamensis, 23. 
oustaleti, Trochalopteron affinis, 38. 

Pachyglossa melanozantha, 73. 
pacifica, Hirundo, 19. 
pacificus, Micropus pacificus, 19. 
Palaeornis derbiana, 18. 

finschi, 18. 
pallidus, AUotrius xanthochloris var., 44. 

Pteruthius xanthochloris, 44. 
pandoo, Monticola solitaria, 58. 

Petrocincla, 58. 
Paradisea tristis, 73. 
Paradoxornithidae, 27. 
Paridae, 28. 
Parrot-biUs, 27. 
Parrots, 18. 
Parus aemodius, 30. 

caspicus, 71. 

dejeani, 30. 

dichrous wellsi, 30. 

major artatus, 31. 

major tibetanus, 31. 

monticolus yunnanensis, 31. 
Passer rutilans intensior, 82. 
Pelecanus sinensis, 6. 
pellos, Collocalia inopina, 19. 

Collocalia lowi, 19. 
Penthestes palustris dejeani, 30. 

palustris hellmayri, 30. 

superciliosa, 31. 
Perdix hodgsoniae sifanica, 9. 

sifanica, 9. 
Pericrocotus brevirostris ethologus, 25. 
Periparus ater aemodius, 30. 

rufinuchalis beavani, 29. 
Perissospiza affinis, 74. 
Petrocincla pandoo, 58. 
Phaeorhadina affinis, 63. 

fuscata fuscata, 63. 

fuscata robusta, 63. 

subaffinis, 63. 
Phalacrocoracidae, 6. 
Phalacrococorax carbo sinensis, 6. 
Phasianidae, 9. 
Phasianus amherstiae, 12. 

colchicus elegans, 12. 
Pheasants, 9. 



AET. 7 



INDEX 



89 



Phoenicura frontalis, 57. 

fuliginosa, 55. 

leucocephala, 56. 
phoenicuroides, Bradypterus, 54. 

Hodgsonius phoenicuroides, 54. 
Phoenicurus auroreus, 56. 

auroreus leucopterus, 56. 

erythrogaster grandis, 56. 

erythrogaster maximus, 56. 

frontalis, 57. 

frontalis sinae, 58. 

hodgsoni, 57. 

schisticeps, 57. 

schisticeps beicki, 57. 
Phylloscopus fuscatus robustus, 63. 

lugubris, 64. 

magnirostris, 64. 

pulcher, 65. 

reguloides claudiae, 64. 

trochiloides, 64. 
Picidae, 20. 
Picoides funebris, 20. 
Picus canus setschuanus, 23. 

canus sordidior, 23. 

hyperythrus, 21. 
pileata, Alcedo, 19. • 

Halcyon, 19. 
Pipastes maculatus, 69. 
Pisobia temminckii, 13. 
placidus, Charadrius, 13. 
platyrhyncha, Anas platyrhyncha, 8. 
platyrhynchos, Anas, 8. 
Platyrhynchus albicollis, 69. 
Plovers,' 13. 

Pluvialis dominicus fulvus, 13. 
Podiceps nigricans poggei, 6. 

nigricollis, 6. 
Poecile superciliosa, 31. 
poecilorhj'nchus, Dryonastes, 36. 
poecilotis, Moupinia poecilotes, 42. 
poggei, Podiceps nigricans, 6. 

Poliocephalus ruficoUis, 6. 
Poliocephalus riificollis poggei, 6. 
Poliomyias hodgsoni, 68. 
Pomatorhinus erythrogenys dedekensi, 
37. 

macclellandi var. dedekensi, 37. 

ruficollis bakeri, 37. 

ruficollis eidos, 36. 

ruficollis similis, 36, 37. 
practica, lanthia, 53. 

lanthia rufilata, 53. 
Pratincola maura var. przewalskii, 58. 

rubicola stejnegeri, 58. 
Prinia catharia, 61. 

cursitans, 61. 
Procarduelis nipalensis intensicolor, 74. 

rubescens saturatior, 74. 
Proctopus nigricollis nigricollis, 6. 
Propasser ripponi, 77. 

verreauxii, 77. 
Propyrrhula subhimachala intensior, 79. 
Prunella collaris ripponi, 49. 

immaculata, 50. 

rubeculoides beicki, 50. 

rubeculoides fusca, 50. 

strophiata multistriata, 50. 



Prunellidae, 49. 

przewalskii, Otocoris alpestris, 23. 

Pratincola maura var., 58. 

Saxicola torquata, 58. 
Psittacidae, 18. 
Psittacula derbiana, 18. 

schisticeps finschi, 18. 
Pterorhinus maximus, 33. 
Pteruthius aeralatus ricketti, 44. 

ricketti, 44. 

xanthochloris pallid us, 44. 
Ptyonoprogne rupestris, 24. 
Pucrasia meyeri, 11. 
pulcher, Phylloscopus, 65. 

Reguloides pulcher, 65. 
pulcherrimus, Carpodacus, 76. 
punicea, Pyrrhospiza punicea, 78. 
pusilla, Emberiza, 81. 
Pycnonotidae, 46. 
Pycnonotus xanthorhous, 47. 
Pvrrhocorax pyrrhocorax himalayanus, 

'26. 
Pyrrhospiza punicea humii, 78. 

punicea longirostris, 78, 79. 

punicea punicea, 78. 

punicea szetschuana, 78, 79. 
Pyrrhula erithaca altera, 79. 

quarta, Yuhina nigrimentum, 45. 
querquedula. Anas, 7. 
Querquedula querquedula, 7. 
querulus, Cacomantis, 17. 

Cacomantis merulinus, 17. 

Reguloides proregulus forresti, 65. 

pulcher pulcher, 65. 

pulcher vegetus, 65. 
Regulus regulus yunnanensis, 65. 
Rhipidura albicollis albicollis, 69. 

hypoxantha, 68. 
Rhodophila ferrea haringtoni, 58. 
Rhyacophilus glareola, 14. 
richardi, Anthus richardi, 70. 
richardsi, Thriponax, 20. 
ricinus, Dryonastes berthemyi, 3, 35. 
ricketti, Pteruthius, 44. 

Pteruthius aeralatus, 44. 

Suthora webbiana, 28. 
ripponi, Carpodacus, 77. 

Laiscopus collaris, 49. 

Propasser, 77. 

Prunella collaris, 49. 
robusta, Phaeorhadina fuscata, 63. 
robustus, Phylloscopus fuscatus, 63. 
rocki, Spelaeornis, 3, 48, 49. 
roseatus, Anthus, 70. 

Carpodacus erythrinus, 75. 
rothschildi, Hemichelidon sibirica, 68. 
rubicilloides, Carpodacus, 77. 

Carpodacus rubicilloides, 77. 
ruficapilla, Fulvetta, 40. 
ruficollis, Turdus, 60. 
rupestris, Columba rupestris, 16. 

Hirundo, 24. 

Ptyonoprogne, 24. 
rusticola, Scolopax, 14. 

Scolopax rusticola, 14. 



90 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. S9 



Ruticilla hodgsoni, 57. 

schisticeps, 57. 
Ryacornis fuliginosa fuliginosa, 55. 

sannio, Dryonastes, 35. 

saturatior, Procarduelis rubescens, 74. 

saturatus, Carpodacus, 77. 

Carpodacus edwardsii, 77. 
Cerchneis tinnunculus, 9. 
Falco, 9. 
Saxicola torquata przewalskii, 58. 

torquata stejnegeri, 58. 
schisticeps, Phoenicurus, 57. 

Ruticilla, 57. 
Schoeniparus brunneus olivaceus, 42. 

dubius genestieri, 42. 

intermedius, 42. 
Scolopacidae, 13. 
Scolopax rusticola, 14. 

rustJcola rusticola, 14. 
secunda, Tetrastes sewerzowi, 9. 
Seicirus burkii distinctus, 62. 

burkii valentini, 63. 
setschuanus. Pious canus, 23. 
Shrikes, 72. 
Sibia desgodinsi, 43. 
sibiricus, Cichloselys sibiricus, 59. 

Larus ridibundus, 14. 

Turdus, 59. 
sifanica, Perdix, 9. 

Perdix hodgsoniae, 9. 
similis, Pomatorhinus ruficollis, 36, 37. 
simplex, Zosterops, 74. 

Zosterops palpebrosa, 74. 
sinae, Phoenicurus frontalis, 58. 
sinensis, Enicurus, 72. 

Enicurus leschenaulti, 72. 

Garrulus, 26. 

Garrulus bispecularis,'i26. 

Heteroxenicus, 51, 52. | 

Pelecanus, 6. 

Phalacrocorax carbo, 6. 
sini, Minla ignotincta, 44. 
Siphia hodgsoni, 68. 

parva albicilla, 68. 

strophiata, 67. 
Sitta europaea nebulosa, 32. 

europaea obscura, 32. 

magna, 32. 

sinensis nebulosa, 32, 

villosa, 32. 

yunnanensis, 31. 
Sittidae, 31. 
Siva cyanouroptera wingatei,'43. 

strigula yunnanensis,'^43. 

wingatei, 43. 
Snipe, 13. 
solitaria, Capella, 14. 

Gallinago, 14. 
sophiae, Leptopoecile, 66, 
sordidior, Fulvetta ruficapilla, 39, 40. 

Gecinus, 23. 

Moupinia poecilotis, 42. 

Picus canus, 23. 

Yuhina gularis, 45. 
souliei, Cinclus pallasii, 47. 

Cinclus pallasii var., 47. 



souliei, Spelaeornis, 48, 49. 
Sparrows, 74. 
sparverioides, Cuculus, 17. 

Hierococcyx, 17. 
Spelaeornis rocki, 3, 48, 49. 

souliei, 48, 49. 
sphenocercus, Lanius sphenocercus, 72. 
Sphenurus sphenurus yunnanensis, 14. 
Spinus ambiguus, 80. 
Spizixos canifrons, 47. 
Starlings, 73. 
stejnegeri, Pratincola rubicola, 58. 

Saxicola torquata, 58. 
Storks, 7. 

Streptopelia chinensis forresti, 15. 
stresemanni, Dryobates major, 21. 
strophiata, Siphia, 67. 
Sturnidae, 73. 
styani, Suthora webbiana, 28. 

Trochalopteron, 39. 
subaffinis, Oreopneuste, 63. 

Phaeorhadina, 63. 
subrufinus, Hypopicus hyperythrus, 21, 
Sun-birds, 73. 
superciliosa, Penthestes, 31. 

• Poecile, 31. 
Suthora fulvifrons cyanophrys, 28. 

fulvifrons fulvifrons, 28. 

unicolor canaster, 27. 

webbiana ricketti, 28. 

webbiana styani, 28. 
Suya crinigera catharia, 61. 

crinigera yunnanensis, 61. 
Swallows, 24. 
Swifts, 19. 
swinhoii, Lioparus, 41. 

Lioparus swinhoii, 41. 
Sylviidae, 61. 

szechenyii, Tetraophasis, 11. 
szetschuana, Pyrrhospiza punicea, 78, 79. 
szetschuanensis, Dryobates semicoro- 

natus, 22. 
szetschuanus, Nannus troglodytes, 49. 
szetschwanensis, Cinclus cinclus, 48. 

taczanowskii, Columba, 16. 
taimyrensis, Larus affinis, 14. 

Larus fuscus, 14. 
talifuensis, Aegithaliscus concinnus, 29. 

Anorthura, 49. 

Nannus troglodytes, 49. 
Tarsiger chrysaeus vitellinus, 55. 

indicus yunnanensis, 54. 
telephonus, Cuculus canorus, 17. 
temminckii, Myophonus, 52. 

Pisobia, 13. 

Tringa, 13. 
tenuirostris, Oriolus, 25. 

Oriolus chinensis, 25. 
tephronotus, CoUurio, 72. 

Lanius, 72. 
Tetraogallus, henrici, 11. 

tibetanus henrici, 11. 

tibetanus tibetanus, 11. 
Tetraonidae, 9. ^ 

Tetraophasis szechenyii, 11. 
Tetrastes sewerzowi secunda, 9. 



ABT. 7 



INDEX 



91 



thalassina, Eumyias thalassina, 66. 

Muscicapa, 66. 
thoracica, Dumeticola thoracica, 62. 
Thriponox forresti, 20. 

richardsi, 20. 
Thrushes, 51. 

babbling, 33. 
tibetaniis, Parus major, 31. 

Tetraogalkis tibetanus, 11. 
Tichodroma muraria, 33. 
Timaliidae, 33. 

tinnabulans, Calamanthella, 61. 
Titmice, 28. 

Totanus totanus eurhinus, 13. 
trifasciatus, Carpodacus, 78. 
Tringa glareola, 14. 

hypoleucos, 13. 

ochropus, 13. 

temminckii, 13. 

vanelkis, 13. 
tristis, Arcidotheres tristis, 73. 

Paradisea, 73. 
Trochalopteron afRnis blythi, 38. 

affinis oustaleti, 38. 

elliotii, 37. 

elliotii elliotii, 37. 

elliotii yunnanense, 38. 

styani, 39. 
trochiloides, Acanthiza, 64. 

Phylloscopus, 64. 
Troglodytidae, 48. 
Trogon maculatus, 18. 
tschebaiewi, Calliope, 59. 
Turdidae, 51. 
Tardus atrogularis, 59. 

castaneus, 60. 

eunomus, 59. 

gouldii, 60. 

kessleri, 60. 

leucocephalus, 46. 

mollissimus, 59. 

obscurus, 60. 

ruficollis, 60. 

sibiricus, 59. 

umbraticus, Horeites brui;inifrons, 62. 
Urocissa erythrorhyncha erythro- 
rhyncha, 26. 

valentini, Cryptolopha burkii, 63. 

Seicirus burkii, 63. 
vanellus, Tringa, 13. 

Vanellus, 13. 
Vanellus vanellus, 13. 
vegetus, Reguloides pulcher, 65. 
verreauxii, Carpodacus, 77. 

Propasser, 77. 
villosa, Sitta, 32. 
vinacea, Aegithalos glaucogularis, 28. 

Mecistura, 28. 



vinaceus, Carpodacus, 78. 
vinipecta, Fulvetta vinipecta, 40, 41. 
vitellinus, Tarsiger chrysaeus, 55. 

walteri, Leucosticte, 80. 

Montifringilla brandti, 80. 
Warblers, Old World, 61. 
weigoldi, Alauda arvensis, 24. 

Budytes citreola, 71. 

Motacilla citreola, 71. 
wellsi, Lophophanes dichrous, 30. 

Parus dichrous, 30. 
White-eyes, 74. 
wilsoni, Ithaginis, 10. 
wingatei, Siva, 43. 

Siva cyanouroptera, 43. 
Woodpeckers, 20. 
Wrens, 48. 

xanthorhous, Pycnonotus, 47. 

yangpiensis, Yuhina gularis, 45. 
Yuhina ampelina, 46. 

diademata, 45. 

diademata diademata, 45. 

gularis griseotincta, 45. 

gularis gularis, 45. 

gularis omeiensis, 45. 

gularis sordidior, 45. 

gularis yangpiensis, 45. 

nigrimentum intermedia, 45. 

nigrimentum nigrimentum, 45. 

nigrimentum quarta, 45. 

occipitalis obscurior, 45. 
Yungipicus scintilliceps clementii, 22. 

scintilliceps omissus, 22. 
yunnanense, Trochalopteron elliotii, 38. 
yunnanensis, Alcippe fratercula, 41. | 

Alcippornis nipalensis, 41. 

Anthus hodgsoni, 70. 

Certhia, 32. 

Certhia himalayana, 32. 

Emberiza, 81. 

Emberiza godlewskii, 81. 

Fulvetta striaticoUis, 39. 

lanthia indica, 54. 

Liothrix luteus, 44. 

Parus monticolus, 31. 

Regulus regulus, 65. 

Sitta, 31. 

Siva strigula, 43. 

Sphenurus sphenurus, 14. 

Suya crinigera, 61. 

Tarsiger indicus, 54. 

Zosteropidae, 74. 
Zosterops palpebrosa simplex, 74. 
simplex, 74. 



o 



A CATALOGUE OF THE TROMBICULINAE, OR CHIGGER 
MITES, OF THE NEW WORLD, WITH NEAV GENERA 
AND SPECIES AND A KEY TO THE GENERA 



By H. E. EwiNG 
Entomologist, Bureau of Entomology, United States Department of Agriculture 



Interest in chigger mites has been greatly increased in recent years 
by the discovery that they are concerned in the transmission of 
certain typhuslike diseases of man. This interest, although largely 
confined to medical men, has nevertheless so stimulated work on 
the taxonomy of the group that to-day there are known to science 
about 100 species. These are nearly all recently described and have 
been reported from most of the larger geographical units of the 
warmer regions of the world. They have been described by about 
a dozen scientists and in a much larger number of scientific journals, 
so that the time is now rather opportune for bringing together into a 
single paper some of the more important taxonomic data dealing with 
chiggers. Some of these taxonomic facts are here presented in the 
form of a synopsis of the known genera and others in the form of an 
annotated catalogue of the species of the New World. In addition, 
descriptions are given of 2 new genera and 11 new species. 

The term " chigger mites " has been applied by the writer in the 
past, and is applied by him in this paper, to those acarids of the family 
Trombidiidae whose larvae parasitize vertebrates. The term " chig- 
ger," however, should be restricted to the larval form of a chigger 
mite. Rearing experiments indicate, so far as known, that all these 
vertebrate-infesting larvae of Trombidiidae are the young of adults 
that belong to the genus Tromhicula Berlese, in the original sense in 
which this genus was used. The boundaries, therefore, of the sub- 
family Trombiculinae should be restricted to those given originally 
by Berlese to his collective genus Trombicula. 

No. 2908.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80. Art. 8. 

70404—31 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

THE GENERA OF TROMBICULINAE 

The writer gave a synopsis of the genera of the subfamily Trom- 
biculinae in his Manual of External Parasites, published in June, 
1929. Here it is intended to revise and extend that synopsis. Just 
how many of the genera of Trombidiidae, based upon larval char- 
acters, should be placed in the Trombiculinae is not known. Un- 
doubtedly some of the unattached larvae that have been described 
have hosts that are vertebrates. Also it has been shown that verte- 
brate-infesting larvae may accidentally be resting on an invertebrate 
host or possibly some of them may have invertebrates as unnatural 
hosts. 

KETSr TO THE GENERA OF THE SUBFAMH-Y TROMBICULINAE, TASEn ON LARVA1> 

CHARACTERS 

1. Dorsal plate bearing six setae, exclusive of the pseudostigraaiic 

organs 2. 

Dorsal plate bearing less than six setae, exclusive of the pseudo- 

stigmatic organs 4. 

2. Four of the six setae, borne by dorsal plate, situated along its 

anterior margin ; dorsal plate broader than long 3. 

Only two of the six setae, borne by dorsal plate, situated along 
its anterior margin; dorsal plate mucli longer than broad; 
head of pseudostigmatic organs spindle-shaped Schbngastiella Hirst. 

3. Dorsal plate with a median, anterior, knoblike process, but with- 

out crista Leeuwenhoekia Oudeu>ans. 

Dorsal plate without anterior process, but frequently with a 
crista Hannemania Oudemaus. 

4. Dorsal plate with five setae, exclusive of the pseudostigmatic 

organs ; antero-median seta present ; pseudostigmatic organs 

setiform, flagelliform, clavate, or capitate 5. 

Dorsal plate with only four setae, exclusive of the pseudostig- 
matic organs; antero-median seta lacking; pseudostigmatic 
organs clavate Walchia, new genus. 

5. Pseudostigmatic organs strongly clavate or capitate G. 

Pseudostigmatic organs setiform or flagelliform and frequently 

with barbs 7. 

6. Chelicerae armed with a row of teeth above; palpal claw usually 

bifurcate Schongastia Oudemans. 

Chelicerae each with not more than one dorsal tooth; palpal 

claw trifurcate Neoschbng'astia Ewing. 

7. Each chelicera with a row of teeth above; ventral tooth may be 

lacking 8. 

Each chelicera never with more than a single dorsal tooth ; ven- 
tral tooth always present Trombicula Berlese, 

8. Several subequal dorsal teeth present on each chelicera ; dorsal 

plate well developed ; antero-median seta pectinate. Not endo- 

parasitic in habits Odontacarus Ewing. 

Three unequal dorsal teeth on each chelicera ; dorsal plate ves- 
tigial or lacking; antero-median seta simple. Living under 
the surface of the skin of amphibians Endotrom^bicula, new genus. 



AST. 8 CHIGGER MITES OP THE NEW WORLD EWING 3 

A CATALOGUE OF THE CHIGGER MITES OF THE NEW WORLD 

In this catalogue the synonymy of various species is given where 
known. Representatives of some, however, have not been seen by 
the writer. The probable synonymy of these is indicated in the 
appended notes. 

Family TROMBIDIIDAE 

Subfamily Trombiculinae 
Genus HANNEMANIA Oudemans 

1911. Hannemania OtroEMANs, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, p. 137; 1912, Zool. Jahrb. 
Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 71. 

HANNEMANIA ARGENTINA Lahille 

1927. Hannemania argent ina Lahiixe, Rev. Univ. Buenos Aires, vol. 24, no. 5, 
p. 1293, pi. 2. (The paper in which H. argentina is described is not in 
Washington libraries.) 

HANNEMANIA DUNNI Sambon 

1928. Hannemania dunni Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., vol. 22, p. 129, 
fig. 17. 

Type host. — ^A salamander {Desmognathus fusciis fuscus). 
Type locality. — " Eastern United States of America." 

HANNEMANIA EDWARDSI Sambon 

1928. Hannemania edwardsi Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., vol. 22, p. 
123, figs. 10-12. 

Type host. — A toad {Bufo variegatus). 

Type locality. — Lake Nahuel Huapi, Puerto Blest, Argentine 
Andes. 

HANNEMANIA ELTONI Sambon 

1928. Hannemania eltoni Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., vol. 22, p. 129, 
fig. 16. 

Type host. — A frog {Rana sphenocephala) . 
Type locality. — San Antonio, Tex. 

HANNEMANIA HOBDAYI Sambon 

1928. Hannemania hohdayi Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., vol. 22, p. 120, 
fig. 13. 

Type host. — Pleurodenna hufonina. 

Type locality. — Rio Negro Territory, Argentina. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

HANNEMANIA HYLAE (Ewing) 

1925. Trombicula hylae Ewing, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 27, p. 146; 
1926, Ann. Ent. Soc. Amer., vol. 19, p. 266, figs. 1-4. 

Type host. — A tree toad {Hyla arenicolor) . 
Type locality. — Cottonwood Creek, San Diego County, Calif. 
The nymph and adult stages of this species have been obtained by 
experimental rearing. 

HANNEMANIA HYLODEUS (Oudcmans) 

1910. Heterothronibidium hylodeus Oudbmans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 54, p. 88. 

1911. Hannemania hijlodeus Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 58, p. 137 ; 1912, 
Zool. Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 71, fig. 2. 

Type host. — A frog {Hylodes sp.). 

Type locality. — Brazil. 

This is the type species of the genus. In it there is a well-devel- 
oped crista between the pseudostigmata, a character missing from 
most of the species. 

HANNEMANLA NEWSTEADI Sambon 

1928. Hannemania newsteadi Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., vol. 22, 
p. 127, fig. 14. 

Type host. — A tree frog {Hyla rubra) . 

Type locality. — Urucum, Matto Grosso, Brazil. 

HANNEMANIA PATTONI Sambon 

1928. Hannemania pattoni Sambon, Ann. Trop, Med, and Parasit., vol. 22, p, 130, 
fig. 18. 

Type host. — Barhorocoetes taeniatus. 
Type locality. — Temuco, Chile. 

HANNEMANIA SAMBONI, new name' 

1928. Hannemania argentina Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., vol. 22, p. 
131, fig. 19. 

Type host. — Pleurodema hihroni. 

Type locality. — Rio Negro Territory, Argentina. 

HANNEMANIA STEPHENSI Sambon 

1928. Hannemania stephensi Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., vol. 22, p. 
127, fig. 15. 

Type host. — A frog {Eleutherodactyltis golhneri). 
Type locality. — Tombador, Matto Grosso, Brazil. 

»For n. argentina Sambon (1928), preoccupied by H. argentina Lahille (1927). 



ART. 8 CHIGGEE MITES OF THE NEW WORLD EWING 5 

Genus LEEUWENHOEKIA Oudemans 

1911. LeeuicenJwekia Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 58, p. 137; 1912, Zool. 
Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p 74. 

LEEUWENHOEKIA VERDUNI (Oudemans) 

1910. Heterothromhidium verduni Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 54, p. 88. 

1911. Leeuicenhoekia verduni Oudemans, Ent. Ber. vol. 3, no. 58, p. 138; 1912. 
Zool. Jahrb., Supp. 14, Heft 1, p. 74, fig. R. 

Type host. — Opossum {Didelphis opossum). 
Type locality, — South Brazil. 

Genus NEOSCHONGASTIA Ewing 

1929. Neoschongastia Ewing, Manual of external parasites, p. 187. 

Species of Neoschongastia differ from those of Schongastia in 
being without the dorsal row of teeth on each chelicera. A single dor- 
sal tooth is usually present. 

NEOSCHONGASTIA AMERICANA (Hirst) 

1921. Schongastia americana Hiest, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 9, vol. 7, p. 37; 
1922, Brit. Mus. Econ. Ser. no. 13, p. 78, fig. 45. 

Type host. — Domestic fowl. 
Type locality. — Dallas, Tex. 

This species is a serious pest of chickens in the southern part of the 
United States. 

NEOSCHONGASTIA CALIFORNICA (Ewing) 

1925. Schongastia californica Ewing, Amer. Journ. Trop. Med., vol. 5, p. 262. 

Type host. — A ground squirrel. 
Type locality. — Topaz, Calif. 

NEOSCHONGASTIA PEROMYSCI (Ewing) 

1929. Schongastia peromysci Ewing, Ent. News, vol. 40, p. 296. 

Type host. — White-footed mouse {Pe?'omysctis leucopus novehoi^a- 
censis). 
Type locality. — Sturbridge, Mass. 

NEOSCHONGASTIA SCIURICOLA (Ewing) 

1925. Schongastia sciurlcola Ewing, Amer. Journ. Trop. Med., vol. 5, p. 261. 

Type host. — Red squirrel {Sciuims hudsonicus richardsonii) . 
Type locality. — Florence, Mont. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM VOL.80 

NEOSCHONGASTIA TROUESSARTI (Oudemans) 

1910. Schongastia trouessarti Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 54, p. 87; 19J2, 
Zool. Jahrb., Suppl 14, Heft 1, p. 65, fig. O. 

Type host. — Opossum {Didelphis opossum). 
Type locality. — South Brazil. 

Genus ODONTACARUS Ewing 

1929. Odontacarus Ewing, Manual of external parasites, p. 188. 

In Odontacarus each chelicera is provided with a dorsal row ef 
teeth ; in Trombicula with a single tooth. 

ODONTACARUS AUSTRALIS (Ewing) 

1929. Troinbicula australis Ewing, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 31, p. 10. 

Type host. — A lizard {Tropiduras peruvianus) . 
Type locality. — Verrugas Canon, Lima, Peru. 

ODONTACARUS DENTATUS (Ewing) 

1925. Trombicula dentata Ewing, Amer. Journ. Trop. Med., vol. 5, p. 257, flg. 3. 
Type host. — White-tailed deer {Odocoileus couesi ?). 
Type locality. — Sonora, Tex. 

Genus TROMBICULA Berlese 

1905. TromWcula Beri-ese, Redia, vol. 2, p. 155 (no generic description) ; 1912, 
Redia, vol. 8, p. 83.— 1915, Banks, U. S. Dept. Agr., Office of the Secretary, 
Rep. 108 [Contr. from Bur. of Ent], p. 43. 

1916. Leptotromhidium Nagayo, Miyakawa, Mitamuba, and Imamura, Dobuts. 
z. Tokyo, vol. 28, p. ?. 

1925. Neotrombicula Hikst (subgenus), Nature, vol. 116, p. 609. 

TROMBICULA ALLEEI Ewing 

1926. Trombicula alleei Ewing, Ent. News, vol. 37, p. 111. 
Tijpe host. — None. 

Type locality. — Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone. 
Description based on adult form. Larva unknown. 

TROMBICULA BATATAS (Linnaeus) 

1758. Acarus Mtatas Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, Gen. 235, 
No. 22, p. 617. — 1775, MiJiXER, Vollstandiges Natursystem, vol. 5, pt. 2, No. 
25, p. 1055. 

1904. Pattata-luis van Stockum, Tijdschr. Kon. Nederlandsch Aardr.-kundig 
Gen. 1904, Verslag. Saramacca-Exp., p. 22. 

1905. Thrombidium batatas Oudemans, Nova Guinea, 1903, vol. 5, p. 148. 
1912. Gen.? batattis Oudemans, Zool. Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 3. 

Type host.— Ci). 

Type locality. — Surinam. 



ART. 8 CHIGGEB MITES OF THE NEW WOKLD EWING 7 

The status of this species has not been definitely determined. It 
appears to be a Troiiibicula sp., and Oudemans claims it is the same 
as his Microthrombidiuni helleri^ which is a typical Tronibicula 
species. 

TROMBICULA BISIGNATA Ewing 

1929, Tronibicula hisignata Ewing, Ent. News, vol. 40, p. 295. 

Type host. — Meadow mouse {Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsyl- 
vanicus). 

Type locality. — Mount Katahdin, Me. 

TROMBICULA BRASILIENSIS Ewing 

1925. Trombicula hrasiliensis Ewing, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washiugton, vol. 27, p. 92. 
Type host.—m. 
Type locality. — Manaos, Brazil. 

TROMBICULA BRUYANTI (OndemanB) 

1910. MicrotJuonibidium hrnyanti Oudemans. Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. .'i4, p. 85; 
1912, Zool. Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 26, fig. F. 

Type host. — Opossum {Didelphis opossum). 
Type locality. — South Brazil. 

TROMBICULA COARCTATA (Bcrlese) 

1888. Trombidium coarctaium Bbrlesk, Bull. Soc. Ent. Itallana, Ann. 20, p. 179, 
Tab. V, fig. 5. — 1901, Leonardi, Zool. Anz., Band 25, p. 17. 

1912. Trombicula coarctata Beklese, Redia, vol. 80, p. 91, fig. 42.— 1921, Ewing, 
Ann. Ent. Soc. Amer., vol. 13, p. 382, fig. 1. 

Type host. — Described from adults. 

Type locality. — Buenos Aires, Argentina, and Rio Apa, Paraguay. 
This species has been confused by some authors with the Kedani 
mite, Tromhicula aham.ushi (Brumpt), but it is distinct. 

TROMBICULA FLUX van Thiel 

1930. Tronibicula flui van Thiel, Parasitology, vol. 22, p. 347, figs. 1, 2. 

Type host. — Man. 

Type locality. — Surinam. 

This species may be a synonym of Acarus hatatas Linnaeus. 

TROMBICULA GOLDII (Oudemans) 

1910. MicrothromUdium yoldii Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 54, p. 84; ]912, 
Zool. Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 13, fig. B. 

Type host. — Dasyprocia agouti. 
Type locality. — Brazil. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

TROMBICULA GUINEENSE (Bniyant and Joyeux) 

1913. Microtrombidium guineense Brtjyant and Joyeux, Bull. Soc. Path. Exot., 
vol. 6, no. 3, I). 202, figs. 1-A. 

Type hosts. — Domestic fowl and two monkeys {G ercopithecus t'uber 
and C. callitrlchus). 

Type locality. — French Guiana. 

May be a synonym of Acanis hatafas Linnaeus. 

TROMBICULA HARPERI Ewing 

1928. TromUoula harperi Ewing, Proc. Ent. Sec. Washington, vol. 30, p. 79. 
Type host. — ^Woodland jumping mouse {N apaeozapus insigyiis). 
Type locality. — Heart Lake, Essex County, N. Y. 

TROMBICULA HELLERI (Oudemans) 

1911. Microthrom'bUlrum helleri Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 30, p. 120; 1912, 
Zool. Jahrb., Snppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 15, fig. O. 

Type host. — A beetle {Passalus sp.). 

Type locality. — Surinam. 

According to Oudemans, this species is a synonym of the Acarus 
{Tromhicula) hatatus of Linnaeus. Beetles probably are not true 
hosts of this mite. 

TROMBICULA INSULARIS Ewing 

1925. Trombicula insularis Ewing, Amer. Jouru. Trop. Med., vol. 5, p. 260. 

Type host. — A lizard {AnMis cyhotes). 
Type locality. — Santo Domingo. 

TROMBICULA IRRITANS (Riley) 

1873. Leptus iiritans Rilet, Amer. Nat., vol. 7, p. 16. 

1877. Tetranyohus tlalsahuate Murray, Economic entomology, Aptera, p. 113. 

1886. Leptus irritans Osborn and Underwood, Can. Ent., vol. 18, p. 6. — 1897, 

Lugger, 2d Ann. Rep. Ent. Minnesota Exp. Sta., p. 82. 
1892. TroniMdium tlaJzahnatl Dug^s, El Estudio, vol. 4, no. 6, p. 198, 1 pi. 

1910. M icrothrombidium alfredduffdsi Oudemans. Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 54, p. 84. 

1911. Microthronihidium tlalzahuatl Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 57, pp. 120 
and 121 ; 1912, Zool. Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 18, fig. D.— 1918, Ewinq 
and Haktsell, Journ. Econ. Ent., vol. 11, p. 261, fig. 10c. . 

1918. " Chigger mite " How.vru, 17th Rep. State Ent. Minnesota, p. 130, pi. 11. 
1921. Trombicula cinnabaris Ewing, Ann. Ent. Soc. Amer., vol. 13, p. 387, fig. 3. 
1921. Leptus (Trombicula?) similis Hirst, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 9, vol. 7, 

p. 37; 1922, Brit. Mns. Econ. Ser. no. 13, p. 78, fig. 44. 
1923. Trombiciila tlalzahuatl Ewing, Journ. Agr. Res., vol. 26, no. 9, p. 401, 
1925. Trombicula irritans Ewing, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 38, pi. 17, 

fig. 1; 1925, Amer. Journ. Trop. Med., vol. 5, p. 253, fig. 1. 



AHT. 8 CHIGGER MITES OF THE NEW WORLD EWING 9 

Tyfe host. — Man. 

Type locality. — United States. 

The nymphs and adults of this species have been obtained by 



rearing. 



TKOMBICULA JAPA (Ribeyro and Bambaren) 



1922. Leptus jaija Riceyro and Bambaren, Arch. Asoc. Peruana para el Prog. 
Cien., vol. 2, fasc. 2, p. 115, 3 figs. 

Type host— Ci). 
Type locality. — Peru. 

The generic status of this species is in doubt. It appears to belong 
to Trombicvla. 

TROMBICULA MICROTI Ewing 

1928. Trom'bieula microti Ewing, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 30, p. 80. 

Type host. — Meadow mouse {Mic-rotius richardsoni 7}iacropus). 
Type locality. — Wyoming. 

TROMBICULA MYOTIS Ewingr 

1929. Tromhicula myotis Ewing, Ent. News, vol. 40, p. 294. 

Type host. — Little brown bat {Myotis lucifugus lucifugus). 
Type locality. — Mount Katahdin, Me. 

TROMBICULA OREGONENSIS Ewing 

1929. Tromhicula oregonensis Ewing, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 31, p. 11, 

Type host. — A mole {Scapanus sp.). 
Type locality. — Corvallis, Oreg. 

TROMBICULA PANAMENSIS Ewing 

1925, Trom'bieula panamensis Ewing, Amer. Joura. Trop. Med., vol. 5, p. 259. 

Type host. — A cotton rat {Sigmodon hispidus chiriquensis) . 
Type locality. — Balboa, Panama. 

TROMBICULA PERUVIANA Ewing 

1926. Tromhicula peruviana Ewing, Ent. News, vol. 37, p. 112. 

Type host. — None. 
Type locality. — Peru. 

Description based on adult form. Larva unknown. Species may 
not belong to this genus; rearing of larva will tell. 

TROMBICULA SHANNONI Ewing 

1929. Tromhicula shannoni Ewing, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 81, p. 10. 

Type host. — House cat {Felis domestica). 
Type locality. — Verrugas Canon, Lima, Peru. 

70404—31 2 



XO PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

TROMBICULA SPLENDENS Ewing 

1913, Tromhicida splendens Ewing, Bull. Amer. Miis. Nat. Hist., vol. 32, p. 113 
pi. 7, fig. 5 ; 1921, Ann. Ent. Soc. Amer., vol. 13, p. 386, fig. 2. 

Type host. — None (described from adult). 
Type locality. — Portage, Wis. 

TROMBICULA TINAMI (Gudemans) 

1910. MicrotJu-onibidium tinami Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 54, p. 84; 
1912, Zool. Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 24, fig. E. 

Type host. — ^A tinamou [Crypturus 7ioctivag'us) . 
Type locality. — Brazil. 

TROMBICULA THOMASI (Oudemans) 

1910. Microthrombidium Uwmasi Oudemans, Ent. Ber., vol. 3, no. 54, p. 84; 
1912, Zool. Jahrb., Suppl. 14, Heft 1, p. 28, fig. G. 

Type host. — A mouse {Akodon jelsJdi). 
Type locality. — Central Peru. 

TROMBICULA TROPICA Ewing 

1925. Trombicula irritans var. tropica Ewing, Amer. Journ. Trop. Metl., vol. 5, 
p. 258. 

Type host. — A lizard (Anadia taeniata). 
Type locality. — Chama River, Venezuela. 

TROMBICULA WHARTONI Ewing 

1929. TromVicula whartoni Ewing, Ent. News, vol. 40, p. 296. 

Type host. — A bird. 

Type locality. — Summerville, S. C. 

TROMBICULA YORKEI Sambon 

1928. Trombicula yorkei Sambon, Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit, vol. 22, p. 119, 
fig. 6. 

Type host. — A tree frog {Hyla i^hra). 

Type locality. — Urucum, Matto Grosso, Brazil. 

DESCRIPTIONS OF NEW GENERA OF TROMBICULINAE 

WALCHIA, new genus 

Palpi rounded laterally; palpal claw trifurcate; chelicerae each 
with a short chela. Dorsal plate present, as long as broad ; bearing 
only four setae, exclusive of the pseudostigmatic organs, these setae 
being a pair of antero-laterals and a pair of postero-laterals. 
Pseudostigmatic organs clavate and pectinate; eyes either lacking 
or represented by vestiges of a single pair. Dorsal abdominal 



AHT. 8 CHIGK3ER MITES OF THE NEW WORLD — EWING 11 

setae moderate in size and number, less than 50 present. Legs 
moderate; second pair shortest; last pair longest. 

Type species. — Tronibicula glahrwrn Walch. 

This genus stands alone in having only four true setae on the 
dorsal plate. It is evidently most nearly related to Schongastia 
Oudemans. Only the type is included. It should now be known 
as Walchia gldbrum (Walch). 

ENDOTROMBICULA, new genus 
Plate 3, Figuees 1, 2 

Palpi rounded laterally; palpal claw trifurcate. Chelicerae each 
with three dorsal teeth and one latero-ventral. Dorsal plate very 
poorly sclerotized, indistinct, with five setae in addition to the 
pseudostigmatic organs; median seta simple. Both pairs of eyes 
well developed, each eye having a complete cornea. Abdominal 
setae short, inconspicuous. Each tarsus armed distally with two 
simple, subequal, lateral claws and one longer, simple, and more 
slender middle claw. Tarsus I with a simple dorsal spine and a 
simple subterminal seta or spine. 

Type species. — Endotromhicula penetrans, new species (p. 16). 

EndotroTiibicula should come between Hannemania Oudemans and 
Odontacarus Ewing, being more closely related to the latter genus, 
from which it differs in having fewer and a definite number of dorsal 
teeth on the chelicerae, and a vestigial dorsal plate, as well as in a 
few other characters. 

DESCRIPTIONS OF NEW SPECIES OF TROMBICULINAE 
TROMBICULA BLARINAE, new species 

Plate 1, Figure 1 

Palpi elbowed, having the second segment angulate laterally; first 
seta strongly pectinate, almost plumose ; second seta shorter than the 
first and with several barbs; third seta with several barbs; palpal 
thumb small, scarcely exceeding the fourth segment; palpal claw 
slender and trifurcate, two accessory claws being small and situated 
near the apex. Chelicerae stout, sliarply pointed and with minute 
upper tooth; lower tooth very minute or lacking. Dorsal plats 
more than twice as broad as long, front margin incurved between 
median and each fronto-lateral seta, but hind margin outwardly 
rounded behind each pseudostigma ; all setae borne by dorsal plate 
strongly pectinate, postero-lateral pair longer than the others. 
Pseudostigmata situated about their diameter from posterior margin 
of dorsal plate and about as far from each other as each is from the 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

postero-lateral seta on its side; in front of each pseudostigma is a 
posteriorly concave, crescentic slit; pseudostigmatic organs minute, 
simple, vestigial. Eyes lacking. Dorsal abdominal setae about 36, 
of which 20 are arranged into two transverse rows of 10 each, all 
short and strongly pectinate. Legs short, last pair longest. Tarsus I 
with dorsal spine situated almost twice its length from base of segment 
and with a simple subapical seta. 

Length, of unengorged specimen, 0.17 mm. ; width, 0.13 mm. 

Type host. — Short-tailed shrew {Blarina hrevicauda) . 

Type locality. — Washington, D. C. 

Type 5^^■6?e.— U.S.N.M. No. 1018. 

Described from many specimens taken from Bloerina hrevicauda^ 
Eock Creek Park, Washington, D. C, collected by J. C. Jones, some 
on September 18 and some on September 20, 1929. Also from one 
specimen of Peroviyscus leucopus taken at the same place by the same 
collector, on September 20, 1929. 

TROMBICULA DUNNI, new species 

Plate 1, Figure 2 

Palpi large, not elbowed, second segment broadly rounded on out- 
side; first seta with two to four barbs; second seta with one barb; 
third seta with two to three barbs. Palpal thumb small ; palpal claw 
usually bifurcate, with a very large, curved, inner prong and a 
smaller, shorter, almost straight, outer prong; traces of a smaller, 
inner third prong sometimes seen. Chelicerae strongly curved. 
Dorsal plate broader than long, front margin slightly incurved on 
each side of median seta, posterior margin broadly but not evenly 
outcurved; pseudostigmata situated far from each other and about 
halfway from the anterior to posterior margin of dorsal plate; 
pseudostigmatic organs long, slender, setiform, simple. Immediately 
behind each pseudostigma is an indistinct straight slit or line. Eyes 
double but corneas of posterior ones lacking, situated about one and 
a half times the diameter of the cornea of one of the anterior eyes 
from the lateral margins of the dorsal plate. Dorsal abdominal setae 
20, arranged in irregular transverse rows as follows: 1-6, II-6, III-4, 
IV-4. Legs medium, second pair the shortest ; tarsus I with dorsal 
spine situated about one and a half times its length from base of 
segment, subapical seta about twice as long as dorsal spine. 

Length of unengorged larva, 0.16 mm.; width, 0.11 mm. 

Type host. — An agouti {Dasyprocta punctata nuchalis). 

Type locality. — Chiriqui, Panama. 

Type slide.— V.S.'^.M. No. 1019. 

Described from several specimens taken from type host. Camp 
Pital, Chiriqui, Panama, October 26, 1929, by L. H. Dunn and from 



ART. 8 CHIGGEB MITES OF THE NEW WORLD — EWING 13 

seven specimens taken from three young coatis {Nasua naHca pana- 
mensis), collected at the same place by the same person. 

TROMBICULA CERVULICOLA, new species 
Plate 1 , Figure 3 

Palpi stout, not angulate ; first seta strongly pectinate, subplumose ; 
second seta with three to four very long barbs; third seta with a 
few shorter barbs. Palpal claw tricleft, short, strongly curved; 
inner prong longest, outer shortest, and middle intermediate. Dorsal 
plate broader than long, front margin almost straight, posterior 
margin broadly and outwardly rounded; anterior setae subequal, 
shorter than the two postero-lateral setae. Pseudostigmata situated 
slightly behind the middle of the dorsal plate and about three times 
the diameter of each from each other; almost contiguous with the 
posterior boundary of each is a short, straight, diagonal slit; pseudo- 
stigmatic organs very long and slender, with about four or five barbs 
on the distal half of each. Anterior eyes well developed, each situ- 
ated a little more than its diameter from the margin of the dorsal 
plate; posterior eyes vestigial, corneas lacking. About 26 dorsal 
setae present, not arranged into definite rows. Legs rather long, 
posterior pair longest; tarsus I with dorsal spine, spinelike and 
situated almost twice its length from the base of the segment; sub- 
apical seta of tarsus I spinelike. 

Length of slightly engorged larva, 0.31 mm.; width, 0.22 mm. 

Type host. — Barking deer [Ceriiulus mirews). 

Type locality. — Mulctesar, Kumaun, India. 

Type .§??*<?e.— U.S.N.M. No. 1020. 

Three specimens at hand, all taken from type host, at type locality, 
March, 1930, by Mr. Cooper. This species is near acuscutellaris 
Walch, but the dorsal shield is not angulate posteriorly, and the 
pseudostigmatic organs have fewer barbs. 

TROMBICULA PIERCEI, new species 

Plate 1, Figure 4 

Palpi slender, not angulate laterally ; first, second, and third setae 
long and simple ; claw curved and very slender, tricleft distally with 
middle prong largest and lateral prongs subequal ; thumb very short, 
subterminal. Chelicerae each with upper and lower tooth prominent. 
Dorsal shield indistinct but broader than long; median seta more 
slender than the others; postero-lateral setae longer than antero-lat- 
eral. Pseudostigmata in front of line drawn between the two postero- 
lateral setae and situated a little more than their diameter apart; 
pseudostigmatic organs very long, almost straight, and with many 



14 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

barbs on distal two-thirds. Eyes subequal, both with corneas. Dor- 
sal setae between 34 and 40. Legs long and slender, tarsus I with 
dorsal spine almost equal to half of segment itself, subapical seta 
spinelike, but smaller and shorter than dorsal spine. 

Length of partly engorged larva, 0.64 mm. ; width, 0.27 mm. 

Type host. — ^A bat {Hipposideros diadema griseus). 

Type locality. — Barrio Buyog, Municipality Sagay, Occidental 
Negros, Philippine Islands. 

Type slide.— \3.^.'^.M. No. 1021. 

Described from nine specimens taken from type host, at type local- 
ity? by W. D. Pierce, May 23, 1928. The characters of the palpi mark 
off this species very distinctly from all others. 

TROMBICULA CAVICOLA, new species 

Plate 1, Figure 5 

Palpi more moderate, subangulate laterally; first seta with many 
slender barbs, being subplumose ; second seta subplumose ; third seta 
shorter, but subplumose ; palpal thumb stout, but longer than broad ; 
palpal claw short, curved, and bifurcate, inner prong being much 
longer and stouter than outer. Ventral tooth of chelicerae sharp, 
dorsal tooth vestigial or lacking. Dorsal plate slightly broader 
than long, front margin almost straight, posterior margin broadly 
and evenly outcurved; setae very long; pseudostigmata behind line 
drawn between two postero-lateral setae and about three times the 
diameter of either from each other ; pseudostigmatic organs long and 
simple. Eyes subequal, and both pairs provided with complete 
corneas. Dorsal abdominal setae long, straight, conspicuous, about 30 
in number. Legs moderate, last pair longest; tarsus I with dorsal 
spine spinelike, curved and situated slightly behind the middle of 
the segment; subapical seta long, slender, but not surpassing claws. 

Length of unengorged larva, 0.22 mm. ; width, 0.14 mm. 

Type host. — None. Description based on unattaclied larvae. 

Type locality. — Reynolds Cave, Ky. 

Type sZ^c^e.— U.S.N.M. No. 1022. 

Four larvae at hand, all being taken at tj^pe locality in 1881, by 
a Mr. Tucker, a collector who specialized in collecting cave insects. 

NEOSCHONGASTIA SIGNATOR. new species 

Plate 2, Figtire 1 

Palpi conspicuous and angulate laterally along outer margin of 
second segment ; first, second, and third setae each with many barbs, 
hence subplumose. Palpal thumb short, inconspicuous, not reaching 
to the middle of palpal claw, which is slender and trifurcate distally, 



ART. 8 CHIGGER MITES OF THE NEW WORLD EWING 15 

the middle prongs being the largest. Dorsal plate broader than long, 
slightly incurved along anterior margin and produced backward 
into an angle behind each pseudostigma and with a conspicuous V- 
shaped signature present in posterior half. Setae along the anterior 
margin of dorsal plate subequal and shorter than the postero-lateral 
setae. Pseudostigmata situated less than their diameter from the 
posterior margin of dorsal plate and about twice their diameter from 
each other; pseudostigmatic organs capitate, pedicel being about as 
long as diameter of head. Anterior and posterior corneas of eyes 
subequal, contiguous. Dorsal abdominal setae about 60, and for the 
most part arranged into five transverse rows. Legs moderate, last 
pair longest; tarsus I with dorsal spine situated its length from the 
base of the segment and with subapical seta moderate, somewhat 
spinelike, and extending slightly beyond the base of the claws. 

Length of unengorged larva, 0.30 mm.; width, 0.19 mm. 

Type host. — A wood rat. 

Type locality. — Wilburton, Okla. 

Type s?^VZc.— U.S.N.M. No. 1023. 

Described from three specimens taken from type host, at type 
locality, by G. W. Stiles, March 17, 1929 (Bishopp, No. 8268). 

NEOSCHONGASTIA SCELOPORI, new species 
Plate 2, Figures 2, 3 

Palpi not angulate but rounded laterally, first and second setae 
long, subplumose. Palpal thumb slightly swollen and extending to 
middle of palpal claw ; the latter strongly curved and deeply trif ur- 
cate distally, the middle prong being the longest and the other two 
subequal. Chelicerae strongly curved, with the upper tooth very 
small, sharp and procurved, and with the lower one larger, stout, 
and directed backward. Dorsal plate but slightly broader than 
long, both anterior and posterior margins being almost straight. 
Median seta shorter than the antero-lateral ones and these slightly 
shorter than the postero-lateral setae. Pseudostigmata situated 
slightly behind middle of dorsal plate, and far laterally, near the 
lateral margins of the same; in front of each is a diagonal straight 
line. Pseudostigmatic organs with globose heads and pedicels equal 
in length to the diameters of the heads. Posterior eyes smaller than 
anterior but with corneas. Dorsal abdominal setae about 30. Legs 
moderate; tarsus I peculiar in that subapical seta is situated on a 
conspicuous tubercle, and part of the tarsus distal to it is attenu- 
ated ; dorsal spine situated almost twice its length from base to the 
segment. 

Length of partly engorged larva, 0.67 mm. ; width, 0.33 mm. 

Type host. — A lizard {Sceloporus spinosus). 



16 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol.80 

Type locality. — Uvalde, Tex. 
Type sUde.—V.S.'^M. No. 1024. 

Four specimens at hand, all being taken from the type host, at the 
type locality, by F. Adams, July 13, 1928. 

NEOSCHONGASTIA BREVIPES, new species 

Plate 2, Figure 4 

Palpus with second segment produced into an angle laterally ; first 
seta plumose, second and third subplumose. Palpal thumb small, 
short, inconspicuous ; palpal claw slender, curved, trif urcate distally, 
the middle prong surpassing the others, which are subequal. Cheli- 
cerae strongly curved and very sharp; teeth minute to vestigial. 
Dorsal plate about twice as broad as long, provided with an anterior 
projection bearing the median seta, posteriorly not broadly rounded; 
median seta slightly smaller than antero-lateral setae, postero-lateral 
setae longest. Pseudostigmata situated slightly behind a line drawn 
between the bases of the two postero-lateral setae and about as far 
from each other as each is from the postero-lateral seta on its side. 
First pair of eyes situated about three times their diameter from the 
dorsal plate, second pair degenerate, without corneas. Dorsal setae 
about 50, all but 6 being arranged into five transverse rows. Legs 
rather short; tarsus I with dorsal spine slightly curved and situated 
about its length from the base of the segment, subterminal seta some- 
what spikelike and situated on a broad low tubercle. 

Length of unengorged larva, 0.29 mm. ; width, 0.16 mm. 

Type host. — ^\^niite-footed mouse {Peromyscus leucopus novehora- 
censis). 

Type locality. — College Park, Md. 

Type slide.— U.S.'^M. No. 1025. 

Sixteen specimens obtained from the type host (individuals C. P. 2, 
C. P. 5, and C. P. 7) by H. S. Peters and the writer, May 3, 1929. 
This species is closely related to signator., new species, but differs from 
it in having about 10 less dorsal setae, the posterior eye degenerate, 
in the shape of the dorsal plate, and in a few other characters. 

ENDOTROMBICULA PENETRANS, new species 
Plate 3, Figxjres 1, 2 

Palpi laterally rounded; first seta simple, second tj'^pically with 
two barbs, third with three barbs. Palpal claw trifurcate, middle 
prong much the stoutest, lateral prongs subequal, all prongs of about 
the same length. Palpal thumb longer than broad, not swollen, 
extending to middle of palpal claw. Chelicerae strongly curved and 
very sharj:) at apex, each with three sharp, recurved teeth on the upper 
margin and a vestigial lateral tooth near the ventral margin. Dorsal 



ART. 8 CHIGGER MITES OF THE NEW WORLD EWINQ 17 

plate indistinct, slightly sclerotized along anterior margin; median 
seta shortest, simple; antero-lateral setae longest. Posterior eyes 
smaller than anterior, both pairs with corneas ; posterior eye situated 
its diameter from anterior eye. Pseudostigmata situated their diam- 
eter apart; pseudostigmatic organs setiform, simple, very short. 
Dorsal abdominal setae small, short, inconspicuous, less than 30 in 
number. Legs short; tarsus I with dorsal spine situated two-thirds 
its length from the base of the segment, but very long, extending to 
base of tarsal pedicel; subterminal seta moderate, somewhat spine- 
like, not situated on a tubercle. 

Length of engorged larva, 0.4G mm.; width, 0.28 mm. 

Type host. — A frog {Arthrole-ptis minutus). 

Type locality. — Mount Sagalla, Kenya Colonj^, Africa. 

Type slide.— U.S.'^.M. No. 1026. 

Many specimens received through Nathan Banks. Specimens taken 
from hosts collected by E. Heller in the year 1911 and determined 
by A. Loveridge. Stained sections of frog's skin show that the mites 
live in cavities under the growing layer of integumentary cells. 

HANNEMANIA HIRSUTA. new .species 

Plate 3, Figures 3, 5 

Palpi large, stout, rounded laterally; first seta with many barbs 
arranged on a single side, second seta simple, third with one barb. 
Palpal thumb small, short, extending only to the base of palpal claw. 
Palpal claw bifurcate, inner prong being much stouter and consid- 
erably longer than outer. Chelicerae not strongly curved, without 
dorsal teeth, but each with a row of laterally projecting ventral 
teeth, the teeth in this row diminishing in size from apex to base of 
segment. Dorsal plate strongly incurved along front margin and 
outwardly rounded behind, being subangulate at median line; sub- 
median setae about equal to antero-lateral ones but shorter than pos- 
tero-lateral setae. Pseudostigmata slightly nearer each other than 
either is to the postero-lateral seta on its own side, situated along a 
line drawn between the postero-lateral setae; approximate to each 
pseudostigmata, both in front and behind, is a curved slit. Pseudo- 
stigmatic organs very long, somewhat flagelliform, and simple. An- 
terior and posterior eyes equally developed, contiguous, and both 
pairs provided with corneas. Dorsal abdominal setae very numerous, 
being more than 100. Legs moderate in size; tarsus I with a short 
dorsal spine situated over twice its length from base of segment, sub- 
apical seta extending to about the base of tarsal claws, not situated 
on a tubercle. 

Length of partly engorged larva, 0.37 nnn. ; width, 0.25 mm. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol. 80 : aht. 8 

Type host. — California pocket mouse {Perognathus californicus 
caXifomicus). 

Type locality. — Berkeley, Calif. 

Type sZ«We.— U.S.N.M. No. 1027. 

Eight specimens at hand, received from S. B. Benson, October 1, 
1929. This species differs from all other chiggers known to the 
writer in the form of its chelicerae and in the number of dorsal 
abdominal setae present. 

HANNEMANIA PENETRANS, new species 
Plate 3, Figtjbe 4 

Palpi rounded laterally; first, second, and third setae simple, sec- 
ond equal to first in length, third much shorter. Palpal thumb small, 
inconspicuous. Palpal claw short, very sharp, trifurcate; middle 
prong the stoutest and longest; accessory prongs subequal. Cheli- 
cerae but slightly curved, each ending ventro-distally in a flattened 
spearhead, which is irregularly serrate on outer margin, basal process 
conspicuous and armed with three teeth on postero-dorsal aspect. 
Dorsal plate broader than long and posteriorly outwardly curved; 
submedian setae shorter than the antero-lateral, the latter shorter 
than the postero-lateral. Pseudostigmata situated behind a line 
drawn between the pair of postero-lateral setae, each about equal dis- 
tance from the other pseudostigma and the postero-lateral seta on its 
own side ; one pair of slits present, these being straight, diagonal, and 
situated just behind the pseudostigmata; pseudostigmatic organs 
short, simple. Dorsal setae about 20. Legs rather short; tarsus I 
with very sharp dorsal spine situated about its length from the base 
of the segment, subapical seta setiform, not situated on a tubercle, 
and extending to the base of the tarsal claws. 

Length of partly engorged specimen, 0.81 mm. ; width, 0.49 mm. 

Type host. — Leopard frog (Rana pipien^s). 

Type locality. — Great Falls of Potomac, Va. 

Type slide.— U.^.'^M. No. 1028. 

Described from eight specimens; two taken from a green frog 
{Rana clamitatis) , collected at the type locality September 21, 192G, 
by the writer; four taken from leopard frogs {Rana pipiens), at type 
locality, August 27, 1930, by H. E. and Paul Ewing; and two from 
same host and locality, September 24, 1930, by same collectors. This 
species is nearest to H. eltoni Sambon but has the palpal claw trifur- 
cate and short pseudostigmatic organs. 



# 



EXPLANATION OF PLATES 

(Drawings by Eleanor A. Carliu) 

Plate 1 

Figure 1. Trombicula hlarinac, new species ; dorsal plate. 

2. Trombicula dunni, new species ; dorsal plate and eyes. 

3. Trombicula cennilicola, new species ; dorsal plate and eyes. 

4. Trombicula piercei, new species; central view of palpus. 

5. Trombicula cavicola, new species, palpal claw from below. 

Plate 2 

FiQUBE 1. Ncoschdnffustia signator, new species ; dorsal view. 

2. 'Neoschongastia scelopori, new species ; lateral view of chelicera. 

3. neoschongastia scelopori, new species ; side view of tarsus I. 

4. Neoschongastia brevipes, new species ; dorsal plate and eyes. 

Plate 3 

Figure 1. Endotrombicula penetrans, new species; outer view of chelicera. 

2. Endotrombicula penetrans, new species; doi'sal view of cephalothorax. 

3. Bannemania hirsuta, new species ; ventral view of chelicera. 

4. Hannemania penetrans, new species ; lateral view of chelicera. 

5. Hannemania hirsuta, new species; dorsal plate and eyes. 

19 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTINS OFFICEl 1991 



1 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 8. PL 1 








New Species of Trombicula berlese 
For explanation of plate see page 19. 



U S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 8. PL. 2 






New Species of Neoschongastia Ewing 
For explanation of plate see page 19. 



U S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 8. PL- 3 







4 




Endotrombicula penetrans, new genus and species, 
Species of hannemania Oudemans 

For explanation of plate see page 19 



AND NEW 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART 9 PL. 1 




MOLLUSKS OF THE GENUS AGAR 

Five top figures, Acar gradata: five middle figures, A. baity i, new species; five bottom figures, .4. panamensis, 

new species. 



THE WEST AMERICAN MOLLUSKS OF THE GENUS AGAR 



By Paul Bartsch 



Curator, Division of Mollusks and Cenozo-ic Invertebrates, United States National 

Museum 



A recent inquiry by Prof. Joshua L. Baily, who is revising Keep's 
" West Coast Shells," regarding the status of Area gradaia in Cali- 
fornia made it necessary to subject the members of this group to a 
critical examination; the results thereof are noted herein. The 
change of concept here expressed is due in part to the splendid series 
of specimens that we secured on the cruise of the United States Bu- 
reau of Fisheries steamer Albatross in its explorations of the waters 
of Lower California and the Gulf of California in 1911 and in part 
to the contributions of many correspondents, both in the United 
States and in the regions to the south, that have enriched the collec- 
tion of the National Museum sufficiently to clear up some doubtful 
problems. 

First of all, I believe that Acar, which was proposed by Dr. J. E. 
Gray in 1857^ as a subdivision of the genus Barhatla, is entitled to 
generic rank. The curiously elevated smooth muscle scars combined 
with the peculiar shape and sculpture make it a compact unit group, 
rather widely distributed in warm waters. 

Gray, in defining Acar (loc. cit.), mentions three species, namely, 
Byssoarca reticulata^ B. divaricata^ and B. gradata, without designat- 
ing a type. A type designation seems not to have been made until 
1925, when Dr. Wendell P. Woodring ^ selected Area gradata 
Broderip and Sowerby for that purpose. 

The genus Acar in the east Pacific ranges from southern Cali- 
fornia to Peru, where it is represented by a number of species whose 
distribution coincides quite well with the faunal areas as at present 
conceived. 

1 Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 2, vol. 19, p. 369, 1857. 

2 Miocene mollusks from Bowden, Jamaica, pt. 1, Carnegie Inst. Washington Publ. 
no. 3GG, p. 36, 1925. 

No. 2909.— Proceedings, U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 9. 
70405—31 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

AGAR BAILYI, new species 

Plate 1, five central figures 

Shell small, rhomboidal, rather inflated, white, with a buflfy tinge. 
The tips of the umbones are at the posterior extremity of the an- 
terior fourth of the shell. The umbones are strongly curved and 
separated only by a narrow space. The cardinal area is narrow and 
marked by a few slender incised lines, which parallel the hinge 
margin. The anterior margin of the shell is well rounded. The pos- 
terior margin is less strongly rounded and somewhat produced at 
the junction of the posterior and ventral border. The sculpture of 
the exterior consists of numerous radiating cords, of which 9 
occur on the anterior portion and 13 upon the posterior part, while 
23 are present on the middle. In addition to the radiating cords, 
which increase in strength from the umbone toward the ventral mar- 
gin, the valves are marked by concentric lamina, which render the 
cords tuberculated. The anterior ventral and posterior borders of 
the valves are rendered wavy by the external sculpture at the edge. 
The interior of the shell is while with a buffy tinge, particularly so 
in the umbonal region. The muscle scars are large, smooth, and de- 
cidedly elevated. The teeth of the hinge are few, 8 being present in 
the anterior group, which slope anteriorly, and 10 in the posterior 
group, which slope posteriorly. The central of these tooth groups 
are mere dots, and they increase in size in both directions as shown 
in our figure. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 382474 is an adult specimen collected by 
A. M. Strong under stones at Balboa, Calif, It measures: Length, 
8.8 mm. ; height, 4.9 mm. ; diameter, 4.5 mm. U.S.N.M. No. 347810 
contains 48 topotypes received from the same source; U.S.N.M. No. 
74831 contains 11 specimens from San Diego, Calif., from the Stearns 
collection, and U.S.N.M. No. 74830 contains 3 specimens from San 
Diego, collected by Henry Hemphill; U.S.N.M. No. 63302 contains 
4 specimens collected by Doctor Dall ; U.S.N.M. No. 127242 contains 
2 specimens collected by Mrs. Oldroyd. 

Remarks. — This species was named in our collection Area gradata 
Broderip and Sowerby, and Fossularca solida Sowerby. From the 
first it can at once be distinguished by its size. A glance at our 
figure will also give other distinguishing characters, and from Fos- 
sularca solida Sowerby by its entirely different ligamental structure. 

AGAR GRADATA (Broderip and Sowerby) 

Plate 1, five top figures 

1829. Area gradata Brodekip and Sowerby, Zool. Journ., no. 15, pp. 365-366. 

Shell moderately large, white with yellowish tinge, rhomboidal 
with the umbones about opposite the anterior third of the shell. 



ART. 9 MOLLUSKS OF THE GENUS ACAR BARTSCH d 

The umbones are fairly closely approximated and leave only a narrow 
marginal area between them, which is marked by a few fine lines 
paralleling the margin of the hinge. The anterior end is strongly 
rounded and the posterior somewhat produced ventrally. The sur- 
face of the shell is marked by radiating, closely approximated, 
slender cords, of which at least 15 are present on the anterior end 
and 21 on the posterior area, and 48 in the middle part. In addi- 
tion to these cords the valves are marked by concentric lamina, 
which render the cords nodulose. The sculpture is best visualized 
by consulting our figures. Interior of shell white, with a buffy tinge. 
The anterior, posterior, and ventral margins are rendered dentic- 
ulated by the external sculpture. The hinge teeth are small in the 
center and increase in size toward either extremity, becoming some- 
what irregular toward the extremities. In the main the anterior 
slope anteriorly and the posterior posteriorly, but the early posterior" 
teeth have a somewhat triangular shape, while the anterior ones 
are somewhat irregular. Both of them increase in size from the 
median portion outward. Fourteen appear to be present both in the 
anterior and posterior half of the hinge in the specimen figured. The 
muscle scars are large, smooth, and strongly elevated. 

We have many specimens of this species, which seems to range 
through the entire Mazatlanic faunal area, and also appears to ex- 
tend up on the outer coast of Lower California to Point Abreojos. 
The specimen that I have figured is one of a small series from 
Mazatlan, the type locality. 

T7/pe.—\J.S.^M. No. 382428. It measures: Length, 23.8 mm.; 
height, 12.7 mm. ; diameter, 12.6 mm. 

Remarhs. — Sowerby says that " this elaborately ornamented shell 
looks at first sight like a piece of Chinese carving. From Mazatlan." 

This species resembles most nearly the Panama forms as far as size 
is concerned. It differs from them, however, in having the sculpture 
much finer in every way. 

AGAR PANAMENSIS, new species 

Plate 1, five bottom figures 

Shell moderately large, rather inflated, white with a buffy tinge, 
strongly rounded anteriorly, somewhat produced at the posterior 
ventral margin. The umbones are well approximated, leaving only a 
narrow cardinal area, which is marked by incised lines parallel to 
the margin of the hinge. The exterior of the valves is marked by 
strong radiating cords, of which 11 are present on the anterior part, 
15 on the posterior part, and 39 in the middle portion. The posterior 
part forms a decided angle where it passes into the sides. The an- 
terior and posterior borders of the valves are rendered finely denticu- 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80:aet. 9 

lated by the external sculpture; the ventral margin a little less so. 
The hinge teeth increase in size from the center, both anteriorly and 
posteriorly, and promptly bend anteriorly in the anterior portion 
and posteriorly in the posterior portion. There are 12 teeth in the 
anterior and 18 in the posterior half ; they increase in strength from 
the center outward. The muscle scars are very prominent, smooth, 
and elevated. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 74827, the specimen figured, comes from 
Panama, and measures : Length, 24.2 mm. ; height, 12.2 mm. ; diam- 
eter, 13.4 mm. 

Remarks. — This species may be the shell figured by Keeve on 
Plate 14, figure 92, of his Conchologia Iconica in 1844. He says it 
was collected by Cuming, who found it attached to stones at St. 
Elena, West Colombia (Ecuador). The figure certainly resembles 
our species, which is easily distinguished from the Mazatlanic shell 
by its much coarser sculpture. 

In addition to the above, our collection contains other specimens 
from Panama, the Galapagos Islands, and one valve from Manta, 
Ecuador. 



*. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTINO OFFICR: 1981 



NOTES ON FRANCIS WALKER'S TYPES OF NORTH 
AMERICAN FLIES OF THE FAMILY TACHINIDAE 



By J. M. Aldrich 
Associate Curator, Division of Insects, United States Natio7ial Museum 



The well-known British entomologist Francis Walker described 
numerous North American flies of the family Tachinidae in two 
publications : List of the Specimens of Dipterous Insects in the Col- 
lection of the British Museum, part 4, 1849; and Insecta Saun- 
dersiana, or Characters of Undescribed Insects in the Collection of 
William Wilson Saunders, Esq., 1852. 

At that early time but little was known of the classification of the 
group, and Walker's descriptions were poor, even for the period. 
The first attempt to place his species in more restricted genera was 
by Osten Sacken, in his Catalogue of North American Diptera 
(Smithsonian Institution, 1878). Osten Sacken had the advantage 
of having examined many of the types in the British Museum, where 
Walker's were all deposited. He was not a specialist in the group, 
and but little advance in its classification had been made since the 
time of Walker, except in the works of Rondani and Schiner, which 
pertained only to the European members, with a few exceptions on 
the part of Rondani. 

The first serious attempt to identify Walker's North American 
species was by Coquillett, in his Revision of the Tachinidae of 
America North of Mexico (Technical Series No. 7, Division of 
Entomology, United States Department of Agriculture, 1897). Co- 
quillett had not seen Walker's types, but he studied the descriptions 
very carefully and believed that he had identified most of them. 
The nomenclature that he accepted has been adopted quite generally 
since that time, at least as to the species, although Townsend in 
various papers expressed the opinion that Coquillett had niisidenti- 
fied many of them. 

Maj. E. E. Austen reported the results of an examination of many 
of Walker's types in Annals and Magazine of Natural History, ser. 7, 
vol. 19, pp. 326-347, 1907. 

No. 2910.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80. Art. 10 
70406—31 1 



2 PROOEEDIISrGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

In 1929 I had the opportunity to examine most of Walker's type 
specimens, although in the time at my disposal I did not see all of 
them. The object of the present paper is to report the results of 
this work and to indicate as far as possible the available names of 
the species Coquiilett had before him, in those cases where he erred 
in his identification of Walker. Species of which I did not see the 
types are also included, with such explanations as I can offer from 
the much larger collections now available and the advances in classi- 
fication that have been made in recent decades. They are listed under 
Walker's names, and in the order of Coquillett's work, although in 
this arrangement I am obliged to begin with a series in which I did 
not see the tj^pes. 

I am under obligation to the authorities of the British Museum, 
especially to Maj. E. E. Austen, D. S: O., keeper of the division of 
insects, for the privilege of examining this important material. 

Only species from the region north of Mexico are here discussed. 

Gymnosonia par Walker, List, p. 692. Coquiilett (p. 43) made 
this a synonym of G. fuUginosa Robineau-Desvoidy. Type not seen. 
The genus is a striking one, and but one species is known from the 
Eastern States; no one has questioned the correctness of Coquillett's 
identification. 

Gymnosoma occidua Walker, List, p. 692. Coquiilett (p. 43) 
placed this as a synonym of Cistogaster ivmiaculafa Macquart. 
Townsend ^ discussed imm^acul ata and thought he could make out a 
division of the abundant material into two forms, but left occidua 
as a synonym of hnniaoulata as it had been placed by Coquiilett. 
Later ^ he decided that occidua is the valid name for one of the forms, 
immacidata for the other. He took up the subject again in his 
Taxonomy of the Muscoidean Flies,^ where he redescribed occidua 
in both sexes and referred it to the genus Gymnoclytia Brauer and 
Bergenstamm. The type of the genus is divisa Loew, the only 
included species, which is believed to be a synonym of occidua. The 
generic characters are slight, and there is room for difference of opin- 
ion as to whether it is not a synonym of Cistogaster. The genotype 
of the latter is the European gJohosa Fabricius, which has the petiole 
of the apical cell ending in the exact tip of the wing, and also has a 
less protuberant oral margin. Walker's description of the abdomen 
seems ample to fix the form he had. I did not see his type. 

Hyaloniyia occidentis Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 260. 
The description is less than five lines long. I did not see the type. 
Coquiilett (p. 44) believed he had recognized the species and referred 

1 Trans. Amfer. Ent. Soc, vol. 22, p. G6, 1895. 

2 Aim. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 6, vol. 19, p .SI, 1897. 
aSmilhsoniau Misc. Coll., vol. 51, p. 127, 1908. 



ART. 10 walker's north AMERICAN TACHINIDAE ALDRICH 3 

it to Phoj^antha, with several supposed synonyms. He mentioned 12 
localities and probably included at least 25 specimens, including a 
type of Hijaloinyia aldrichi Townsend. His series has been rear- 
ranged and mixed with other material in the attempt to make out 
the various forms included as synonyms and some specimens have 
apparently been used in exchange. Townsend ^ separated one speci- 
men as type of Phoranthella mo^^lsoni, new genus and species, but it 
remains totally undescribed. Robertson ^ expressed the view that 
Coquillett included at least three species and that occidentis can not 
be recognized from the description. Without publishing on the mat- 
ter, Townsend later separated a female unlike Coquillett's from Los 
Angeles County, Calif., and labeled it as occidentis "typical." 

It may be assumed that Coquillett misidentified occidentis^ as his 
specimens do not agree with Walker's statement, "Abdomen hoary, 
black toward the base and with two black bands," especially as to 
the black bands. If we leave the true occidentis aside until the type 
is seen, the question of the identity of Coquillett's species remains for 
consideration. He undoubtedly included aldrichi, and this name is 
the valid one for most of his specimens; some of his other synonyms 
may be distinct species. The genus should be Hyalomyla, as first 
given by Townsend. H. aldrichi is a widespread species, with the first 
abdominal segment black, all the following with glistening white 
l^ollen and with indications of a median black stripe. 

Trichopoda histrio Walker, List, p. 697. No locality, but the 
type must have been from tropical America; I did not see it. Coquil- 
lett (p. 48) made it a synonym of plumipes Fabricius. Townsend 
published notes on the group in Taxonomy of the Muscoidean Flies,*' 
in which he seemed to show histrio as a distinct form in his genus 
Polistomyia; but in his later work on the National Museum collection 
he apparently gave this up, as he left no specimens labeled with 
Walker's name. As to the status of Polistomyia, it is obvious from 
the sj)ecimens labeled by Townsend that the apical cell has a very 
short i^etiole and the hind tibiae are strongly ciliate, in the type spe- 
cies trifasciata Loew; other characters are very slight, hence I do 
not accept the genus, and should call the species Trichiopoda 
plumipes Fabricius, as Coquillett did, merely amending the spelling 
of the genus to agree with its original form. 

Phyto clesides Walker, List, p. 757. Coquillett (p. 51) identi- 
fied this as a species that he had described two years before ^ as Phyto 
setosa. Austen^ stated that Walker's type belongs to the genus 
Phorichaeta Rondani, a genus that has been regarded by later Euro- 

* Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 28, p. 23, 1915. 
scan. Ent., vol. 33, p. 285, 1901. 
« Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 51, p. 134, 1908. 
^Jonrn. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 3, p. 99, 1895. 
8 Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 33G, 1897. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. FO 

pean authors as a synonym of Wagneria Kobineau-Desvoidy. On 
examining the type I at first agreed with this disposition of it, but 
further examination showed that it belongs to Eutrichogena Town- 
send.® It is, in fact, the species on which Townsend based the genus, 
Trichogena setipennis Coquiilett, which becomes a synonym. Town- 
send ^° had stated that NeophoHchaeta johisoni Smith is a synonym 
of setipennis^ a conckision later accepted by Smith. There is no 
doubt of the validity of EutricTiogena); hence Walker's species should 
be called Eutrichogena clesides. Meanwhile Townsend ^^ had pro- 
posed the new genus Neophyto for Coquillett's sefosa, which is not a 
Pliyto. This has been generally accepted for years; Coquillett's 
species is therefore Neophyto setosa. It has no postscutellum, and I 
think it belongs to the family Sarcophagidae. 

Tachiiia tlieutis Walker, List, p. T78. Coquiilett (p. 52) placed 
this in its proper genus, Gryptomeigenia Brauer and Bergenstamm. 
I took full notes on the type, a male from Nova Scotia. The genus 
contains several North American species, which show modifications 
of the ovipositor in the female available for specific distinction in at 
least a part of the series. A revision of the genus is now in progress 
and will probably be published shortly after the present paper; 
hence it is not desirable to discuss the specific characters here. 

Tachina prisca Walker, List, p. 780. Coquiilett (p. 52) placed 
this as a synonj^m of the preceding, and it certainly belongs to the 
same genus. The type is a female from Nova Scotia, different from 
theutis^ on which I took notes that will be used in the forthcoming 
work just mentioned. 

Tachina convecta Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 276. 
Walker had already, page 264, established the genus Schizotachina 
for this and his Tachina eocul, immediately following it. Coquiilett 
(p. 55) made eanil a synonym of convecta^ which was a very natural 
course, as the descriptions are almost exactly the same. Both were 
from " United States." I was surprised on examining the type of 
convecta to find that it did not match the specimens I had with me. 
My notes run : 

One male, United States. It is in good condition as to antennae and abdo- 
men. I note first an absence of the interruptions of the basal silvery bands 
on second and third abdominal segments. The band seems entire on the second 
and only interrupted in the middle on the third ; although narrow in a certain 
light, they are not so sharply limited as in my two males. The band is in- 
distinct on the fourth segment laterally, perhaps on account of condition. The 
discal row of bristles on the fourth segment is distinctly behind the middle ; not 
so in mine. The narrowest part of the parafacial is much wider than in my 
males, and the bristles of the facial ridges are only four, on lowest one-third 
or two-sevenths. Wings a little milky. 

»Proc. Biol. Soc. WasMngton, vol. 28, p. 23, 1915. 
10 Insecutor Insiciae Menstruus, vol. 3, p. 116, 1915. 
"Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 51, p. 55, 1908. 



ART. 10 walker's north AMERICAN" TACHINIDAE ALDEICH 5 

The specimens I had with me had the narrow basal silvery bands 
of the second, third, and fourth abdominal segments three times in- 
terrupted ; in other words, a row of four silvery spots, the outer wider 
than the inner. This is the species referred to by Townsend when 
he says ^- that Clausicella usitata Coquillett (p. 56) and Neaera lon- 
gicornis Coquillett ^^ are synonyms of convecta. The discovery thnt 
there are two species of Schizotachina would seem to indicate usitata 
for the name of the second, but I have found a peculiar complication 
here. Coquillett described usitata from three males and four fe- 
males, collected in the White Mountains, N. H. (Morrison), and at 
New Bedford, Mass. (Hough). Later he decided that there were 
two species and removed those from the White Mountains, leaving 
only a female from New Bedford under the species label. Town- 
send's note on synonymy was based on this female, and he appar- 
ently knew nothing of the whereabouts of the males. I have had the 
good fortune to find the three males, and they belong to a species 
not named in our collection, which I place provisionally in the genus 
Plectops. Since no one has published anj^thing about the occurrence 
of two species under the name usitata.^ it remains to decide which 
shall bear the name. I therefore designate the males as the true 
nsitata^ letting the female go into longicornis. This course preserves 
all the names, while the designation of the female would leave us 
with two names for one species and none for the other. The effect 
of this designation is to leave Schizotachina longicornis Coquillett 
as the valid name for the second species of the genus, differing from 
convecta in having the basal abdominal bands three times interrupted, 
in having much narrower parafacials in the male, and in being 
decidedly smaller. 

Coquillett had three specimens that he called convecta; one from 
Horse Neck Beach, Mass., has no abdomen, but is probably the true 
convecta; while the other two, from Waco, Tex., and Colorado, are 
longicornis. 

Tachina exul Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 277. See note 
under preceding. Unfortunately I have no note on the type. There 
is very slight doubt that it is a synonym of convecta., as the two 
descriptions are so nearly identical. Walker thought the specimen 
a female, but as it has the third antennal joint divided it was cer- 
tainly a male. 

Dexia pedestris Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 313. Placed 
in Hypostena by Coquillett (p. 51). The type is a male of the 
genus Gryptomeigenia.) and is the same species as Walker's Tachina 
deinylus., 1849. 

"Ent. News, vol. 26, p. 366, 1915. 

"Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 25, p. 106, 1902. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

The species identified as fedestns by Coquillett was described by 
Townsend as Meigenielloides cinerea}'^ As Townsend did not con- 
nect his species with that of Coquillett, I failed to observe that they 
were the same, and redescribed it as Synoris coquilletti.^^ No other 
species of the genus is known. 

Dexia pristis Walker, List, p. 841. Coquillett (p. 64) placed 
the species in Macquartia, following an identification by Brauer 
and Bergenstamm. Before seeing the type I had accepted Coquil- 
lett's identification of the species, but had removed it from Mac- 
quartia to the genus P&eudeuantha^ which Townsend ^^ had erected 
for linelli^ new, from Mexico. An examination of the type showed 
that Coquillett had identified it correctly, Brauer and Bergen- 
stamm erred, however, in the genus to which they assigned the speci- 
men sent them for identification. Townsend did not accept 
Coquillett's species as the true pristis; in 1892 he had described it as 
Aporia Umacodis, and he later ^^ made this the type of the new genus 
Anaporia. This genus I do not consider distinct from Pseudeuantha. 

Tachina areos Walker, List, p. 766. Placed in Polidea by 
Coquillett (p. 64), a genus now regarded as synonymous with Lydlna 
Itobineau-Desvoid}^ Townsend had in 1892 described Tryphera 
americana^ T. polidoides^ and Polidea cmiencana in a single paper ^^ ; 
all these Coquillett placed as synonyms of areos. In my Catalogue 
of North American Diptera,^^ I separated Tryphera americana Town- 
send as a distinct species of Polidea^ from an examination of the 
type. 

As I did not see Walker's type, and as the large collection available 
for study shows much variation among the specimens, I can at present 
only indicate the nature of the problem here. There appears to be in 
Europe only one species of Lydina., the genotype, aenea Meigen. It 
differs from the common form in this country most obviously in 
having black palpi. I had regarded this as a sufficient distinction 
for areos until obliged to review the matter for the present paper. T 
now find that Walker stated that areos has " palpi black." There is 
now in the National Museum a series of five males and three females 
of Lydina., collected by me at Hammond, 111., June 24, 1915, all of 
which have black palpi; there is also a female from Viola, Idaho, 
collected by me. A male and a female of aenea from Italy (Bezzi) 
show some differences, but hardly more than our series shows within 
itself. If the black palpi are specific, and our specimens with that 
character belong to aenea., then Walker's areos is probably a synonym, 

"Troc. U. S. Nnt. Mus., vol. 56, p. 574, 1910. 

«Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 69, art. 22, p. 12, 1926. 

" Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 49, p. 416, 1915. 

1' Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 56, p. 560, 1919. 

" Can. Ent., vol. 24, pp. 78, 79, and 82, respectively, 1892. 

" Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 46, no. 1444, p. 436, 1905. 



ART. 10 walker's north AMERICAN TACHINIDAE ALDEICH 7 

and one of Townsend's names will apply to the species with yellow 
palpi. With only a single pair from Europe I am in doubt. We have 
42 specimens of Lydina from North America, and they show remark- 
able variations in antennal form and in the degree of hypertrophy of 
the front tarsi in the females. It would not be feasible to attempt a 
further analysis here. 

Tachina masuria Walker, List, p. 753. Coquillett (p. 72') 
identified this as the species that he had previously described ~^ as 
Clytiomyia exilis, making it the type of a new genus, Eutrixa. 
Austen -^ published the following note on Walker's type : " Is an 
Acemyla^ Rob.-Desv., apparently distinct from A. dentata Coq. and 
A. tibialis Coq." As I did not see the type, I can add nothing to this. 
Coquillett's species is easily disposed of by reviving his exilis, which 
is not a sjaionym; for some years it has been correctly known as 
Eutnxa exilis Coquillett. 

Tachina corythus Walker, List, p. 797. Coquillett (p. 73) 
placed it as a sj^nonym of Xanthoiiielana atrifennis Say. The de- 
scriptions agree very well, and no one has proposed a different 
disposition of corythus. I did not see the type. 

Tachina aelops Walker, List, p. 796. Coquillett (p. 73) placed 
this in the genus Beskia Brauer and Bergenstamm, which was 
erected for a new species named cornuta^ from Brazil. Coquillett 
placed cornuta as a synonym of aelops, and I '^'^ agreed with this 
on examining the type of cornuta, but without seeing the tj^pe of 
aelops. Austen -^ referred Walker's type to Beskia. Townsend -* 
still thinks the two species distinct; this, however, does not inter- 
fere with the correctness of the name used by Coquillett, Beskia 
aelops Walker, as he refers the species to that genus. I did not see 
Walker's type. 

Tachina insolita Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 277. Co- 
quillett (p. 85) placed this in the genus Melanophrys, along with 
the type species of the genus, flampennis Williston. Later ^^ he 
placed flavipennis as a synonym of insolita. The specimen now 
bearing his label as insolita is correctly named, but his specimen 
now bearing the name flavipennis is also insolita. He attempted 
to separate the two species by the abdominal bristles, which are 
somewhat variable and do not lend themselves to the purpose. In 
insolita the third antennal joint is hardly longer than the second; 
in -flavipennis it is fully twice as long in the female and even longer 
in the male. The male of insolita has a striking, thick median 

'OJourn. New York Eiit. Soc, vol. 3, p. 53, 1895. 
"Ann. Mag. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 360, 1907. 

22 Ann. Eut. Soc. Amer., vol. 18, p. 120, 1925. 

23 Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 3 9, p. 345, 1907. 
" Ent. News, vol. 39, p. 150, 1928. 

^sproc. U. S. Nat. Mils., vol. 37, p. 567, 1910. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

horn projecting downward on the second genital segment, and the 
parafrontal and parafacial are smoothly silvery down to the large 
brownish " transverse impression " near the vibrissae ; the male of 
■flavipennis has no honi on the genital segment, and the parafrontal 
and parafacial are shining black, except a narrow silvery band 
extending from the eye to the suture at the level of the second 
antennal joint. The female of -fiavifemiis has a silvery poUinose 
stripe from eye to antenna about as in its male, while that of 
insolita has a more diffuse, wider stripe beginning higher up at 
the eye and sloping downward as it approaches the antenna — it 
also has a rather faint spot of pale pollen on the parafacial resting 
against the eye at its lower curve. In both sexes, flavipennis has a 
clump of bristles at the vibrissa, while insolita has only one row. 

I examined the type of insolita; it is a female with characters as 
indicated. Coquillett had the species, but erred in trying to make 
two of it. I have also examined the types of flavipennis in the 
University of Kansas. 

Townsend^® described Atropharista jurinoides, new genus and new 
species, which is a synonym of Melanophrys insolita^ as pointed out 
by Coquillett, Townsend himself " having admitted the synonymy of 
the species. 

Ocyptera dotadas Walker, List, p. 694. Coquillett (p. 86) 
placed this as a synonym of Ocyptera caroUnae Eobineau-Desvoidy. 
The type, according to my notes, is " one male, a fragile and damaged 
specimen that I dare not spread." It is from Jamaica. In my revi- 
sion of the genus, to which I applied the prior name C ylindromyia^^ 
I placed both dotadas and caroUnae among the unidentified species. 

Walker's description states that the antennae are shorter than in 
the European forms; the abdomen is red, with base and tip black. 
These are the only characters given that seem of value in identifying 
the species. Perhaps specimens from Jamaica may ultimately justify 
a specific determination. 

Ocyptera epytus Walker, List, p. 694. Coquillett (p. 86) placed 
this as a synonym of caroUnae Eobineau-Desvoidy. I did not find 
the type in the British Museum. Townsend -" expressed the opinion 
that it is the same species as euchenor, but he made out the synonymy 
only from the description, and his euchenor was not the same as 
Walker's. I listed epytus as unidentified in my revision, noted under 
the preceding species. It was described from Georgia. 

Ocyptera euchenor Walker, List, p, 696. Coquillett (p. 86) 
placed this with the two preceding as synonyms of caroUnae 
Robineau-Desvoidy. In my revision of the genus, noted above, I 



2«Tr.nus. Amer. Ent. Soc, vol. 19, p. 92, 1892. 
2^ Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc, vol. 22, p. 72, 1895. 
28 Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 68, art. 23, p. 26, 1926. 
» Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 5, p. 177, 1897. 



AET. 10 walker's north AMERICAN TACHINIDAE ALDEICH 9 

placed the species by the aid of Major Austen, to whom I sent my 
manuscript key and some numbered specimens before publishing. 
The type, which I have since seen, is a female and agrees with the 
species accepted by me. The supposed euchenor of Townsend ^^ is 
vulgaris^ neAV species of my revision. 

Ocyptera dosiades Walker, List, p. C95. Coquillett (p. 86) 
identified this correctly. The type is a female. Major Austen had 
assisted me in placing it in my revision before I saw the type. I 
refer it to the genus Cylindromyia^ like the others. 

Tachina ampelus Walker, List, p. 732. Coquillett (p. 88) 
placed the species as a synonym of Panzeria radicmn Fabricius. 
Later, however, he separated specimens under the name anifelus^ 
which agree with the type, as I found by sending some to Major 
Austen for comparison. I failed to see the type myself, but there 
are good external characters. Tothill ^^ revised the genus and 
adopted Ernestia as the proper generic name, redescribing am'pelus 
(p. 273). It is a very common species. Coquillett apparently iden- 
tified the species correctly in 1897, but erred in making it a synonym 
of a European species not now believed to occur in North America. 

Curran ^^ has proposed to refer all our American species of 
Ernestia. to Merida Robineau-Desvoidy, since ours have inf rasquamal 
setules absent in the genotj^pe of Ernestia. Two questions arise here : 
Is the character of generic value, and is it possessed by the genotype 
of MeHciaf As to the first point, there seem to be no North Ameri- 
can species of Ernestia without infrasquamal setules, and they are 
absent in the Euro]3ean E. mdis., type of the genus. They are, how- 
ever, present in the European E, connivens Zetterstedt and E. pudicus 
Kondani (specimens determined by Doctor Villeneuve). Curran 
has proposed as a supplementary character that the posterior forceps 
of Ernestia are simple (or flat), while in Mericia they are keeled. 
Our American species have them keeled, and so does connivens^ but 
pudicus has them simple, thus dividing the two characters. As the 
infrasquamal setules are sometimes very few as well as minute, I 
hesitate to give them generic weight in the absence of other char- 
acters. As to my second question, it appears that MeHcia engonea 
Robineau-Desvoidy, the sole original species of the genus, can not 
be identified and is unknown. Stein ^^ says as much. It seems im- 
possible to assume that it has the characters indicated by Curran, 
who in response to an inquiry informed me that he did not know the 
species. Hence I should continue to call Walker's species Ernestia 
atufelus. 

sojourn. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 5, 176, 1S97. 
"Can. Ent., vol. 54, pp. 199 ff.. 1921. 
"^Ent. News, vol. 35, p. 214, 1924. 
"Arch. f. Naturg., vol. 90, p. 53, 1924. 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. SO 

Tachina pyste Walker, List, p. 754. Coquillett (p. 93) placed 
this in Exorista. The type is a female and agrees with the deter- 
mination of Coquillett. Aldrich and Webber ^* make pyste a syno- 
njaii of Tnaculosa Meigen of Europe, which Stein ^^ puts as a syno- 
n3^m of -floralis Fallen. Brauer and Bergenstamm had referred 
American specimens to the genus NemoHlla Rondani for Coquillett, 
and this genus is now generally accepted for the species. Hence 
Tachina pyste Walker should be called Nemorilla -floraUs Fallen. 

Tachina epicydes Walker, List, p. 786. Coquillett (p. 94) 
placed this as a synonym of ExoHsta affinis Fallen. The type is a 
male from Martins Falls, Albany River, Canada ; it runs in the key of 
Aldrich and Webber to Zenillia coerulea^ new species, and agrees 
with the description perfectly except that it appears to have true 
discals. The abdomen is rubbed and this point is not clear, but I 
accept the synonym}^, sinking coerulea. 

Eurygaster septentrionalis Walker, in Lord's " Naturalist in 
Vancouver Island," vol. 2, p. 339, 1847. Coquillett (p. 102) placed 
tliis as a synonym of Euphorocera cJaripennis Macquart. I did not 
find the type in the British Museum. The description is vague and 
incomplete, but reads like a Phorocera. It is as follows : 

Euryijaster septentrionalis, N. S. Foem. — Nigra, setosn, latiuscula ; capite 
argenteo-cinereo ; vertiee aurato ; frontalibns atris ; palpis rufescentibus ; an- 
tennis aristae dimidio incrassato ; thorace vittis quinque cinereis ; scutelli 
apice piceo ; abdomine cinereo subtessellato ; alis cinereis. 

Female. — Black, setose, rather broad. Head silvery cinereous, gilded above ; 
frontalia deep black, widening in front ; facialia bordered with bristles aloug^ 
most of the length from the epistoma. Palpi reddish. Antennae extending 
to the epistoma ; third joint linear, rounded at the tip, full six times the length 
of the second ; arista incrassated for half its length from the base. Thorax 
with five cinereous stripes; scutellum piceous at the tip. Abdomen slightly 
tessellated with cinereous, very bristly toward the tip, a little longer than 
the thorax. Wings cinereous ; veins black ; prebrachial vein forming an obtuse 
angle at its flexure, straight from thence to its tip. [Length omitted.] 

Tachina melobosis Walker, List, p. 743. Coquillett (p. 105) 
could not identify any specimens as belonging to this species, and 
placed it doubtfully as a Phorocera. I saw the type, a male from 
Florida, but had nothing with me to match it, nor can I find the 
species in the National Museum ; hence I quote the description I made 
from the type : 

Much resembles LypTKi dubia Fallen in having hairy eyes, large pteropleurals, 
abdomen thick apically and with discals, the first genital segment shining black 
and rather large and conspicuous. However, melobosis has much longer an- 
tennae, and the penultimate joint of the arista is elongate. 

Outer vertical larger than a hair ; ocellars proclinate and divergent ; 2 re- 
clinate frontals, 10 others to second fifth of third antennal joint, fully meeting 

3*Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 63. art. 17, p. 5, 1924. 
»3Arcla. f. Naturg., vol. 90, p. 83, 1924. 



I 



ART. 10 walker's north AMERICAN TACHIISriDAE ALDEICH 11 

the bristles on facial ridges. Third antennal joint long and wide, five times the 
second, upper angle prominent ; arista straight, thickened to beyond the middle. 
Antennal groove deep with sharp edges. Palpi blackish. Pollen of the narrow 
parafacial rather dark, very thin pollen on parafrontals, which look black. 
Mesonotum with indistinct stripes. Dorsocentral 3 ; sternopleural 2, 1 ; scutel- 
lum with 3 lateral, one rather long apical in poor condition. Abdomen shining 
black, bases of second, third, and fourth segments with band of whitish pollen ; 
venter almost wholly shining in side view, as deep close to the apex as at base. 
Mid tibia with two very distinct bristles on outer front side ; hind tibia with 
sparse bristles on outer side, not ciliate. Wing subhyaline, fourth vein with 
rounded, rectangular bend, then very concave, just closing the apical cell barely 
before the extreme apex ; hind cross vein erect, almost in middle between an- 
terior and bend ; first vein bare, third with two hairs. 

Tachina addita Walker is the female of this, and is so placed by 
Major Austen. 

The species may be left in Lypha until further material is found or 
the related forms revised. 

Tachina addita Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 290. Placed by 
Coquillett (p. 105) as a synonym of the preceding, and I found that 
Major Austen had made out the same synonjany from the types, with 
which I fully agreed. The locality was " United States." 

Tachina antennata Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 298. Co- 
quillett (p. 105) lists this as unrecognized, perhaps a Phorocera. I 
did not see the type, and nothing has been published upon it as far as 
I know. The description indicates a very recognizable and remark- 
able form, if the statements can be relied upon ; briefly, it has the eyes 
hairy, facial ridges bristly, and third antennal joint greatly widened, 
twice as wide as long; palpi and antennae black. Several species of 
North American Tachinidae are known with very wide third anten- 
nal joint in the male, but all of them that I can find in the collection 
have bare eyes and bare facial ridges. 

Tachina ancilla Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 299. Co- 
quillett (p. 106) placed this in the genus Frontina^ but he had the 
wrong species. I found the type to be the same species that Town- 
send described as Pseudornyofhyria indecisa.^^ Townsend suggested 
this synonymy in 1918.^'^ Major Austen ^® referred Walker's type to 
the genus Frontina. I referred indecisa to the genus 7'achinophyto 
(regarding Pseiulomyothyria as a synonym of the latter) .^^ 

Coquillett's species, which he mistook for ancilla, has been pro- 
vided for by Townsend,^'' who named it Frontiniella parancilla, new 
genus and species (by misprint pararcilla) . Townsend compared the 
new genus with the European genotype of Fi'ontlna; if he had com- 
pared with AchaetoTieura his differences would have disappeared 

»8 Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc, vol. 19, p. 132, 1892. 

^Troc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 20, p. 21, 1918. 

"^Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 337, 1907. 

'» Insecutor Inscitiae Menstruus, vol. 12, pp. 147, 149, 1924. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

except a few very slight ones. Webber, hoATever, in revising the 
genus Achaetoneura,^'^ has left this out; it may stand for the present. 

Tachina violenta Walker, List, p. 788. Coquillett (p. 108) 
identified this as a species of Frontina. The type is a male from 
Nova Scotia, and is the same species described on an earlier page by 
Walker as panaetius, which I take for the valid name. It is the 
same species described by Townsend as Tachinomyia rohusta.^^ In 
Ciirran's key to the species of Tachinomyia ^^^ the type runs to couplet 
3, but I did not venture to spread the genitalia and could not posi- 
tively exclude variata Curran, which, however, seems at most not 
more than a subspecies of robusta. The genus TacMnoinyia is a 
distinct one, hence violenta in my opinion is a synonym of Tachino- 
w/yia panaetius Walker. 

As to the species misidentified as violenta by Coquillett, the speci- 
men with Coquillett's label on was included in Achaetoneura testacea^ 
new species, by Webber.*^ Coquillett placed Masicera dubia Willis- 
ton ** and Masicera sphingivora Townsend *^ as synonyms of his 
supposed violenta. Webber has discussed these on pages 36 and 37 
of his recent revision. , 

Tachina irrequieta Walker, List, p. 788. Coquillett (p. 108) 
placed what he identified as this species in Fronting. The type is 
a female of Tachinomyia panaetius Walker. 

The species misidentified by Coquillett as irrequieta is included as 
Achaetoneura rileyi Williston by Webber in his revision of Achae- 
toneurc(\; *° Coquillett had already indicated the synonymy of this 
si:)ecies with the supposed irrequieta. 

Tachina dydas Walker, List, p. 748. Coquillett had no speci- 
mens Avhich he could identify as this species, and placed it (p. 108) 
as a doubtful species of Frontina. Major Austen*^ published a note 
on the type, making it a synonym of Eutachina rustica Meigen. I 
agree with this disposition after examining the type; but it seems 
that simulans Meigen has some years priority for the species, and 
the genus Eutachina has little to stand on as against Tachina of 
authors {=Exorista Meigen according to strict rules, as larvarum 
Linnaeus was the only species originally included in Exorista). On 
this basis the species becomes Exorista simulans Meigen. 

Tachina obconica Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 296. Co- 
quillett (p. 110) placed this as a synonym of Sturmia alhifrons 
Walker. The type is a female, not a male as Walker thought, and is 

*" Pioc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 78, art. 10, pp. 3, 35, 1930. 

-tt Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc, vol. 19, p. 96, 1S92. 

« Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, 1926, sec. 5, p. 108. 

" Proe. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 78, art. 10, p. 25, 1930. 

« Scudder's Butterflies of New England, vol. 3, p. 1924, 1889. 

<^ Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc, vol. 19, p. 286, 1892. 

<« Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 78, art. 10, p. 32, 1930. 

"Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 336, 1907. 



ART. 10 walker's north AMERICAlsr TACHINIDAE ALDEICH 13 

the species included by Coquillett on page 115 of liis Kevision as 
Masicera eufitchlae Townsend, which, however, is not the true 
eufltchiae of Townsend. Director Gillette, of the Colorado Experi- 
ment Station, has generously deposited in the National Museum five 
remaining specimens of the reared lot from which the type of 
Townsend's species came; I find it almost if not quite the same 
species that was described later by Tothill ^'^ as Lydella hyjyhantriae. 
Curran *^ has noted the same point about hyphantriae. This, how- 
ever, does not affect the Walker species, which I refer to Anetia 
Robineau-Desvoidy [Lydella of authors). 

Tachina albifrons Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 283. Co- 
quillett (p. 110) placed the species in Sturmia^ and identified it 
correctly, according to my examination of the type, which is a female. 
Walker preoccupied the name Tachina albifrons in 1837; hence 
Townsend ^^ has proposed the name ricinorum for the present species 
and makes it the type of the new genus Gymnocarcelia^ but without 
indicating any characters except " quite bare ej'^es." Without a 
fuller study than has yet been made of the American forms related 
to Sturijiia, it is difficult to estimate the value of some of the char- 
acters, but I should call this species Stur^nia Hcinorum Townsend. 

Tachina panaetius Walker, List, p. 767. Coquillett (p. 119) 
placed this as a synonym of mella Walker in the genus Tachina of 
authors. The type is a female from Nova Scotia, and Townsend's 
Tachinomyia rohusta is a synonym, which is the next species in 
Coquillett's Revision. I take Tachinomyia panaetius Walker as the 
valid name for the species, which includes as synonyms Walker's 
Tachina pansa^ T. violenta, and T. irrequieta. Major Austen had 
placed the four Walker species together as one in the British Museum 
a long time ago, but had not published his conclusion. 

Tachina pansa Walker, List, p. 787. Coquillett (p. 119) placed 
this with the preceding under nulla Walker. The type is a male of 
panaetius. 

Tachina mella Walker, List, p. 767. Coquillett (p. 119) placed, 
this in Tachina in the current sense. I did not find the type, the 
only mella that I discovered being one named by Townsend, agree- 
ing with Coquillett's interpretation. There is little doubt that Co- 
quillett had the right species, and no serious question has arisen 
on the point. The species is a very common northern one, and P 
think identical with Exorista larvaTum Linnaeus of Europe, com- 
monly referred to Tachina (see note under Tachina dydas). 

Tachina hybreas Walker, List, p. 785. Coquillett (p. 119) 
could not identify the species, but placed it as probably a Tachina. 

*8Caii. Dept. Agr. Bull. 3, Tech. Ser., p. 43, 1922. 
« Can. Bnt., vol. 59, pp. 12, 13, 1927. 
"Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 56, p. 582, 1919. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Major Austen ^^ stated that the type is headless and unrecognizable, 
perhaps a Ceromasia. My notes on it may be of little use, but I 
quote them : 

Female from Martins Falls, Canada. A robust specimen now headless and 
■with several legs gone as well as most of the bristles. Black with yellowish 
apex of scutellum. Postscutellum well developed. Calypters clear pale yellow. 
Dorsocentral 4 ; sternopleural 2, 1, in almost equilateral triangle ; scutellum 
with long and strong apicals like laterals. Abdomen with discals, gray pollinose 
on whole dorsal surface, but the hind edges of the segments subshining in some 
lights. Claws small. Third vein with five stout setules ; apical cross vein 
straight, bend oblique. 

Tachina helymus Walker, List, p. 795. Coquillett (p. 126) 
placed the species in his genus Metaohaeta. His identification of the 
species is correct. The type is a female from Maine. Recent 
authors have combined Mefachaeta Coquillett and PJiorichacta Ron- 
clani in the genus Wagneria Robineau-Desvoidy, of which the type 
species in Musca cai'honcuAa Panzer. From the key and descriptions 
given by Stein ^^ and from a single palaearctic specimen in the Na- 
tional Museum, I believe h^lyinus is identical with carhoiiaria Panzer 
and should, therefore, call the species Wagneria- carhoiiaria Panzer. 

Tachina trixoides Walker, List, p. 760. Coquillett (p. 138) 
placed the species as a synonym of MicrojjhthaJiyia disjuncta Wiede- 
mann. This was correct, according to information that I received 
from Major Austen while prejDaring my revision of the genus 
MicTOflifhahna.^^ I did not see Walker's type. 

Tachina punctifera Walker, List, p. 728. Coquillett (p. 141) 
placed this as a synonym of Feleteina tessellata Fabricius, a Euro- 
j3ean species not now believed to occur in North America, and super- 
seded here by Peletena iterans Walker. I saw the types of both 
and made punctifera a synonym of iterans Walker. 

Tachina anaxias Walker, List, p. 726, Coquillett (p. 141) 
placed this as a synonym of Peleteria rohusta Wiedemann. Curran ^* 
has identified it as a distinct species of the same genus. The type 
is a female from Nova Scotia, hard to identify in a group where the 
male genitalia are so important; it certainly shows little difference 
from the type of apicalis Walker, also a female, and from California, 
not Colombia as published. The latter dates from 1852, and I sus- 
pect that confusa Curran is a synonym of it. 

Tachina apicifera Walker, List, p. 718. Coquillett (p. 142) 
erroneously made this a synonym of Archytas analis Fabricius. 
Curran redescribed this species as Archytas vulgaris^ new species, 

61 Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist, ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 336, 1907. 
"Arch. f. Naturg., vol. 90, p. 123, 1924. 
M I'roc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 69, art. 13, p. 4, 1926. 
"Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, 1925, sec. 5, p. 245. 



ART. 10 walker's north AMERICAN TACHINIDAE ALDRICH 15 

in his revision of the genus ^^ ; the species that he called apiclfera is 
calif orniae Walker. The type of aficifera is a male from " North 
America " ; that of calif orniae is a male from California. 

Tachina californiae Walker, Insecta Sanndersiana, p. 270. 
Coquillett (p. 142) erroneously placed this as a synonym of Archytas 
analis Fabricius. See note under apicifera. 

Tachina atra Walker, Insecta Saundersiana, p. 273. Placed by 
Coquillett (p. 143) as a synonym of Archytas atcrrhia Robineau- 
Desvoidy. Major Austen ^'^ agrees with Coquillett, from the type, 
with which I agree also. Two other Walker species are synonyms of 
aterriina^ but have escaped notice f]'Om being described without lo- 
cality. These are Tachhm metallifera Walker, List, p. 719; and 
Tachina carhonifera Walker, List, p. 721. Austen thought the two 
were a single species.^^ I saw the types of the three. 

Tachina candens Walker, List, p. 720. Placed by Coquillett 
(p. 143) as a synonym of Archytas lateralis Macquart. A female 
supposed to be from Nova Scotia, but I surmise is neotropical. My 
notes are as follows : 

Female, considerably rubbed ; head has been off and glued on, but seems 
genuine. Has the characters of Archytas except that it has, or had, a pair 
of discals far forward on the second abdominal segment, and still has a single 
discal on the corresponding part of the third, its mate not developed. Rather 
large for Archytas, the abdomen shining mahogany red or a little darker 
except fourth segment, which is entirely polliuose above and below. Hairs of 
face and cheek yellow, abundant ; antennae red, third antennal joint black 
except for two-thirds of the length below, one and one-fourth times the second. 
The pleurae had yellow hair almost exclusively, and the remaining hairs around 
edge of dorsum indicate that the mesonotal hairs were yellow. Legs black. 
Length, 15 mm. 

I have been unable to find a specimen in the National Museum 
agreeing with this description, nor do I know what genus to put 
it in if the discals exclude it from Archytas. At any rate, it should 
be recognizable hereafter. 

Tachina iterans Walker, p. 727. Coquillett placed this (p. 143) 
as synonymous with Archytas lateralis Macquart. I was able to 
match the type with a male that I had with me, so took no notes. 
Curran has the species correctly in his revision of PeletenaJ^ It 
is properly Peleteria iterans Walker. Coquillett was misled by the 
express statement of Walker, " no bristles on the side of the face," 
which Austen ^^ says is " precisely the opposite of the fact." A 

K^Can. Ent., vol. 60, p. 276, 1928. 

J'" Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 330, 1907. 

»nbid., pp. 337, 338. 

'^ Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, 1924, sec. 5, p. 238. 

s^Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 328, 1907. 



16 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80 : art. 10 

synonym is Tachina punctifera Walker, List, p. 728, as I saw from 
the type. Peleteria iterans takes the place of PeleteHa tessellata 
Fabricius in North American literature. 

Tachina decisa Walker, List, p. 715. Coquillett (p. 143) placed 
this in the genus Echinomyia. The species is almost unmistakable, 
and he undoubtedly had the right one, and I think it belongs to the 
genus Jurinella. The generic reference requires a rather long dis- 
cussion, which I postpone for another occasion. I saw the type. 

Tachina degenera Walker, List p., 732. Coquillett (p. 144) 
placed this in his Echinomyia {= F dbi'^iciella Bezzi of Tothill's re- 
vision) as a synonym of E. algens Wiedemann. Major Austen,*^" 
however, examined the type and placed it in Ernestia, finding the 
eyes to be hairy. I did not see the type and am unable to add further 
details, 

Tachina signifera Walker, List, p. 708. Coquillett (p. 145) 
referred the species to the genus EpaJpns Rondani. I did not see the 
type, but it is hardly necessary, for of all Walker's species this is 
the easiest to identify. It would be almost impossible to mistake it 
within the area where the type was taken (Nova Scotia). As to 
the proper genus for signifera^ Townsend in his Peruvian collecting 
and later has brought to light a world of related forms without 
palpi. He has reported on his examination of the type of signifera 
in Revista Ent., vol. 1, p. 167, 1931, where he refers the species to 
his genus Argentoepalpus^ of which the type species is Epalpus 
niveus Townsend, from the Peruvian Andes. The genus was de- 
scribed in Insecutor Inscitiae Menstruus, vol. 6, p. 178, 1918, and 
the type species in the same journal, vol. 2, p. 136, 1914. I have 
compared niveus and signifera and agree with this reference. 

Tachina finitinia Walker, List, p. 707. Placed by Coquillett 
(p. 146) as a synonym of Bomhyliomyia ahrupta Wiedemann. I did 
not see the type, and it has not been reported upon; it is, however, 
a very recognizable species, which could hardly be mistaken, so I 
accept Coquillett's specific determination. Townsend ®^ has made 
ahrupta (of which I have seen the type) the type of Bonibyliopsis^ 
new genus. I find, however, that the species is so much like the 
genotype of Hystricia that it may very well be left there, so I call 
the species Hystncia abrupta Wiedemann. 



«»Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 7, vol. 19, p. 335, 1907. 
iProc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 28, p. 23, 1915. 



U. S. SOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: t9SI 



NORTH AMERICAN TWO-WINGED FLIES OF THE GENUS 
SPATHIMEIGENIA, WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF FIVE 
NEW SPECIES 



By J. M. Aldrich 
Associate Curator, Division of Insects, United States National Museum 



The present paper contains a discussion of the generic characters of 
the tachinid genus Sj^athimeigenia^ keys for separating the species 
in both sexes, and descriptions of five new species, with notes on the 
six heretofore known. 

I am under obligations to the authorities of the American Museum 
of Natural History and of the Massachusetts Agricultural College 
for the privilege of examining types of species not found in the 
United States National Museum ; to Dr. Alf ons Dampf , of the Oficina 
Federal para la Defensa Agricola, Mexico City, Mexico, for permis- 
sion to retain for the National Museum a series of specimens of the 
new species S. mexicana; and to William Middleton, of the United 
States Bureau of Entomology, for revising the nomenclature of the 
sawflies involved. 

Genus SPATHIMEIGENIA Townsend 

Spathimeigenia Townsend, Proc. Biol. Soc. "Washington, vol. 28, p. 19, 1915. — 

CuTvBAN, Can. Ent., vol. 62, p. 246, 1930. 
Hylotomomyia Townsend, Insecutor Inscitiae Menstruus, vol. 4, p. 31, 1916. 

Townsend established the genus Spathmieigenia in 1915 by assign- 
ing as type the species which Coquillett had erroneously identified 
as Tachina demylus Walker {Admontia demylus Walker of Coquil- 
lett ^). Believing that Coquillett 's species was not the true demylus^ 
Townsend named it spinigera, designating one of the Coquillett 
specimens as type. On examining the type of Tachina demylus in 
the British Museum, I found it to be a Cryptomeigenia^ leaving the 
name spinigera valid for Coquillett's species. Townsend gave no 
description of the genus and species. 



1 Revision of the Tachinid.ae of America north of Mexico, U. S. Dept. Agr., Div. Ent., 
Tech. Ser. No. 7, p. 54, 1897. 



No. 291 1.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 1 1. 

70407—31 1 



Z PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM Vol.80 

The type species of the genus Hylotomomyia is Admontia hyloto- 
mae Coquillett, by original designation. The genus was said to 
differ from Spathitneigenia in having no spines on the fourth seg- 
ment of the ventral abdominal keel of the female. This is evidently 
of merely specific importance, and Curran combined the two genera 
in his revision cited above. 

The genus is one of the easiest to recognize, from the presence 
on the lower part of the parafacial of an area bearing distinct hairs. 
The female has the abdomen keeled below and bearing stubby spines 
on the ventral margin of the keel, at least on the third segment. This 
female character is shared with Lydella and several other genera, 
which all have bare parafacials. 

The genotype has the following additional characters among 
others : Hypopleural bristles and postscutellum present ; one vertical 
bristle in male and female; ocellars proclinate; two upper frontals 
reclinate, the second i^air largest ; frontals extending to tip of second 
antennal joint; front slightly prominent at antennae, the face dis- 
tinctly receding; facial ridges with several bristles above vibrissae, 
the latter at oral margin, which is considerably above the lower edge 
of the head behind ; palpi and proboscis of ordinary form, the latter 
short; antennae extending about three-fourths of the way to the 
vibrissae, third joint about twice the second, at tip projecting 
slightly forward (not nearly so much as in Acemyia) ; arista bare. 
Acrostichal bristles, 3, 3 (one pair just before suture) ; dorsocentral, 
3, 3; presutural, 2 (inner small) ; supraalar, 3; intraalar, 3; sterno- 
pieural, 2, 1 ; pteropleural small ; inf rasquamal setules absent ; scutel- 
lum with three lateral pairs and one small discal, the apicals small 
and upturned. First abdominal segment with a pair of median mar- 
ginals, second to fourth with cliscals and marginals, the discals much 
better developed in male than female, the former having three irregu- 
lar pairs of different sizes, the latter with usually one small pair. 
Apical cell ending a little before tip of wing, bend of fourth vein 
rounded and oblique; hind cross vein in normal position, joining 
fourth vein at three-fifths of the distance between small and bend. 

The genus has a considerable degree of economic importance, and 
has been reared without exception from sawflies; many rearings are 
cited under the respective species. Several of the species, however, 
have not yet been reared. 

Eleven species are now known. I have seen the types of all, and 
with the exception of two they were before me in the preparation of 
the present paper. 



ART. 11 FLIES OF THE GENUS SPATHIMEIGENIA ALDEICH 3 

KET8 TO SPECIES OF SPATHIMB3GENIA 

MALES 

1. Scutellum without the usual pair of slender, upturned, apical 

bristles (British Columbia) buckelli Curran. 

Scutellum with slender, upturned apicals 2. 

2. Purafacial between eye and suture at least twice as wide as 

third antennal joint 3. 

Parafacial decidedly less than twice as wide as third antennal 
joint 4. 

3. Claws and pulvilli short (Kansas) bridwelli, new species. 

Claws and pulvilli long (Massachusetts, Indiana, Florida). 

hylotomae Coquillett. 

4. Claws and pulvilli short; apical cross vein not very oblique 

(Texas) texensis, new species. 

Claws and pulvilli long; apical cross vein quite oblique 5. 

5. Parafacial narrower than the widest part of third antennal joint 

(Quebec) aurifrons Curran. 

Parafacial wider than third antennal joint 6. 

6. Calypters pale yellow or ivory white, opaque (Michigan). 

erecta, new species. 
Calypters dark and translucent in middle, hind edge yellow 7_ 

7. Abdomen black to tip ; palpi a little longer than thii-d antennal 

joint (Mexico) obscura, new species. 

Fourth abdominal segment red or reddish at tip ; palpi a little 

shorter than third antennal joint 8. 

8. Legs black ; facial ridges bristly about halfway from vibrissae ; 

parafacial hairs numerous and rather long (Michoacan, 

Mexico) mexicana, new species. 

Legs usually red or reddish ; facial ridges less bristly ; hairs of 
parafacials less numerous (Northeastern United States; 
Texas spinigera Townsend. 

FEMALES 

1. Front with yellow or golden pollen 2. 

Front with cinereous or silvery pollen 4. 

2. Fourth abdominal segment wholly black aurifrons Curran. 

Fourth abdominal segment red at apex 3. 

3. Legs usually red or reddish ; posterior orbit with whitish or sil- 

very pollen spinigera Townsend. 

Legs black; posterior orbit with golden pollen mexicana, new species. 

4. Intermediate abdominal segments with discal bristles, small but 

distinct hylotomae Coquillett. 

Abdomen without discals 5. 

5. Tip of third antennal joint distinctly produced upward (Massa- 

chusetts) nigriventris Smith. 

Tip of antennal joint not so produced (Mexico) albopicta Bigot, 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80 

SPATHIMEIGENIA SPINIGERA Townscnd 

Spathimelgenia spinigera Townsend, Proc, Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 18, p. 19, 
1915.— Greene, Proc. Eut. Soc. Washington, vol. 23, p. 42, 1921 ; Proc. U. S. 
Nat. Mils., vol. 60, p. 11, fig. 90, 1922. — Middleton, Journ. Agr. Res., vol. 20, 
p. 757, 1921.— Johnson, List of the Diptera of New England, p. 186, 1925.— 
CuRBAN, Can. Ent., vol. 62, p. 246, 1930. 

Adnwiitia demyhis Walkek (misidentifled) Coquxllett, Revision of the Tachi- 
nidae of America north of Mexico, pp. 9, 53, 1897. — Johnson, in Catalogue 
of the insects of New Jersey, p. 668, 1899; 1910, p. 776. — Townsend, Proc. 
Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 14, p. 165, 1912; Journ. New York Ent. Soc, 
vol. 21, p. 304, 1913. 

Hyperecteina demylus Walkek (misidentifled) Smith, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash- 
ington, vol. 14, p. 126, 1912.— Johnson, Diptera of Florida, p. 70, 1913. 

Masicera demylus Walkek (misidentifled) Johnson, Diptera of Florida, p. 332, 
1895. 

The description has been given in part under the generic charac- 
ters. The legs are usually red, but tend toward brown in some speci- 
mens and are black in a few. The pollen of the parafrontals, para- 
facials, cheeks, and posterior orbit is golden. In the male the abdo- 
men is considerably flattened in good specimens and is more or less 
reddish at the sides, more so ventrally. The grayish pollen extends 
from the base beyond the middle on segments 2 and 3, and almost 
to tip in segment 4, which is red apically. The female has the 
apical third of the fourth abdominal segment and all the genital 
structures red; the keel has a strong double row of short, stout 
spines, beginning on the second segment and continuing well on the 
fourth. 

The nearest related form is mexicana, under which I liaA^e dis- 
cussed the rather slight differences. 

The National Museum has 10 males and 12 females of spinigera, 
with the following data (the first two rearings were published by 
Coquillett, 189T, p. 9, and those by Rohwer, Middleton, and Knull by 
Greene, 1921, p. 42) : 

One male and one female reared from Neodiprlon abhoftii Leach, 
collected in Virginia near Washington, D. C, by E. A. Schwarz ; the 
female of these is the one bearing Coquillett's label '■'•Admontla 
demylus Wlk.," which was designated by Townsend as the type of 
spinigera. 

One male reared from Neodiprion lecontei Fitch, taken in Vir- 
ginia near Washington, D. C, by Theodor Pergande. 

Three males and one female reared from the same host and one 
male reared from Neodiprion sp., all collected at Reading, Pa., by 
S. A. Rohwer. 

One female from the same host, collected at Linglestown, Pa., by 
William Middleton. 



ART. 11 FLIES OF THE GENUS SPATHIMEIGENIA ALDRICH 5 

One male and one female reared from same host, taken at Falls 
Church, Va., by S. A. Eohwer (Hopkins No. 10175, referred to 
hylotomae by Greene, cited above). 

One male and four females reared from Neodiprion- arney^icanus 
Leach, taken at Falls Church, Va., by William Middleton. 

One female reared from Neodiprion affinis Rohwer, taken at same 
place by J. N, Knull. 

One female reared from Neodiprion sp., taken at same place by 
S. A. Rohwer. 

One female pinned with sawfly cocoon, locality unknown. 

Two males, Westfield, Pa., labeled " ex sawfly." 

One female reared by J. D. Mitchell at Victoria, Tex., but the 
notes have been lost. It is a poor, shriveled specimen, but seems 
to belong here. 

For a supposed specimen from California, see under S. aurifrons. 

Johnson reported the species from Florida. Nearly all the records 
are within the area comprising New England, New York, New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, and the vicinity of Washington, D. C. 

JV/^e.— Female, U.S.N.M. No. 19133. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA MEXICANA, new species 

Besides having all the characters mentioned as pertaining to the 
genotj'pe, the following may be mentioned : 

Male. — Front rather narrow, at narrowest about 0.21 of head 
width (three measured : 0.2, 0.22, 0.22) ; pollen deep golden on 
parafrontals, parafacials, and posterior orbits; face with yellow 
pollen; facial ridges bristly about halfway up; antennae black; 
palpi yellow. Thorax with gray pollen, on which are two pairs of 
inconspicuous stripes, ending considerably before the suture. Abdo- 
men elongate; irregular discals of several sizes on last three seg- 
ments, hairs large, sparse and erect on last two; pollen gray on 
last three segments, the apical third or thereabouts brown ; generally 
in an oblique side view it will appear light on one side of the middle 
line, dark on the other, and these shades will reverse themselves in 
a dilferent view. Tip of fourth joint red, sometimes a little red on 
sides of second, rarely on third. Legs black. Anterior tibia with 
a single outer posterior bristle ; middle tibia with one on outer front 
side, one flexor, and two on outer hind side. Hind tibia with a 
scattering row of bristles of unequal size on outer hind side. Wings 
distinctly infuscated toward base, third vein with two or three 
hairs. 

FeTTiale. — Front narrowest at extreme vertex, where it measures 
about 0.29 of head width (three measured : 0.27, 0.3, 0.3), thence very 
gradually widening, and quite prominent at antennae; facial ridges 



6 PROCEEDIlSrGS OF THE NATIOlSrAL MUSEUM vol.80 

with smaller bristles than in male, the uppermost not so high ; hairy- 
patch of parafacial reaching nearly to lowest f rontals. Shining api- 
cal portion of second, third, and fourth abdominal segments narrower, 
the pollinose portion more uniform in color but still showing the 
median division in oblique light ; fourth segment fully half red. One 
pair of erect discals on second, third, and fourth segments; keel red 
on third segment; spines of keel conspicuous on second, third, and 
fourth segments, but those of second are more slender than the others 
and somewhat longer. 

Length of male, 7-9.5 mm. ; of female, 6-7.5 mm. 

Described from 19 males and 12 females, all' reared from Neodi- 
prion vallicola Rohwer, at Erongaricaro, Michoacan, Mexico, arid sent 
to the National Museum by Dr. Alfons Dampf, of the Oficina para 
la Defensa Agricola of the Mexican Department of Agriculture. 
Eleven males and six females are returned to Doctor Dampf, the re- 
mainder retained in the National Museum. The host sawfly was 
also sent for determination. 

The species is closely related to spinigera^ but differs in the charac- 
ters given in the keys, to which may be added that the ground color 
of the parafacials and cheeks is mostly yellow in the latter, quite 
black in niexicana. The males of sp'lnige7'a have light yellow or 
grayish pollen on the posterior orbits. 

Type.— Male, U.S.N.M. No. 43354. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA OBSCURA, new sp«cies 

This is a large Mexican species similar to 77iexicana, but differs as 
indicated in the key. It has a striking character, which may be an 
abnormality in the single specimen — there is a long bristle on each 
parafacial close to the suture, turned in across the face and appear- 
ing without careful scrutiny as one of the bristles of the ridge, but 
larger than the others. These bristles arise outside the suture but 
close to it, as stated, and are unlike anything I have ever seen in 
flies of this relationship. 

One male, Mexico, without precise locality, donated by H. J. Rein- 
hard. 

Type.— Male, U.S.N.M. No. 43355. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA AURIFRONS Curran 

Spathimeigenia aurifrons Cueran, Can. Ent., vol. 62, p. 246, 1930. 

Described from eight specimens of both sexes, all reared from Ne- 
odiprion sp. at Mont Laurier, Quebec, by M. B. Dunn. Type in the 
Canadian National Collection, Ottawa; paratypes in American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, New York. The latter institution has do- 
nated a female and lent a male, paratypes, to the National Museum, 



ART. 11 FLIES OF THE GENUS SPATHIMEIGENIA ALDRICH 7 

With these for comparison I have identified three additional speci- 
mens in our collection : One male, reared along with several speci- 
mens of spinigera from N eocUfrimi lecontei Fitch taken at Reading, 
Pa., by S. A. Rohwer; one male, Redlands, Calif., bred from Neodi- 
prion edwardsii Norton, collected by H. E. Burke; and one female 
from Snow Creek Crossing, Yosemite National Park, Calif., reared 
probably from a Neodiprion by J. M. Miller. The Redlands speci- 
men was referred to spinigera, and the Yosemite one to hylotomae^ 
by Greene.^ 

Curran has given a full description of both sexes, but he attached 
too much importance to the yellow jDollen of the front. The fact 
that the material from Reading, Pa., yielded both this and spinigera 
looks suspicious, but there seem to be two fairly tangible differences 
when all the material of the two species is examined — the male of 
aurifi'Ons has narrower parafacials, and both sexes have the fourth 
abdominal segment wholly black. 

Paratype.—FQm^lQ, U.S.N.M. No. 43359. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA HYLOTOMAE Coquillett 

Admontia hylotomac Coquillett, Can. Ent., vol. 30, p. 233, 1898. — Johnson, 

Catalogue of t!ie insects of New Jersey, p. 77G, 1909. — ^Townsend, Journ. 

New York Ent. Soc, vol. 21, p. 304, 1012.— Essig, Insects of western North 

America, p. 579, 1926. 
Eyperecteina hylotomae Smith, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 14, p. 123, 1912. 
Hylotomom>jia hylotomae Townsend, lusecutor Inscitiae Menstruus, vol. 4, 

p. 31, 1916.— Geeene, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 23, p. 42, 1921 ; Proc. 

U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 60, art. 10, p. 11, fig. 57, 1922.— Johnson, List of the 

Diptera of New England, p. 188, 1925. 
Spathimeiffcnia hylotomae Cuekan, Can. Ent., vol. 62, p. 246, 1930. 

Male. — Front wider than in sjnnigera (the best two measuring 
0.26 and 0.28 of head width), pollen of paraf rentals, parafacials, 
cheek, and posterior orbit subsilvery ; eye more diagonal, so that the 
lower part of the posterior orbit is wider; tip of third antennal joint 
usually not at all jjrotruding forward; chaetotaxy as in spinigera, 
except that there is only a single large pair of discals on each of the 
last three abdominal segments ; calypters almost pure white ; abdomen 
mostly shining black, with silvery basal bands on last three segments, 
which in certain lights extend thinly over half or more of the length. 
Fourth segment wholly black. 

Female. — Front about one-third of head width (three measured: 
0.32, 0.32, and 0.33) ; discal bristles small but distinct, one pair to the 
segment; abdomen with narrower basal silvery bands than in male; 
keel usually not very prominent, the spines confined to the third seg- 
ment, piercer as in spinigera but somewhat smaller. 



2 Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 2.3, p. 43, 1921. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Redescribed from 8 males and 10 females in the National Mu- 
seum collection. The type series consists of 3 males and 4 females, 
Woods Hole, Mass., bred from Hylotoma humeralis Beauvois by 
H. G. Dyar. Three additional males were bred from Arge sp. at 
East River, Conn., by C. R. Ely; 4 females bred at Falls Church, 
Va., from Arge sp., by Carl Heinrich; 1 female bred at Westerly, 
R. I., by workers at the Gypsy Moth Laboratory. One female was 
collected at Miami, Fla., by Townsend ; 1 male at La Fayette, Ind., 
by myself; and 1 male from Massachusetts has no collector label. 

ry^e.— Male, U.S.N.M. No. 4061. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA NIGRIVENTRIS Smith 

Spathimeigenia nigrwentris Smith, Psyche, vol. 24, p. 139, 1917. — Johnson, List 
of the Diptera of New England, p. 185, 1925. 

Described from a single female in the collection of ihe Massachu- 
setts Agricultural College, presumably from Massachusetts. The 
type has been generously loaned to the National Museum for my 
examination. The pollen of the front is cinereous, not yellow. There 
are absolutely no discal bristles, even minute ones. The fourth 
abdominal segment is wholly black; the keel is well developed, bear- 
ing on the third segment four pairs of blunt spines, and on the fourth 
segment two pairs, the second segment with about two somewhat 
longer and less blunt. The apical cross vein is not so oblique as in 
spinigera and the others, sharing this peculiarity with texensis. 
Infrasquamal setules absent. For other characters, see original 
description. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA EEECTA. new species 

Male. — Front narrow (0.21 and 0.23 of head width in the two speci- 
mens) ; parafrontals light yellow poUinose, the parafacials, cheeks, 
and posterior orbits subsilvery; antennae black, third joint twice 
the second, slightly upturned and pointed at tip; last three ab- 
dominal segments with a one or two pairs of discals and several much 
smaller erect large hairs or very small bristles; a longitudinal area 
between the discals is changeable in color from the median line, one 
half looking dark when the other is light, and reversing when viewed 
at a different angle. Fourth segment very obscurely reddish at tip. 
Sides of abdomen reddish in ground color toward base. Otherwise 
as in spinigera. 

Length, 7.4 mm. 

Female. — Unknown. 

Described from two males, reared at Kalamazoo, Mich., from 
Neodiprion sp. by R. A. Todd. Date of emergence, August 27, 1903. 

Ty^e.— Male, U.S.N.M. No. 43356. 



ART. 11 FLIES OF THE GENUS SPATHIMEIGEFLl ALDRICH 9 

SPATHIMEIGENIA BRIDWELLI, new species 

Male. — Front narrowest at extreme vertex, where it is 0.35 of the 
head width by micrometer measurement — the widest of any of the 
species. The parafrontals and parafacials are also wider than in 
the others, the former being but little narrower on each side than the 
frontal stripe, the latter as wide as three-fourths the length of the 
third antennal joint; cheek wide, three-sevenths of the eye height. 
The pollen of the parafrontals, parafacials, cheeks, and posterior 
orbit is subsilvery, with no yellow tinge. Antennae black, rather 
short, third joint barely twice the second. Facial ridges with four 
or five small bristles, extending about one-fourth of the way to base 
of antennae. The parafacial has the usual group of black hairs, 
which are rather numerous and almost cover the lower two-thirds. 
Thoracic chaetotaxy as in genotype, except that there is no inner 
presutural. Abdomen shining black with very narrow silvery basal 
bands on segments 2, 3, and 4; on the sides of the last two a very 
delicate tomentum forms a grayish subopaque patch on each, rounded 
above and covering all but the anterior and posterior edges (this is 
a very characteristic feature, similar to the " sexual patch " that 
occurs in other male tachinids, and should readily identify the 
species). 

Legs black; claws and pulvilli short. Front tibia with two bristles 
on outer hind side, middle tibia with two on outer front. 

Wings slightly darkened toward base ; calypters white. 

Length, 7 mm. 

One male, Baldwin, Kans., June, collected by J. C. Bridwell. 

7'y^^.— Male, U.S.N.M. No. 43357. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA TEXENSIS, new species 

Male. — Front rather wide, at vertex measuring in the single speci- 
men 0.32 of head width, continuing at same width three-fourths of 
the way to antennae. Pollen subsilvery on parafrontals, parafacials, 
cheeks, and posterior orbits. Facial ridges bristly two-fifths of the 
way to base of antennae. Parafacial narrower than third antennal 
joint, with rather sparse dark hairs from the middle downward. An- 
tennae black, second joint a little shorter than in the other species, 
hardly one-half the third, which is rounded at apex. Cheek one- 
fifth eye height. Thorax with subsilvery pollen, not so grayish as 
in other species; chaetotaxy as in genotype. Abdomen badly dam- 
aged, but the last three segments appear to be shining on posterior 
half, discals if present must have been minute. Legs black; claAvs 
and pulvilli small. Wings rather evenly pale brownish, apical cross 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80: art. 11 

vein less oblique than in any of the other species except hridwelli, the 
bencl might almost be called a rounded angle. Calypters white. 

Length, about 8 mm. 

One male, Brownsville, Tex., collected by C. H. T. Townsend. 

Tijpe.—Male, U.S.N.M. No. 43358. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA BUCKELLI Curran 

SpatJiimeigenia tuckelli Curran, Can. Ent., vol. 58, p. 216, 1926. 

Described from a single male, collected at Osoyoos, British Colum- 
bia, by E. R. Buckell. The type is in the Canadian National Col- 
lection. It was in my possession several years ago for determination, 
and was labeled by me " HijlotomoTnyia^ n. sp." I have not seen it 
since and have no notes on its characters. Curran has given a com- 
plete description, which is readily accessible. The absence of the 
small apical scutellars, with the well-developed outer verticals, silvery 
head pollen, and wide parafacials will make it easily recognizable. 
It is not represented in the National Museum, and there is no record 
of any specimens except the type. 

SPATHIMEIGENIA ALBOPICTA Bigot 

Chactolyga altopicta Bigot, Ami. See Ent. France, 1888, p. 258. 
Oymnostylia alhopicta Brauee, Sitz. Kais. Akad., vol. 106, p. 351, 1897. 

Briefly described by Bigot from two females, locality " Mexico." 
Brauer saw the types and referred them to Gymnostylia. I saw the 
types in Mr. Collin's collection at Newmarket, comparing them with 
an authentic specimen of hylotomae that I had with me. There is 
no question about the generic reference; my notes state that the 
species is "a Spathimeigenia, having fine hairs on the lower part of 
parafacial, no infrasquamal setules, piercer in female, etc. Differs 
from hylotom-ae in having cheek one-fifth of eye height, no discals 
on second, third, and fourth abdominal segments. Very similar in 
other characters." I know of no other specimens in collections. 



U. S GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1931 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80. ART. 12 PL 1 




Interior of St. Lawrence Island 
Looking west from the top of the mountain at Cape Kialegak, at tlie .southeast end of the island. 







J 



r^^^ 










?t> . . 1* 



Cape Kialegak 
Southeast end of- St. Lawrence Island. 



THE BIRDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND, BERING SEA 



By Herbert Friedmann 
Curator, Division of Birds, United States National Museum 



During the summer of 1930, Henry B. Collins, jr., of the Division 
of Anthropology of the United States National Museum, made an 
expedition to St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea. Although the chief 
aims of his trip were in the fields of archeology and anthropology, 
he used his spare time to advantage in collecting biological material 
as well. Among the latter were 109 bird skins, constituting the 
largest single ornithological collection ever made on that island. 
These specimens have been carefully studied and form the basis 
of this paper, but inasmuch as so little has been written about the 
bird life of St. Lawrence Island, I have included all previously 
published data as well, making the present contribution as complete 
as possible. 

St. Lawrence Island is one of the northwestern outliers of the 
area covered by the American Ornithologists' Union Check-List, 
the official list of the birds of the North American faunal region, 
but geographically it is as much a part of Asia as of North America. 
Because of its position as a spatial link between the Palearctic and 
the Nearctic regions, St. Lawrence Island possesses more interest 
than might otherwise be attached to a semibarren island of its size. 
(Figs. 1 and 2.) 

The best description of St. Lawrence Island is that given by John 
Muir in his book " The Cruise of the Corwlny Unfortunately many 
of his statements about the theoretical glaciation of the island have 
since been discredited, and recent expert opinion has been to the 
effect that the island never was glaciated. By omitting the inaccu- 
rate statements of past history, however, we may extract a fair 
picture of the place from Muir's writings. 

St. Lawrence Islautl, the largest in Bering Sea, is situated at a distance of 
about 120 miles off tlie moutli of the Yuljon, and 45 miles from the nearest 
point on the coast of Siberia. It is about 100 miles in length from east to 
west and 15 miles in average width, a dreary, cheerless-looking mass of black 
lava, dotted with volcanoes, covered with snow, without a single tree ♦ * *. 



No. 2912.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum. Vol. 80. Art. 12. 
70631—31 1 1 



PROCEEDINGS OE THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



* * * It is traversed by numerous valleys and ridges and low gaps 
* * *. Nearly all the volcanic cones with which the central part of the 
island is in great part covered * * 
weathered as yet. 



present well-formed craters but little \ 



i7d* 



174-° 



170" 



166° 



IbZ" 




170' 



166 



Figure 1. — Map of the Bering Sea region, showing the location of St. Lawrence 
Island with reference to Asia and North America 



All the surface of the low grounds * * * ig covered with wet, spongy 
tundra of mosses and lichens, with patches of blooming heathworts and dwarf 
willows, and grasses and sedges, diversified here and there by drier spots, 
planted with larkspurs, saxifrages, daisies, primulas, anemones, ferns, etc. 
These form gardens with a luxuriance and brightness of color little to be hoped 
for in so cold and dreary-looking a region. 



ART. 12 



BIRDS OF ST. LAVv'EEXCE ISLAXD — FRIEDMAN N 



In another place he writes of the advent of summer on the island. 
On May 28 winter was still in full possession of the place, but 11 days 
later he found — 

* * * the dwarf willows, tlrabas, erigerons, and saxifrages pn^liing up 
their buds and leaves, on spots bare of snow, with wonderful rapidity. This 
was the begiimiug of spring at the northwest end of the island. On July 4 the 
flora seemed to have reached its highest development. The bottoms of the 
* * * valleys were in many places covered with tall grasses and carices 
evenly planted and forming nieadoAvs of considerable size, while the drier por- 
tions, and the sloping grounds about them were enlivened with gay, highly 
colored flowers, * * * 

The environmental conditions existing at present in St. Lawrence 
Island are very different from those that obtained there in the Ter- 
tiary, but the avifauna is wholly that of the surrounding tundra 






/VOf^TH CAPE 

CAPe KUHULIAH 



\A/esT cAPe 



SOUTf^lnfSST CAPe 




^ourne/iST CAPE 



.yoprffCAST 
cspe 

S^sr CAPS 

\.Pi/fVUK /SLANO 
CAPE HiALt'eAK 



Figure 2. — St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea, showing localities mentioned in this 

paper 

country of Siberia on the one hand and of Alaska on the other. At 
the suggestion of Prof. R. W. Chaney, of the Carnegie Institution 
of Washington, Collins searched for, and found, fossiliferous shales 
of Tertiary age, which, on examination, proved to contain remains 
of sequoias, poplars, and other plants. The former existence of the.se 
trees on the island, now so destitute of arboreal vegetation, is looked 
upon by Chaney as strong evidence of a former land connection 
across Bering Straits between Siberia and Alaska, as sequoias have 
been found in a fossilized state in both those regions and in Mongolia y 
although thej' are now restricted in living condition to California. 
That the birds do not reflect the history of the island is not remark- 
able, as the distance from the west end of the island to Siberia is only 
some 40 miles, a readily negotiable flight for any of the birds now 
inhabiting it. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol S) 

Surrounded by angry seas, closed to navigation for a good part 
of the year, St. Lawrence Island has been visited but rarely, in 
contrast to some of the other islands, such as the Pribilofs, and 
most of the few parties that touched its bleak shores remained for 
only very short periods of time. In fact, so little work has been 
done there in natural history that it is possible to outline every such 
attempt in a short paper such as this. 

The first mention of the island is to be found in Vitus Bering's 
journal.^ On August 8, 1728, when in latitude 64° 30' N., Bering 
met with eight Chukchi men who asked him who he was and whv 
he came. " On being invited on board, they put one man over, 
who * * * swam over to have a talk with us. A little later 
the boat moved up to us and the men in it told us * * * that 
a short distance from here the coast turns to the west, and that not 
far ahead of us is an island. We located this island, which we 
named St. Lawrence, in honor of the day, and found on it a few 
huts but no people, although I twice sent the midshipmen to look 
for them." It may be noted that while the date in the journal reads 
August 8, the map shows that St. Lawrence Island was visited on 
August 10. There is nothing in Bering's account to indicate that 
he or any of his men actually landed on the island, and, as a matter 
of fact, Da 11 ^ writes definitely that Bering did not land there but 
merely cruised off its shores. 

In 17G7 Lieutenant Sind saw several clusters of small islands, 
which were probably the peaks of the old volcanoes on St. Lawrence 
and which seemed like separate little islands in the fog. He did not 
land there, and his journey leaves us no richer in information about 
St. Lawrence. 

In 1777 Capt. James Cook saw the western highlands of the island 
and named the land Clerke's Island. In the account of his cele- 
brated voyage '' we find that " * * * Clerke's Island * * * 
stands in the latitude of 63° 15', and in the longitude of 190° 30'. 
It seemed to be an island of considerable extent, in which are several 
hills, all connected by low ground, so that it looks, at a distance, 
like a group of islands." In another entry * is the first note on 
record of the bird life of this island : "About midnight, the Isle of 
St. Lawrence was five or six miles distant * * *. We were ac- 

* Bering's voyages. An account of the efforts of the Russians to determine the rela- 
tion of Asia and America, vol. 1, p. 18, 1922. Edited by F. A. Golder; published by the 
American Geographical Society. 

' Ball, W. H., A critical review of Bering's first expedition, 1725-1730, together with 
a translation of his original report upon it, with a map. Nat. Geogr. Mag., vol. 2, no. 2, 
p. 31, 1890. 

« Cook, Capt. James, and King, Capt. .Tames, A voyage to the Pacific Ocean, under- 
taken by command of His Majesty, for making discoveries in the Northern Hemisphere : 
Performed under the direction of Captains Cook, Clerke, and Goie in the year 1TT6, 
1777, 1778, 1779, and 1780, vol. 3, pp. 83, 84, 1784. 

«Idera, vol. 4, pp. 19. 20. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 12 PL. 2 




i^^^ '^"'-' 






Gambell, Northwest End of St Lawrence Island 
riioto taken in October, WM). 




The Mountain back of Gambell 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80. ART. 12 PL. 3 





Two Views of the Cape at gambell 



UJT. 12 BIRDS OP ST. LAWEEXCE ISLAND PEIEDMANN 5 

companied with sea fowl of various sorts, and observed some guil- 
lemots and small crested hawks." Cook believed to the end that 
Gierke's and St. Lawrence were two separate islands, and we find 
that on the map in Pennant's "Arctic Zoology " ^ the island is called 
Gierke's Island. 

St. Lawrence Island was first actually visited in 1816, when 
Kotzebue's party, of whom Eschscholtz was the naturalist, landed 
there. They returned again in 1817, when Louis Ghoris also landed 
there on June 28 (July 10 old style). Kotzebue's contribution to 
knowledge of the fauna of the island is not very extensive. All he 
wrote in this connection was that the " * * * reindeer, which 
belongs to both coasts, seems to be wanting in St. Lawrence Island." 

Ghoris^ figures AJcella pygmaea from St. Lawrence Island, this 
being the first definitely identifiable bird record for the island. 

Gaptain Beechey took his ship, H. M. S. Blossom^ to St. Lawrence 
Island in 1826, and Vigors, in his report on the ornithology of that 
famous voyage,^ lists Giceronia pusllla (under the name Gerorhinca 
occidentalls) as being brought off from St. Lawrence Island in 
great abundance. 

The island was not visited again until the now historic cruise of 
the CoTwin in 1881, when E. W. Nelson and John Muir, among 
others, landed on St. Lawrence. Nelson recorded about 20 forms of 
birds, this being the first attempt at a list of its avifauna. The total 
time spent on the island was short. May 28 to 31 and June 7 to 9. 
H. W. Elliott and Lucien M. Turner also made short visits to St. 
Lawrence Island about this time. 

A number of the members of the Harriman Alaska Expedition 
spent part of a day, July 13, 1899, on St. Lawrence Island. The 
landing party included Robert Ridgway, C. Hart Merriam, A. K. 
Fisher, and L. J. Gole. Unfortunately but little opportunity was 
given to make observations on the birds. They collected 16 speci- 
mens of 6 species and made notes on 3 others. Doctor Fisher lias 
very kindly sent me his notes of that day for use in this paper. 

During the summer of 1896, Alvin Seale and N. B. Scofield made 
a journey to Point Barrow and passed close by St. Lawrence Island 
on July 1, and noted three species there. 

W. Sprague Brooks and Joseph Dixon spent a good part of June, 
1913, on St. Lawrence Island and noted 22 kinds of birds, collecting 
specimens of the majority. F. Seymour Hersey was on the island 

^ I'eunant, Thomas, Arctic zoology, vol. 2, map. 2, 17S5. 

• Choiis, L., Voyage pittoresque autour du monde, p. 20, 1822. 

' Vigors, N. A., in Beechey, P. W., The zoology of Captain Beechey's voyage ; compiled 
from the collections and notes made by Captain Beecliey, the officers and naturalist of 
the expedition during a voyage to the Pacific aud Bering's Straits performed in His 
Majesty's ship lilossom under the command of Capt. F. W. Beechey. • ♦ * in the 
years 1825, 26, 27, and 28. Ornithology, pp. 13-40, pi. i-xliv, 1839. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

for two days, July 24 and 25, in 1914. Alfred M. Bailey and Kiisseli 
W. Hendee collected on St. Lawrence late in June and early in July, 
1921, and Hendee again visited it in August, 1922. They found a 
resident teacher on the island, Mr. Dupertius, of the Bureau of Edu- 
cation, who was interested in birds and who had made some ob- 
servations there. Except for a few fragments given by Bailey, none 
of Dupertius's notes have been published. 

F. L. Jaques passed close by St. Lawrence in 1928 and noted three 
sj^ecies of birds offshore. 

Finally, in the summer of 1930, Henry B. Collins, jr., spent sev- 
eral months on the island from June 19 to October 22, and collected 
birds as time permitted. 

The present paper is merely a descriptive list of the birds known 
to occur on St. Lawrence Island. Undoubtedly other species will 
have to be added as more collecting is done there, especially among 
the small land birds and the shorebirds. Mr. Collins tells me that 
he saw some hawks there but was unable to procure a specimen. No 
published record of a hawk from St. Lawrence Island is known to 
me, so that is another U)vm lo be added in the future. 

Inasmuch as Harry b. Swarth. of Ihe California Academy of 
Sciences, is working on a comprehensive paper on the Bering Sea 
avifauna, I have not attempted any interpretative w^ork on any of 
the distributional problems and am restricting this paper to the 
status of a reference list. 

The present list contains 61 species of birds. Of these the follow- 
ing eight have not been recorded from the island before : 



Gavia arctica pacifica. 
Oavia stellata. 
Mareca penelope. 
Limosa lapponica bancri. 



Lams argentatus vegae. 
Cepphus grpllG mandti. 
Cnciilus canorus 'bakeri. 
Nyctea nyctea. 



In addition to the 61 species now definitely known from St. Law- 
rence Island, three others have been stated by Nelson ^ to occur there 
" undoubtedly^" These birds, for which definite records are lacking, 
are Nettion carolinsnse^ the green-winged teal, Phaeopus hudsonictis, 
the Hudsonian curlew, and Plsohia halrdi, Baird's sandpiper. 

The reference to the original description of each species is given, 
and this is folloAved by a complete synonymy as far as the literature 
of St. Lawrence Island is concerned. All the birds collected by 
Collins, as well as those obtained by the Harriman Expedition, are 
in the United States National Museum (including the collection of 
the Biological Survey). 

The specimens without data, listed in this paper, were purchased 
by Mr. Collins from various Eskimos at Gambell. 

* Nelson, E. W., Birds of Bering Sea and the Arctic Ocean. Cruise of the revenue- 
steamer Conviu in Alaslja and tlie NW. Arctic Ocean in 1881, pp. 88, 90, 97, 1883. 



ART. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND — FRIEDMANN 7 

The photographs illustrating this paper (pis. 1-6) are all by Mr. 
Collins. 

Family GAVIIDAE, Loons 

GAVIA ADAMSI (Gray) 

Yexlow-billed Loon 

Colymhus adamsi Gray, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1859, p. 167 (Russian America 

tlirough Bering Straits=AIa?ka). 
Gacia adamsi, Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 26, 1925. 

Collins collected two adult specimens in good summer plumage. 
Unfortunately neither was sexed or dated. Both were taken at 
Gambell, in the northwestern part of the island. Bailee' saw one 
near the old village of Kookooluk (Kukuliak) on June 28, the only 
previous record for St. Lawrence. It is not known whether it breeds 
there. 

This species is said to be a late-nesting bird. It is all the more 
unfortunate that the present two specimens are without dates, as 
they may be migrants or may have been late enough to have been 
breeding on St. Lawrence. 

A third specimen, a female, taken on October 14, is in fresh winter 
plumage. Judging by its smaller size, it appears that the two sum- 
mer-plumaged birds were males. 

GAVIA ARCTICA PACIFICA (Lawrence) 

Pacific Loon 

Columbus pftcificiis Lawrenck, in Baird, Cassin, and Lawrence, Report of 
explorations and surveys, etc., for a railroad from the Mississippi River to 
the Pacific Ocean, vol. 9, Birds, pp. liv, 887, 889, 1858 (" San Diego, Calif., 
and Puget Sound "=Presidio, near San Francisco, Calif.). 

Collins obtained 10 of these loons, two of them juvenals, the rest 
adults of both sexes, all in winter plumage. The specimens with 
dates were taken from September 23 to October 16. A full-grown 
Juvenal was shot on September 23. A male, collected on October 14, 
still has some of the summer plumage on the back and has a few black 
feathers on the chin and throat. All were collected at Gambell. 

I am not aware of any satisfactory way of telling winter-plumaged 
specimens of (r. a. viridigulaHs from G. a. pacifca and regret the 
absence of summer adults from St. Lawrence Island. Hartert ^ gives 
measurements that imply a longer bill in viridignlaris. If we use 
this as a criterion, all the present birds are pacifica. 

The postnuptial molt must follow YQ.vy quickly on the termination 
of nesting activities, as all but one of the adults are in full winter 
plumage. 

•Die Vogel der paliiarktlschen Fauna, vol. 2, p. 1461, 1920. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vot. 80 

A number of the birds have the new remiges only partly grown and 
were probably quite flightless at the time. All the loons appear to 
shed all their wing quills simultaneously. It is worthy of note that 
they first acquire the more somber winter feathering and then go 
through the temporary period of flightlessness. 

This bird was not previously known to inhabit St. Lawrence Island. 

GAVIA STELLATA (Pontoppidan) 

Rejd-throated Loon 

Colytnhus Stellatus Pontoi>pidan, Danske Atlas e. Konge-Riget Dannemark med 
(lets naturlige Egenskaber, vol. 1, p. 621, 1763 (no locality inentione(i= 
Denmark). 

Collins obtained two adults in breeding plumage and two birds in 
winter feathering. The two latter are females, one adult and one 
immature. The summer birds are without dates ; the adult female in 
winter dress was shot on October 9 ; the immature bird in September. 
All were taken at Gambell. 

The red-throated loon has not been recorded from St. Lawrence 
Island before. It is rather strange that Brooks, Bailey, Hendee, and 
others who made collections and observations there should have failed 
to see it, and it may be assumed that it is less numerous on the island 
than the Pacific loon. 

Family DIOMEDEIDAE, Albatrosses 

DIOMEDEA ALBATRUS Pallas 

Shobt-tailed Albatross 

Diomedea alhatrus Pallas, Spicilegia zoologica, etc., vol. 1, fasc. v, p. 28, 

1769 (ad Oram Kamtschatcae orientalum * * * ad insulam Beringil= 

Bering Sea). 
Diomedea hrachyura, Nexson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corwin, 

p. Ill, 1883. 
Diomedea alhatrus, TxjTvNer, Contr. Nat. Hist. Alaska, no. 11, p. 128, 1886. — 

Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in Alaska, p. 61, 

1887. 

Nelson notes that " adults of this species were seen between St. 
Lawrence Island and Plover Bay, Siberia, and the mandibles of two 
specimens were obtained in the ruined villages on St. Lawrence 
Island." Turner saw this albatross at sea near the island, but it 
appears that the only definite records for the island itself are the two 
mandibles found by Nelson, and these may have gotten there by hand 
of man. Collins collected a maxilla of this species in the second 
oldest village site at Gambell. The ruins with which it was asso- 
ciated are at least 1,000 3'^ears old. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 12 PL. 4 



a'^Vv "^ r-\% -%r:^.' - - . —.. ^_ ir- -^r--^ 




Nest and Young of Raven (Corvus 
corax principalis) 

• In clilT hack of (iainbi'll. 




View at Gambell 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80, ART. 12 PL. 5 




Cormorants nesting on Punuk island 

Four miles off the east, end of 8t. Lawrence Island. 



ART. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWEENCE ISLAND FRIEDMANN 9 

Family PROCELLARIIDAE, Shearwaters, Fulmars 

FULMARUS GLACIALIS RODGERSI Cassin 

Rodgek's Fulmak 

Fulmarus Rodgersii Cassin, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 1862 (Oct. 

28), p. 326 (South Indian Ocean=North Pacific). 
Fulmarus glacialis rodyersi. Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of the 

Cortcin, p. 112, 1883 ; Ileport upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 62, 1887. — A, O. U. check-list of North American birds, ed. 4, 

p. 12, 1931. 
Fulmarus glacialis rodgersii, Habtert, Die Vogel der palaarktischen Fauna, 

vol. 2, p. 1438, 1920. 
Fulmarus glacialis glupischa, Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, pp. 368, 

369, 1915. 
Fulmarus rodgersi, Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 121, p. 46, 1922. 

Nelson saw this fulmar in abundance off St, Lawrence Island. 
Brooks noted quite a number during the last week in May, while 
crossing Bering Sea from Cape Zhipanov, Kamchatka, to St. Law- 
rence Island. According to Hartert and Bent, this bird breeds on 
St. Lawrence Island. 

Family HYDROBATIDAE, Small Petrels 

OCEANODROMA FURCATA (Gmelin) 

FOEK-TAILED PetEEL 

Procellaria ftircata Gmelin, Systema naturae, vol. 1, pt. ii. p. 561, 1789 (based 
on the Fork-tail Petrel, Pennant, Arctic zoology, vol. 2, p. 535: In glacie 
maris Americam et Asiam interfluentis=" among the ice between Asia and 
America," Pennant). 

Oceanodroma fureata, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 
Alaska, p. 64, 1887.— Godman, Monograph of the petrels, p. 37, 1907-1910. 

This petrel figures in the present list solely on the basis of Nelson's 
statement that during " the cruise of the Corwin^ in 1881, these 
petrels were seen on several occasions in Bering Straits and about 
St. Lawrence Island and in Plover Bay, Siberia." 

Family PHALACROCORACIDAE, Cormorants 

PHALACROCORAX PELAGICUS PELAGICUS Pallas 

Pelagic Cormorant 

Phalacrocorax pclagicus Pall^vs, Zoographia Rosso-Asiatica, vol. 2, p. 303, 
pi. 76, 1811 (maris Camtschatici orientalis et Americanorum insularum 
incola= Aleutian Islands). 

Phalacrocorax pclagicus pelngicus, Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, 
p. 397, 1915.— Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 107, p. 275, 1919.— Bailey, Condor, 
vol. 27, p. 167, 1925.— A. O. U. check-list of North American birds, ed. 4, 
p. 24, 1931. 

70631—31 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Nelson ^" does not definitely record this cormorant from St. Law- 
rence Island, but writes that it is the " commonest of its kind 

* * * about the shores of the various islands in Bering Sea 

* * *." Bent records it as breeding on St. Lawrence, and Bailey 
found the birds " fairly abundant at St. Lawrence Island, where they 
were nesting along the cliffs below Sivunga, the first week in July." 

Collins brought back four specimens, three adults and one fully 
grown immature just beginning to molt from the brown plumage to 
the lustrous violet and greenish black of the adult state. This imma- 
ture bird was a male, shot on July 22; two of the adults are without 
data; the last adult, a male, was collected on October 11. All were 
taken at Gambeil. 

The year-old immature bird is in an early stage of molt, although 
it was collected so late in the summer. It would seem that this 
species is as variable in its molting season as is the double-crested 
cormorant, P. auritus aurltus, of which Lewis ^^ writes as follows : 

The time of beginning of the molt out of the first winter plumage varies much 
in different individuals * * * it may begin as early as February, while in 
the same birds it does not appear to begin ])efore the first of the following 
August. Some individuals apparently complete it by the middle of July or 
some afterwards, while in others it is still incomplete at the end of vSep- 
tember * * *, 

Brooks found this species beginning to lay by June 2, on St. Law- 
rence, " and eggs in an advanced state of incubation were taken 

* * * on June 28." 

PHALACROCOKAX URILE (Gmelin) 

Red-faced Cormorant 

Pelecanus Urile Gmelin, Systema naturae, vol. 1, pt. ii, p. 575, 1789 (in Cam- 

tschatcae rupestribus maritimis=Kamc'hatka). 
Phalacrocorax urile, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 65, 1887. 

Nelson is the only naturalist who has recorded the red-faced cor- 
morant from St. Lawrence Island. According to him, it is a " more 
or less common summer resident " there. 

Family ANATIDAE, Ducks, Geese, Swans 

CYGNUS COLUMBIANUS (Ord) 

Whistling Swan 

Anas columbianus Ord, in Guthrie's Geography, 2d Amer. ed., p. 319, 1815 

(below the great narrows of the Columbia River). 
Olor columbianus, Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 388, 1915. 

"Nelson, E. W.. Birds of Bering Sea and the Arctic Ocean. Cruise of the revenue- 
steamer Corwin in Alaska and the NW. Arctic Ocean in 1881, p. 103, 1883. 

" Lewis, Harrison F., The natural history of the double-crested cormorant (Phalacro- 
corax auritus auritus (Lesson).) Ru-Mi-Lou Boolcs, Ottawa, Canada, p. 58, 1929. 



-LET. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAAVEENCE ISLAND FEIEDMAXN 11 

Cygnus colmnbianus, Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 206, 1925. — Bknt, U. S. Nat. 
Mus. Bull. 130, p. 292, 1925.— A. O. U. check-list of North Americau birds, 
ed. 4, p. 3G, 1931.— Peteks, Checlc-list of tlie birds of the ^vovld, vol. 1, p. 
144, 1931. 

Brooks saw two pairs of swans flying past the southeast point of 
St. Lawrence Island on June 28, 1913. Bailey writes that a resident 
teacher on the island, " Mr. Dupertius, of the Bureau of Education, 
showed me a photograph which he had made of four j'oung downy 
swans in their nest on St. Lawrence Island during tlie summer of 
1922. He tells me the species breeds there regularly." 

The members of the Harriman Expedition also saw a couple of 
swans on the island (at a distance the large white objects were first 
identified as polar bears), and later in the same day they found 
a pair with young, feeding in a slough. One downy young one was 
collected. 

Collins noted the presence of swans on the island in the summer 
of 1930 but was unable to obtain a specimen. 

PHILACTE CANAGICA (Scvastianoff) 
EMpmjoR Goose 

Anas canagictis Sevastiano] f, Nova Acta Acad. Sci. Imp. Petropol., vol. 13, 
p. 349, pi. 10, 1802 [probablj' Kanaga (or Kyktak) Ishuid, Aleutian 
Islands]. 

Philacte canagica. Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of the Corwin^ 
p. 95, 18S3.— Turner, Contr. Nat. Hist. Alaska, no. 11, p. 142, 1886.— Nelson, 
Report upon natural history collections made in Alaska, p. 89, 1887. — 
Nei-Son, Bird-Lore, vol. 15, p. 129, 1913. — Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., 
vol. .59, p. 389, 1915.— Heksey, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 66. no. 2, p. 22, 
1916.— Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 205, 1925.— Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 
130, p. 268, 1925.— Jaques, Auk, vol. 47, p. 364, 1930.— A. O. U. cheek-list of 
North American birds, ed. 4, p. 39, 1931. — Peters, Check-list of the birds 
of the world, vol. 1, p. 149, 1931. 

A/iser canagicus, H.vetert, Die Vogel dei" palliarktischen Fauna, vol. 2, p. 1290, 
1920. 

The emperor goose is one of the most notable birds of St. Law- 
rence Island, breeding there in large numbers, especially in the lagooji 
and lake area in the southern part of the island. Nelson saw great 
numbers of them along the southwestern coast. Brooks noted them 
abundantly, during the latter part of June, " flying to and from a 
marsh by a large lagoon."' Hersey was " told repeatedly that em- 
peror geese occur in large numbers on the south side of St. Lawrence 
Island during the period when engaged in the postnuptial moult, 
and " he believes " that the center of their abundance to-day is on 
this island." Bailey writes that Hendee saw this species daily during 
the first week in July- 
He was working the north shore, which, according to the natives, is not a 
good locality for this s])ecies, the lagoons along the southern side being the 
main breeding ground. * * * Sr. Lnwrence Island has been considered the 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

center of abundance of the emperor goose, but from my experience I believe 
the southern shore of Kotzebue Sound to be their favorite breeding ground. 

Dixon ^2 found these geese to be very numerous on the island. On 
June 25 he saw flocks of from 7 to 20. He saw in all more than 100 
birds, but none of those dissected showed signs of breeding, and he 
found no recent nests. 

Collins procured two adults and two fully grown immature birds 
with dark heads. The latter two, a male and a female, were shot 
on September 21 ; an adult male was taken on September 18 ; and an 
unsexed adult on October 2. All are in rather fresh plumage. All 
w ere collected at Gambell. 

The immature male lias a little more white on the postero-median 
portion of the abdomen than the female of corresponding age. 

ANSER ALBIFRONS ALBIFRONS (Scopoli) 

White-fkonted Goosb 

Branta aliifrons Scopoli, Annus I Historico-Naturalis, p. 69, 1769 (no locality 

given=Carniola) . 
Anser albifrons (jambeli, NErsoN, Report upon natural history collections made 
in Alaska, p. 83, 1887. 

Nelson writes that during the summer of 1881 a number of these 
geese were found feeding on St. Lawrence Island. 

Collins tells me that he saw some grayish geese there during the 
summer of 1930, but was unable to shoot one. 

MARECA PENELOPE (Linnaeus) 

European Widgeon 

Anas penelope Linnaeus, Systeraa naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 126, 1758 (Europe; 
restricted type locality, Sweden). 

Collins brought back an unsexed, undated bird, taken at Gambell. 
By plumage it is a female and is clearly referable to penelope and 
not to americana^ as it has a very rufous-brown head, and abundantly 
graj^-freckled axillars. 

This duck has not been recorded previously from St. Lawrence 
Island. 

DAFILA ACUTA TZITZIHOA (Vieillot) 

American Pintail 

Anas tzitzihoa Vieillot, Nouv. Diet. d'Hist. Nat., vol. 5, p. 163, 1816 (Mexique). 

Dafila acuta. Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of the Corimn, p. 98, 

1883 ; Report upon natural history collections made in Alaska, p. 69, 1887. 

Anas acuta tzitzihoa, Phillips, Natural history of the ducks, vol. 2, p. 308, 1923. 

Nelson saw several pintails on St. Lawrence Island in the sum- 
mer of 1881, but ajiparentl^y he did not collect any. Collins obtained 
one immature male at Gambell in August. It is quite impossible to 

i^Auk, vol. 33, p. 373, 1916. 



ART. 12 BIEDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND FEIEDMANN 13 

determine the subspecific identity of such a specimen satisfactoril}'', 
but Phillips considers St. Lawrence Island as within the breeding 
range of the American race tzltzihoa, with which I hnve identified 
Collins's bird. It has the broad speculum supposed to be charac- 
teristic of tzitziJwa. 

NYROCA MARILA (Linnaeus) 

Gre.\tek Scaup Duck 

Anas MarUa Linnaeus, Fauna Siiecica, ed. 2, p. 39, 1761 (in Lapi)ouia=Lap- 

land). 
Fulix marila, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corwin, p. 97, 

1883. 

Nelson states that this duck Ov:curs on St. Lawrence Island. Be- 
yond this bare statement nothing seems to be known of it as a member 
of the avifauna of that island. 

CLANGULA HYEMALIS (Linnaeus) 

Old-squaw 

Anas TiyemaVis Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, voL 1, p. 126, 1758 (Id 
Europa et America arctica=nortliern provinces of Sweden). 

Earelda glacialis, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corwin, p. 99, 
1883. 

Earelda hyemalis, Bkooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 50, p. 392, 1915. 

Clangula hyemalis, Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 170, 1925. — Phillips, Natural his- 
tory of the ducks, vol. 3, p. 350, 1925. 

Nelson saw old-squaws about St. Lawrence Island during his visit 
there in June and July, 1881. Brooks found them very common, in 
pairs and small flocks, on June 2. He notes that when " paired, the 
female very often flies ahead of the male, as does the female eider. 
A set of six fresh eggs was taken at St. Lawrence Island, June 25, 
1913." Bailey obtained a set of five eggs there on July 9. While on 
the island with the other naturalists of the Harriman Expedition 
on July 13, 1899, Dr. A. K. Fisher obtained a specimen of this duck. 

Collins obtained a male at Gambell in August and a female there 
on October 17. Both birds are in a molting condition. 

HISTRIONICUS HISTRIONICUS PACIFICUS Brooks 

"Western Harlequin Duck 

Histrlonicus histrionicus paclficus Brooks, Bull. IVIus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, no. 5, 

p. 393, Sept., 1915 (Cape Shipunski, Kamchatka). 
Eifstrionicws histrionicus, Hersey, Smithsonian Mi.sc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 2, p. 18, 

1916. 
Eistrionicus histrionicus pacifictis, Bailey, Condor, "Vol. 27, p. J97, 1925. — Bent, 

U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 130, p. 62, 1925. 



14 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE Js^ATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Nelson " does not definitely list tliis duck from St, Lawrence 
Island, but states that it is found on " the shores and islands of 
Bering Sea." Herse}^ saw a few to the east of St. Lawrence Island, 
and Bailey saw three birds on the island on June 28. 

Collins obtained a female at Gambell on June 27, and an unsexed 
bird, probably also a female, on October 2. The June specimen is 
in molt. 

According to Bent, this duck probably breeds on St. Lawrence 
Island. 

POLYSTICTA STELLERI (Pallas) 

Stelleb's Eider 

Anas stelleri Pallas, Spicilegia zoologica, etc., vol. 1, fuse. 6, p. 35, pi. v, 1769 

(east Kamchatka). 
Polysticta stelleri. Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corivin, p. 

99, 1S83.— Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool.. vol. 59, p. 395, 1915.— Hersev, 

Smithsouian Misc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 2, p. 19, 1916.— Brnt, V. S. Nat. Mus. 

Bull. 130, p. 73, 1925.— A. O. U. check-list of North American birds, ed. 4, 

p. 55, 1931. 
Eniconetta stelleri, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made ia 

Alaska, p. 75, 1887. 

Nelson found Steller's eider evidentlv breeding in small numbers 
around the fir.^t of July in the brackish ponds on St. Lawrence 
Island. 

Brooks found a number of large flocks on the south side of the 
island on June 25. These flocks consisted mostly of males. Plersey 
found them common on the island also. 

Bailey 1* definitely states that Hendee saw none of these birds dur- 
ing his week's stay on the island. 

Collins collected an adult male in breeding plumage on June 8 at 
Gambell. The black of the back, rump, and upper tail coverts has 
relatively little of the violaceous sheen as compared with other speci- 
mens from Alaska. The blackish chin and throat patch are broadly 
connected posteriorly with the dark collar. The width of the con- 
nection appears to be very variable; in some specimens it is reduced 
to a very fine line, in others (as in the present case) it is as much as 
12 millimeters wide. 

SOMATERIA V-NIGRA Gray 

Pacific Eider 

Bomateria V-nigra Gray, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1855, p. 212, jil. 107, Feb., 1856 

(Kotzebue Sound [Alaska]). 
Somateria v-nigra, Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Tiool., vol. 59, p. 396, 1915. — 

Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 200, 1925. 

1^ Birds of Bering S<a and tlie Arctic Ocean. Cruise of the Convin in Alaska and the. 
NW. Arctic Ocean in 1.S81, p. 98, 1883. 
n Condor, vol. 27, p. 197, 1925. 



ABT. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWRE^TCE ISLAND FEIEDMANN 15 

Nelson ^^ writes that this eider is found everywhere about the 
shores and islands of Bering Sea, but gives no definite mention of 
St. Lawrence Island. Brooks found the species common in pairs 
early in June. Bailey writes that "great flocks of them were seen 
along the edge of the ice * * * from King Island to St. 
Lawrence Island." 

Collins obtained a third-grown juvenal female on September 21; 
three adult males, all in molt, on September 27, October 11, and 
October 20 ; and four adult females, June 1, October 12, and October 
20. The last four show a great deal of variation in coloration; the 
two October birds are in fresh plumage, the June bird and one with- 
out date are in worn condition. 

The juvenal bird is in natal down, with the first pennaceous feath- 
ering just beginning to show on the wings, tail, breast, and belly. 

The adult males taken on September 27 and October 11 have 
brownish heads, necks, and breasts; the one shot on October 20 has 
the head largely white with the heavy black crown patch, and has 
a white neck and breast, scapulars, and interscapulars. 

According to Phillips," the males begin to molt into the eclipse 
plumage, illustrated by the three specimens discussed above, soon 
after the first of July, and this plumage is often retained in part until 
November. 

When on St. Lawrence Island on Jidy 13, 1899, the Harriman 
Expedition saw a few of these ducks, but did not collect any. It 
would be interesting to know how early the postnuptial molt begins 
on that island. 

SOMATERIA SPECTABILIS (Linna^^us) 
King Eider 

Anas spectabilis Linnaeus, Systenia natiiiae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 123, 1758 (in 
Canada, Svecia= Sweden). 

Somateria spectabilis, Nexson, Report upon natural history collections made 
in Alaska, p. 79, 1887. — Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 395, 
1915.— Heksey, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 2, p. 20, 1916.— Bent, 
U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 130, p. 118, 1925.— Phillips, Natural history of the 
ducks, vol. 4, p. 117, 1926.— A. O. U. check-list of North American birds, 
ed. 4, p. 57, 1931.— Peters, Chock-list of the birds of the world, vol. 1, p. 
380, 1931. 

Nelson reported king eiders as being common on St. Lawrence 
Island ; Brooks found them numerous about Cape Chibukak, in pairs 
and small flocks, on June 2 ; Hersey writes that " during the summer 
the king eider occurs regularly as far south as St. Lawrence Island 
where they doubtless breed * * *." According to Phillips, 

^^ Birds of Bt>ring Sea and the Arctic Ocean. Cruise of tlie revenue-steamer Corwin 
in Alaska and tiie NW. Arctic Ocean in 1881, p. 101, 1883. 
"Natural liistor.v of the duclss, vol. 4, p. 8.'',. 1026. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

William Percy also recorded this eider from St. Lawrence, but I am 
not aware of this being published elsewhere. 

Collins obtained two adult males, one on June 1, the other without 
date. Both were shot near Gambell, and both are in fine, breeding 
plumage. 

AKCTONETTA FISCHERI (Brandt) 

Spectacled Eider 

Fuligula FiscJieri Bkandt, Fuligulam Fischeri novam avium speciem, pp. 10, 

14, 1 pi., 1S47 (St. Michael, Alaska). 

Arctonetta fischeri, Bbooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 395, 1915. — 

Hersey, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 2, p. 19, 1916. 

Brooks collected three specimens of the spectacled eider from a 
small flock on the south shore of St. Lawrence Island, on June 25, 
1913. Hersey observed this species in small numbers, apparently on 
the north side of the island. 

OIDEMIA AMERICANA Swainson 

American Scoter 

Oidetnia americana Swainson, in Swainson and Richardson, Fauna Boreall- 
Americana, vol. 2, p. 450, 1831 (1832) (Hudson Bay, latitude 57° N.). 

OedenUa americana, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corwin, 
p. 102, 1883. 

Oidemia americana. Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made In 
Alaska, p. 80, 1887. 

The American scoter occurs sparingly upon St. Lawrence Island. 
Nelson is the only naturalist who has recorded it there. 

MERGUS SERRATOR Linnaeus 

Red-breasted Merganser 

Mergus Serrator Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 129, 1758 (in 

Europa= Sweden ) . 
Merganser serrator. Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 66, 1887. 
Mergus serrator, Phillips, Natural history of the ducks, vol. 4, p. 281, 1926. 

Nelson found the red-breasted merganser breeding on St. Law- 
rence Island in the summer of 1881. 

Collins collected one unsexed bird (probably a female) at Gambell 
in September. The specimen is in fairly fresh plumage. 

Family GRUIDAE, Cranes 

GRUS CANADENSIS CANADENSIS (Linnaeus) 

T.ittlb Brown Crane 

Ardea canadensis Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 141, 1758 (based 
on the Brown and Ash-colour'd Crane, Edwards, Natural history of birds, 
p. 133: In America septentrionali=Hu<lson Bay). 



ABT. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWEENCE ISLAND FRIEDMANN 17 

Oru8 canadensis, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 
Alaska, p. 95, 1887.— Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 388, 1915. 

Nelson recorded the little brown crane as a summer resident on St. 
Lawrence Island. Brooks saw two pairs at the southeast end of the 
island, " where a pair and one juvenile about a week old were taken 
June 27, 1913." 

Collins noted the presence of this bird in the summer of 1930, but 
he was not able to obtain a specimen. 

Family CHARADRIIDAE, Plovers, Turnstones, Surf-birds 

CHARADRIUS SEMIPALMATUS Bonaparte 

SeMIPALMATED rL0\^B 

Charadrius semipalmatus Bonaparte, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 

5, p. 98, 1825 (new name for Tringa hiaticnla Wilson; coast of New Jersey). 
AeyiaJitcs semipalmatus, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of the 

Convin, pp. 84-85, 1883. 

Nelson found this plover on St. Lawrence Island, thereby estab- 
lishing its place in the known avifauna of the island. 

PLUVIALIS DOMINICA FULVA (Gmelin) 

Pacific Golden Ploveb 

Charadrius fulvus Gmelin, Systema naturae, vol. 1, pt. ii, p. 687, 1789 (based 

on the Fulvous Plover, Latham, Synopsis, vol 3, p. 211 : In Tahiti maritimis 

et uligiuosis=Society Islands). 
Charadrius dominicus, Nei-son, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 124, 1887. 
Charadrius dominicus fulvus, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections 

made in Alaska, p. 125, 1887. 

As was pointed out long ago by Nelson, the relationships of the 
golden plovers of the Bering Sea coasts and islands are involved, 
because both do7iiinica and fulva intergrade there. Nelson examined 
a long series and decided that on " the Siberian coast of Bering Sea 
the typical Asiatic form is found common, and is of much rarer 
occurrence on the Alaskan coast, from the peninsula of Alaska north 
to Point Barrow. On this stretch of coast to the island of St. Law- 
rence dominicus is the predominating form, but specimens are 
found grading in a regular series from this bird to the fulvus of the 
Asiatic region * * *." 

Bailey," quoting Bangs, states that Wainwright, Alaska, must be 
close to the meeting ground of the two races. 

Collins collected 5 specimens at Gambell — 2 males, 2 unsexed, and 
1 female — in September. All these birds I refer to fulva and not to 



"Condor, vol. 28, p. 85, 1926. 



18 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol.80 

dominica, although I am not unmindful of the fact that Nelson came 
to the opposite conclusion. According to Hartert/^ fulva is smaller, 
having wings 164 to 175 mm. in length, as against 176 to 186 mm. in 
dominica. The wing lengths of the present five birds are as follows : 
Males, 165, 163 ; female, 161.5 ; unsexed, 163, 168 mm. All are, there- 
fore, referable to fulva on the basis of size. The present specimens 
are all very yellow on the upper parts, thereby also agreeing better 
with fvXva than with dominica. They are all in fresh plumage. 

Nelson recorded both races from St. Lawrence Island, but in view 
of the intermediate nature of the place I feel it would be misleading 
to claim that there were two forms of golden plover there. It would, 
perhaps, be more to the point to call all the St. Lawrence birds 
intermediates between the two subspecies. 

ARENARIA INTERPRES INTERPRES (Linnaeus) 

Etjropean Turnstone 

Tringa Interpres Linnaeus, Systenia naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 148, 1758 (in 

Europa et America septentrioiiali=Islands of Gothland, Sweden). 
Strepsilas interpres, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corwin, 

pp. 82, 83, 1883. 
Arenarin interpres, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 128, 1887. 
Arenaria interpres interpres, Bailey, Condor, vol. 28, pp. 85, SO, 1926. — Bent, 

U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 146, p. 293, 1929. 

Nelson saw a number of mated pairs with nests on St. Lawrence 
Island the last of June, 1881. Bailey writes that a " few turnstones 
Vvcre noted on the gravel beach in the vicinity of Gambel village, on 
St. Lawrence Island, and Hendee found one downy young, which 
had left the nest June 29." 

As Bailey states, the birds from Cape Halkett and from Wales. 
Alaska, would have to be considered A. i. oaJmensis (Bloxham) if 
that race be recognized. This is probably true also for the St. 
Lawrence Island birds. The status of oahuensis seems doubtful, 
however. 

ARENARIA MELANOCEPHALA (Vigors) 

Black Tukn stone 

Strepsilas melanocephalus Vigors, Zool. Journ., vol. 4, p. 356, Jan., 1829 (north- 
west coast of [North] America). 

Arenaria melanoccphala, Nelson, Repoi-t upon natural history collections made 
in Alaska, p. 129, 1887. 

Nelson observed this species sparingly on St. Lawrence Island. 
No one else has recorded it since. 

"Die Vogel der palfiarktischen Fauna, vol. 2, pp. 1551, 1552. 1920. 



ART. 12 BIKDS OF ST. LAWEEXCE ISLAND FPJEDMAXN 19 

Family SCOLOPACIDAE, Snipe, Woodcock, Sandpipers 

ARQUATELLA PTILOCNEMIS PTILOCNEMIS (Coues) 

Pbibilof Sandpipbjr 

Tringa ptilocncmis Coues, in Elliott, Report oq the Seal Islands of Alaska (not 

l>agedj, 1873 (St. George Islaiul, Pribilof Islands). 
AfQuatella ptilocncmis, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Convin, 

p. 86, 1883.— Hanna, Condor, vol. 23, p. 51, 1921. 
Tringa ptilocncmis NBa.soN, Report upon natural lii.story collections made in 

Alaska, p. 105, 1887. 
Arquatellu niaritiiJia ptilocnemis, Heksey, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 

2, p. 24, 1916. 
Erolia maritiina ptiloc-neniis, Hautert, Die Vogel der paliiarktischen Fauna, 

vol. 2, p. 1592, 1920. 
Arquatella ptilocnemis ptilocnemis. Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 142, pp. 153, 159, 

1927.— A. O. U. checklist of North American birds, ed. 4, p 118, 1931. 

Nelson found a single pair of these sandpipers on the south shore 
of St. Lawrence Island in June, 1881. Hersey saw a few on the 
north side of the island on July 24, 1914. Hunna overlooked Hersey's 
note, as he thought there was but a single record for the bird for 
St. Lawrence Island. He suspected " that the birds have some other 
extensive breeding ground than St. George, St. Paul, and St. Mathew 
I::lands, because in September and October large flocks came to the 
two former i.slands; these appear to contain many more individuals 
than are in existence on all three. Whether St. Lawrence Island 
supplies the extra number or not remains for future determination.'' 

The Harriman Expedition obtained one male and two females on 
July 13, 1899, and Collins got a male at Gambell in September, 1930 
The last-mentioned specimen is in an advanced stage of molt. It is 
a peculiar bird in that it has the darker color of couesi and the 
larger size of ptilocnemis (wing length 128 mm.). 

AKQUATELLA PTILOCNEMIS COUESI Ridgway 

Aleutian Sandpipes 

Arquatellu couesi Ridgway, Bull. Nuttall Orn. Club, vol. 5, p. 160, July, 1880 
(Aleutian Islands and coast of Alaska=Attu Island, Aleutian Islands). 

AiQiiatella maritima couesi. Brooks, Bull. Mus. Conip. Zool., vol. 59, p. 386, 
1915.— Bailett, Condor, vol. 27, p. 236, 1925. 

Arquatella ptilocncmis couesi. Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus, Bull. 142, p. 166, 1927. 

Brooks noted a few at the southeast end of St. Lawrence Island 
during June, 1912. He collected specimens, now in the Museum 
of Comparative Zoology, at Cambridge, Mass. Bailey saw several 
during the first week in July. 

St. Lawrence Island appears to be a meeting place of typical 
ptilocnemis and of couesi — northern and southern races of the same 
species, just as it is for the eastern and western forms of the golden 
plover. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM VOL.80 

PISOBIA MELANOTOS (Vieillot) 

Pectobal Sandpiper 

Tringa melanotos Vieillot, Nouv. Diet. d'Hist. Nat., nouv. M., vol. 34, p. 462, 

1819 (Paraguay). 
Pisoim maculata, Bailet, Condor, vol. 28, p. 31. 1926. 

The only published record for St. Lawrence Island is Bailey's 
observational one. He saw some pectoral sandpipers there on July 
29. The Harriman Expedition, however, obtained a female specimen 
on the island on July 13, 1899. 

PELIDNA ALPINA SAKHALINA (Vieillot) 

Red-backed Sandpipeb 

Bcolopaw sakhaUna Vieillot, Nouv. Diet. d'Hist. Nat., nouv. 6d., vol. 3, p. 359, 

1816 (en Russie= Sakhalin Island, Okhotsk Sea). 
Pelidna alpina americana, Nej^son, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of the 

Concin, p. 88, 1883. 
Pelidna alpinu pacifica; Pelidna alpina sakhalina, Bailey, Condor, vol. 28, 

p. 33, 1926. 
Pelidna alpina sakhalina, Beooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. vol. 59, p. 386, 1915. 

Nelson found this bird to be common on St. Lawrence Island. 
The Harriman Expedition obtained three examples on July 13, 1899. 
Bailey noted several pairs there the first week in July, " where they 
were no doubt breeding, as specimens we took had their sex organs 
well developed." Brooks saw, but did not collect, this species, during 
the latter part of June, 1913. 

EREUNETES PUSILLUS (Linnaeus) 

Semipalmated Sandpipeb 

Tringa pusilla Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 12, vol. 1, p. 252, 1766 (based 
on La Petite Alouette de mer de S. Domingue. Oinclus Dominicensis minor, 
Brisson, Oruithologie, vol. 5, p. 222: In Domin go = Santo Domingo, West 
Indies). 

Ereunetes piisiUvs, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corioin, 
p. 88, 1883. 

According to Nelson, the semipalmated sandpiper is a common 
summer resident on St. Lawrence Island. 

EREUNETES MAURII Cabanis 

Western Sandpiper 

Ereunetes Mauri Cabanis, Journ. f. Orn., Nov., 1856, p. 419, 1857 (Cuba). 
Ereunetes occidentalis, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made 
in Alaska, p. 114, 1887. 



ABT. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWEENCE ISLi\.ND FEIEDMANX 21 

Nelson writes that, although this species " is not recorded from the 
Seal and Aleutian Islands, I have seen the bird at St. Lawrence 
Island." 

LIMOSA LAPPONICA BAUERI Naumann 

Pacific Godwit 

Liniosa Baueri Naumann, Naturgescbiclite der Vogel Deutschlands, vol. S, p. 429, 
1836 (Neuliolland= Australia). 

Collins obtained two immature males at Gambell, on August 1 and 
23, respectively. These constitute the first records for this species 
for St. Lawrence Island. Thev have short bills — culmen lengths of 
61 and 63 mm., as against 76 to 120 mm. in the adults. They have 
darker, less whitish, rump feathers than a bird of corresponding ago 
from Cape Bolskoi Baranov, eastern Siberia. 

Family PHALAROPODIDAE, Phalaropes 

PHALAROPUS FULICARIUS (Linnaeus) 

Red Phalabope 

Trinua FuUcaria. Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 148, 1758 (based 

on the Red Coot-footed Tringa, Edwards, Natural history of birds, p. 142 : 

In America = Hudson Bay). 
Crymophihis fulicarius, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made 

in Alaska, p. 98, 1887. 
Phalaropus fulicarius Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., p. 91, 1883.— Bkooks, 

Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 387, 1915.— Balley, Condor, vol. 27, p. 

233, 1925.— Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 142, p. 14, 1927. 

Nelson found this bird nesting on St. Lawrence Island. Brooks 
recorded it as common east of Cape Chibukak, June 24, on the south 
side of the island, June 25, and at the southeastern end on June 27, 
1913. Bailey saw these birds on the island, and Hendee found a 
nest with two eggs there on July 1. 

The Harriman Expedition obtained two males and saw a number 
of others about some sloughs on the island. 

Collins collected a male in breeding plumage on July 24, and two 
males in Avinter plumage on October 1 and 7; all were taken at 
Gambell. 

LOBIPES LOBATUS (Linnaeus) 

Noethebn Phalabope 

Tringa tobata Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 148, 1758 {lohata 
in Eraendanda, p. 824) (based on the Cock Coot-footed Tringa, Edwards, 
Natural history of birds, p. 143: In America septentrional!, Lapponia= 
Hudson Bay). 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

Lobipcs hyperboreun, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corwin, 

p. 91, 1883. 
LoUpes lobatns, Beooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 387, 1915. 

In discussing the distribution of the phalaropes in Bering Sea, Nel- 
son states that " the Northern Phalarope appears to be the only 
species breeding in the Aleutian chain and thence north to St. Law- 
rence Island, where the Red Phalarope nests." Brooks found the 
northern phalarope quite common at the southeast end of the island 
on June 27. On June 26 he collected a clutch of eggs about one- 
quarter incubated. 

Family STERCORARIIDAE, Skuas, Jaegers 

STERCORARIUS POMARINUS (Temminck) 

PoMAEiNE Jaeger 

Lestris pomarinus Temmikck, Manuel doruithologie, p. 514, 1815 (1814) (les 
regions du cercle arctiqne, accidentel sur les cotes de Hollande et de 
France). 

Dr. A. K. Fisher informs me that when he Avas on St. Lawrence 
Island with the Harriman Expedition, on July 13, 1899, he saw 
several pomarine jaegers flying over the tundra in the manner of 
marsh hawks. He suggests that they were probably after meadow 
mice, as these mammals Avere found in stomachs of specimens taken 
in other localities. 

Collins collected two females in tlie light phase, on July 10 and 
August 6, respectively, and one unsexed, undated bird in the dark 
phase ; all were shot at Gambell. All three are in good, fairly fresh 
plumage. 

STERCORARIUS PARASITICUS (Linnaeus!) 

Pabasitic Jaegeb 

Larus parasiticus JAsyAr.r-s, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 13fi, 1758 (intra 
tropicum Cancri, Europae, Amerieae, Asiae=coast of Sweden). 

Stercorarius parasiticus, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of tlie Corwin, 
p. Ill, 1883.— Seale, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelpliia, 1898, p. 130.— 
Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 101, 1925. 

Nelson saw the parasitic jaeger at St. Lawrence Island, as did 
also Seale on July 1, 1896, and Hendee during the first week in July, 
1921. 

STERCORARIUS LONGICAUDUS Vicillot 

Long-tailed .Taeger 

Stercorarius longicauOus Vieillot, Nouv. Diet. d'Hist. Nat., nouv. 6d., vol. 32, 

p. 157, 1819 (le nord de I'Europe. de lAsio et de I'Ameriaue). 
• Stercorarius lonyicaudiis, Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 113, p. 28, 1921.— Bailey, 
Condor, vol. 27, p. 102, 1925. 



ABT. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND — FRIEDMANN 23 

Bent records this bird as breeding on St. Lawrence Island. 
Hen dee saw several there during the first week in July. 

Family LARIDAE, Gulls, Terns 

LARUS HYPERBOREUS Gunncrus 

Glaucous Gull 

Laius hiiperboreus Gunnerus, in Leem, Beskrivelse over Fiuinarkens Lapper 

p. 226 (note), 1767 (uorthern Norway). 
Laruf! Jjarrovianu^. Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 52, 1887. 
Lams liyperhoreus, Jaques, Auk, vol. 47, p. 358, 1930. 

In his report on the birds of Bering Sea ^^ Nelson writes of this 
gull (under the name Lm^us glaucus) to the effect that it breeds on 
all the islands and shores of Bering Sea. In his later report he gives 
the first definite record for St. Lawrence Island and states that the 
bird breeds in that place. 

Dr. A. K. Fisher informs me that one specimen of this gull was 
secured by the Harriman Expedition and that others were seen the 
day they landed on St. Lawrence Island (July 13, 1899). 

Jaques noted these birds north of the island, but none " were seen 
much south of St. Lawrence Island." 

LARUS GLAUCESCENS Naumann 

Glaucous-wingeid Gull 

Larus filaucescens Naumann, Naturgescluchte der Vogel Deutschlands, voL 

10, p. 351, 1840 (Nord-Amerika). 
Lams gloucescens, Brooks, Bull. Mus. Conip. Zool., vol. 59, p. 373, 1915. — 

RiDGWAY, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 50, vol. 8, p. 598, 1919.— Bent, U. S. Nat. 

Mus. Bull. 113, p. 73, 1921. — Hartert, Die Vogel der palaarktiscben Fauna, 

vol. 2, p. 1734, 1921. 

Brooks found this species breeding at St. Lawrence Island. A set 
of eggs taken by him on June 20 was very advanced in incubation. 

LARUS ARGENTATUS VEGAE Palmen 

Vega Gull 

Larus argentatws Bexjnn. var. Vegae Palmen, in NordenskiSld, Vega-Expedi- 
tionens Vetenskapliga lakttagelser, vol. 5, p. 370, 1887 (Pidlin and vidnity, 
extreme northeastern Siberia). 

Collins collected two Vega gulls, thereby adding this species to the 
known avifauna of St. Lawrence Island. Both birds were taken 

^^ Nelson, E. W., Birds of Bering Sea and the Arctic Ocean. Cruise of the revenue- 
Eteamer Concin in .Alaslfa and the NW. Arctic Ocean in 1881, p. 106, 1883. 



24 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

at Gambell; unfortunately both are without further data. Both are 
in worn plumage, and both have a little black on the rect rices. One 
bird is otherwise in full adult plumage ; the other has a considerable 
number of darkish markings on the head. 

HISSA TRIDACTYLA POLLICARIS Ridgway 

Pacific Kittiwakb 

Rissa tridactyla pollicaris Stejneger MS., Ridgway, in Baii'd, Brewer, and 

Ridgway, Water birds of North America, vol. 2, p. 202, 1884 (Kotzebue 

Sound, Alaska). 
Rissa tridactyla kotzehuei, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of the 

Coricin, p. 105, 1883. 
Rissa tridactyla pollicaris, Seale, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 1898, 

p. 131. — Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, pp. 103, 104, 1925. — Jaqixes, Auk, vol. 47, 

p. 358, 1930. 

Nelson found these kittiwakes about the shores of St. Lawrence 
Island during the last days of June, 1881. Bailey found them "to 
be abundant * * * at St. Lawrence Island, where they were 
already nesting. I saw many of their eggs along the cliffs below 
Sivunga on July 8." Seale saw great numbers of these birds. 

Hersey ^^ saw kittiwakes on the high cliffs near Gambell. Jaques 
found the species common at sea near St. Lawrence Island. 

Collins collected seven specimens, all at Gambell, during October. 
Most of the birds are unsexed. Four of them have the tail termi- 
nally banded with black, a considerable extent of black on the hind 
neck, interscapulars, and upper wing coverts, and black bills, and are 
obviously young birds. The other three are adults with pale yellow 
bills. The young birds are in fairly fresh plumage; the adults are 
abraded. 

XEMA SABINI (Sabine) 

Sabine's Guil 

Larus sabini J. Sabine, Trans. Linn. Soc. London, vol. 12, pt. ii, p. 522, pi. 29, 

1819 (west coast of Greenland, latitude 75° 29', longitude 60° 9', Sabine 

Islands, near Melville Bay). 
Xema saMnci, Nbxson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc.. Cruise of the Corwin, p. 109, 

1883. 
Xema sahinii, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in Alaska, 

p. 56, 1887. 
Xema saMvi, Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 113, p. 196, 1921.— Dwiqht, Bull. Amer. 

Mus. Nat. Hist, vol. 52, p. 328, 1925. 

Nelson notes that Sabine's gull occurs " in small numbers off St. 
Lawrence Island, but is unknown from the other Bering Sea islands." 
Bent writes that this gull breeds on St. Lawrence Island. 

a> Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 2, p. 4, 1916. 



ABT. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND FRIEDMANN 25 

Collins obtained four adults and one young of this species, all at 
Gambell, in July and August (two of the specimens are undated). 

The July adult is in very fresh plumage; the two taken in August 
are somewhat worn. The abrasion on the primaries is of interest in 
that the white tips wear off more quickly laterally than terminally, 
leaving the feathers with a narrow white terminal bar from which 
protrudes, distally, a slender white shaft with a few white barbs on 
either side. Finally this protruding part also wears off. One of 
the adults (undated) has the outer greater upper primary coverts 
tipped with white ; the others have no white on these feathers. The 
young bird is in fresh plumage (undated). 

STERNA PARADISEA Brunnich 

Aectic Tern 

Btema Paradisaea Brunnich, Ornithologia Borealis, p. 46, 1764 (E Chris- 

tiaus6e=Christians6e Island, Denmark). 
Sterna paradisaea, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 58, 1887.— Brooks, Bull. Mus. C!omp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 372, 1915.— 

Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 164, 1925. 

Nelson writes that the arctic tern " occurs on St. Lawrence and 
St. Matthew's Islands, where it breeds." 

Brooks found a colony of some 25 pairs breeding " on a sand spit 
in the large lagoon on the south side of St. Lawrence Island in June, 
1913. Several sets of eggs taken June 25 showed that incubation 
had started." Bailey saw several daily during the latter part of 
June and early part of July. 

Collins collected a female at Gambell on August 21. It is in an 
advanced stage of molt and appears to be a young bird coming into 
adult plumage. 

Family ALCIDAE, Auks, Murres, Auklets 

URIA LOMVIA AREA (Pallas) 

Pallas' s IMurke 

Cepphus Ana Pallas, Zoographia Rosso-Asiatica, vol. 2, p. 347, 1811 (in oceano 

orientali circa Camtschatcam). 
Uria lomvia arra, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 45, 1887. — Seale, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 130, 

1898.— Hersey, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 2, p. 10, 1916.~Bailey, 

Condor, vol. 27, p. 66, 1925. 

Nelson saw large numbers of these murres off St. Lawrence Island. 
Hersey found the species breeding on the cliffs behind Gambell, and 
Bailey records that Hendee found them extremely numerous on the 
island during the first week in July. They were then just beginning 
to nest, and ravens and kittiwakes were seen flying off with their 
eggs. 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Seale wrote that " off St. Lawrence Island July 1 murres were 
far more abundant than any other siDecies of bird." 

Collins obtained a male on June 1, a female on August 6 and 
another on August 10, and still another on September 4. All were 
collected at Gambell. All are adults. 

CEPPHUS GRYLLE MANDTI (Mandt) 

Mandt's Guillemot 

Uria mandtii Lieut., Mandt, Observationes in liistoriam naturalem et anatom- 
iam comparatam in itiuere Groenlandico factae, p. 30, 1822 (Spitzbergen). 

Collins collected a young male at Gambell, on November 23, 1930. 
It is in fairly fresh plumage. This is the only St. Lawrence record 
I know of. 

CEPPHUS COLUMBA Pallas 

PIGEX3N Guillemot 

Cepphus Columha Pallas, Zoographia Rosso-Asiatiea, vol. 2, p. 348, 1811 (in 
oceano arctico pariterque circa Camtschatcam et in omni freto inter Sibi- 
riam et Americam= Bering Sea). 

Cepphus columha, Bailett, Condor, vol. 27, p. 66, 1925. 

Bailey found the pigeon guillemot to be abundant on St. Lawrence 
Island, nesting along the cliffs near Sevunga and below Gambell. It 
is strange that Nelson, Brooks, and others overlooked this bird if it is 
really abundant. 

Collins collected an adult male on July 14 and another, both in 
breeding plumage, on August 16 and a j^oung bird on October 11, all 
at Gambell. The August bird is very much abraded. 

CYCLORRHYNCHUS PSITTACULA (Pallas) 

Paroquet Auklet 

Alca psittac-ula Pallas, Spieilegia zoologica, etc., vol. 1, fasc. 5, p. 13, pis. ii, v, 

figs. 4-6, 1769 (insulas partim versus laponiam partim versus Americam 

septentrionalem sparsus=Kamchatka). 
Cyclorrhynchus psittaculus, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections 

made in Alaska, pp. 40, 41, 1887. 
Phalaris psittacula, Hersey, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 66, no. 2, p. 9, 1916. — 

RiDGWAY, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 50, vol. 8, p. 765, 1919.— Bailey, Condor, 

vol. 27, p. 63, 1925. 

Nelson found this peculiar auklet abundant on St. Lawrence 
Island. Hersey noted that this species appeared to be less numerous 
than the crested auklet or the least auklet. 

Bailey writes that there " is a large nesting colony of sea birds 
below Gambell village on the southwest (northwest) side of St. Law- 



ART. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND — ERIEDMANN 27 

If nee Island, which Henclee visited, and he reported a number of 
this species * * * which were nesting, or preparing to nest, 
among the gigantic boulders * * *. i visited a fine colony of 
birds near the reindeer-herding camps of Sivunga, on the north 
shore of St. Lawrence Island, about GO miles from Gambell. * * * 
this species of auklet seemed to prefer burrows near the top of the 
cliff where they could not be molested. The Paroquet Auklets were 
quite tame and often peered inquisitively at us, even after the murres, 
cormorants, and other auklets had taken wing." 

Collins collected a female at Gambell on July 1. The bird is in 
fresh plumage and is fully adult. 

AETHIA CRISTATELLA (Pallas) 

Crested Auki-btt 

Aha cristatella Pallas, Spicilegia zoologica, etc., vol. 1, fasc. 5, p. 18, pis. iii, 
V, figs. 7-9, 1769 (ultimariiin versus Japoniam iusularuin inaxime incola et 
circa insulam Matmey=Yesso, Japan, to Kamchatka). 

Shno-rhijncJius cristatellus, Neison, Report upon natural history collections 
made in Alaska, pp. 41, 42, 1887. 

AetJiia cristatella, Townsend, Bird-Lore, vol, 15, p. 134, 1913. — Brooks, Bull. 
Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 370, 1915. — Hersky, Smithsonian Misc. Coll., 
vol. 66, no. 2, p. 9, 1916.— Bailet, Condor, vol. 27, p. 64, 1925. 

Nelson found the crested auklet extremely numerous among the ice 
off St. Lawrence Island. Brooks found it common at Cape Chibu- 
kak on June 3; Hersey noted its abundance near Gambell, July 24 
and 25. Bailey writes that on " St. Lawrence Island, these birds 
were present with the other auklets in both the colonies * * *^ 
The summits of the cliffs were lined with a confused jumble of 
boulders among which this species and the least auklets made their 
homes." 

Collins collected 10 specimens, all at Gambell. The six with 
dates were taken late in June and in July and August. One unsexed 
specimen has the bill as in the winter condition, that is, it has shed 
the nasal and suprarictal cuirass. 

AETHIA PUSILLA (Pallas) 

Least Auklet 

Uria pusilla Pallas, Zoographia Rosso-Asiatica, vol. 2, p. 373, 1811 (circa 

Camtschatcam). 
Cerorhinca occidentalis?, Vigors, The zoology of Captain Beechey's voyage to 

the Pacific and Behring's Strait. Ornithology, p. 34, 1839. 
Slinorhynchus pusillus, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made 

in Alaska, p. 43, 1887. 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol. 80 

Aethia pu^illa, Beooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 371, 1915. — Heesett, 
Smithsonian Misc. Coll., vol. 6, no. 2, p, 9, 1916. — Haetebt, Die Vogel (3er 
palaarktischen Fauna, vol. 3, p. 1787, 1921. — Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 64, 
1925. 

Ciceronia pnsiUa, Riixjway, U. S, Nat. Mus. Bull. 50, vol. 8, p. 768, 1919. 

Finsch ^^ discussed the unpublished copper plates of J. F. v. 
Brandt's work for the Icones Avium Rossicarum, and identified the 
figures and their names and localities. Figures 6 and 7 on plate VI 
are given on page 21 as follows : " 6.7. Phaleris pi/gmaea-Simorhya- 
chics pusillus (Pall.) — St. Lorenz." On page 81, however, under the 
account of Simorhynchus pusillti^, no mention is made of St. Law- 
rence Island. It is doubtful if Brandt's figure was drawn from a 
bird from St. Lawrence Island. 

Vigors states that " specimens of these birds were brought off from 
St. Lawrence Island in great abundance." Nelson found the species 
abundant there and so did Hersey, Brooks, and Bailey. Thus, 
Brooks found " them in enormous numbers at St. Lawrence Island." 
Bailey writes that this species " is the most abundant of the auklets 
* * *. At St. Lawrence Island we saw thousands of them in the 
breeding colony at Sivunga, where they were preparing to nest among 
the rocks and rounded boulders." 

Collins collected a male and a female at Gambell in July. Both 
are in somewhat worn plumage. 

AETHIA PYGMAEA (Gmelin) 

Whiskered AuKLErr 

Alca pygmaea Gmelin, Systema naturae, vol. 1, pt. ii, p. 555, 1789 (based on the 
Pygmy Auk, Pennant, Arctic zoology, vol. 2, p. 513: Circa insulam avium 
inter Asiam septentrionalem et Americam=Islands in Bering Sea). 

Mormon cristatellus (not Alca cristatella Pallas, 1769), CuvaEE, in Choris's Voy- 
age pittoresque autour du monde, lies Aleoutiennes, p. 20, pi. 12, 1882. 

Alcella pygmaea, Ridgway, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 50, vol. 8, p. 772, 1919. 

M. Choris received specimens of the whiskered auklet from the 
natives of St. Lawrence Island. Kidgway considers Cuvier's name, 
based on one of Choris's specimens, as a synonym of pygmaea^ but he 
appears to consider the locality open to question. 

FRATERCULA CORNICULATA (Naumann) 
HOENEID PU¥FIN 

Mormon oorniculata Naumann, Isis, vol. 9, Band ii. Heft 8, col. 782 (pi. vii, 

figs. 3, 4), 1821 (Kamchatka). 
Fratercula corniculata, Txhiner, Contr. Nat. Hist. Alaska, no. 11, p. 119, 1886 — 

Bent, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 107, p. 103, 1919.— Bailey, Condor, vol. 27, p. 62, 

1925. 



siAbh. Naturw. Ver. Bremen, vol. 1, 1872. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80, ART. 12 PL. 6 





Eskimo Netting Auklets near Gambell 
The least and crested auklets are the species caught most frequently. 



ABT. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND rRIEDMAN:S" 29 

Turner listed the horned puffin as a breeding bird on St. Lawrence 
Island. Bailey found it " very abundant at King and St. Lawrence 
Islands on June 27 and 28, doubtless then beginning to lay. * * * 
They were even more abundant at St. Lawrence Island along the 
cliffs on the north side, and in the colonies on the southwest (north- 
west?) near Gambell village." 

Collins collected six adults of both sexes at Gambell in August 
and September. 

LUNDA CmRHATA (Pallas) 

TiF-iED Puffin 

Alca cirrhnta Pallas, Spicilegia zoologica, etc., vol. 1, fasc. v, p. 7, pis. i, v. 

figs. 1-3. 1769 (iu mail inter Kamtschatcam et Americam Archipelagumque 

Kuriluiit = Bering Sea). 
Lunda cirrhaia, Tukneb, Coutr, Nat Hist. Alaska, uo. 11, p. 117, 1886. — 

Baiutt, Condor, vol. 27, p. 62, 1925. 

Turner first recorded the tufted puffin from St. Lawrence Island. 
Bailey found it fairly common there, as did Collins, who collected 
four adults at Gambell late in June and in August. 

Family CUCULIDAE, Cuckoos 

CUCULUS CANORUS BAKERI Hartert 

Cuciilus canorus lakeri Harteet, Die Vogel der paliiarktisciien Fauna, vol. 2, 

p. 948, 1912 (Shillong, Khasia Hills). 
Cuculas cGiwrus bakeri, Friedman n and Riley, Auk, vol. 48, p. 269, 1931. — 

A. 0. U. check-list of North American birds, ed. 4, p. 159, 1931. 

An adult female, obtained by Collins at Gambell on July 1, 1930, 
is the only record, not only for St. Lawrence Island but for the entire 
Nearctic realm, for this dark form of the European cuckoo. 

Family STRIGIDAE, Owls 

NYCTEA NYGTEA (Linnaeus) 

Snowy Owl 

Strix 'Nycteu Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 93. 1758 (in Europa 
et America septentrionali= Sweden), 

Collins obtained two males at Gambell, one on September 18 and 
the other on October 2, The latter is almost immaculately white 
underneath and has only a very few brownish marks on the tertials 
and rectrices; the former specimen is more abundantly marked with 
dark brovra. 

The snowy owl does not seem to have been recorded from St. 
Lawrence Island before. 



30 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Family CORVIDAE, Crows, Magpies, Jays 

CORVUS COR AX PRINCIPALIS Ridgway 

Northern Raven 

Corvus corax principalis Ridgway, Manual of North Ameiican birds, p. 361, 

1887 (Greenland to Alaska, etc.=St. Michael, Alaska). 
Corvus corax sintiatus, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made in 

Alaska, p. 165, 1887. 
Corvus corax principalis, Bailey, Condor, vol. 28, p. 165, 1926. 

Nelson and Elliott both saw ravens on St. Lawrence Island. Bailey 
writes that a few were " seen daily by Hendee on St. Lawrence Island, 
where they were preying upon the cliff-nesting birds." He saw some 
there himself as well. 

Collins found this bird breeding quite commonly on the island 
and procured an adult female at Gambell on August 16. (PL 4.) 

Family MOTACILLIDAE, Wagtails, Pipits 

BUDYTES FLAVUS ALASCENSIS Ridgway 

Alaska Yellow Wagtail 

Biidytes flavus alascensis Ridgway, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 16, p. 105, 

Sept. 30, 1903 (St. Michael, Alaska). 
Budytes flavus leucosiriaius, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections 

made in Alaska, p. 206, 1887. 

The only data on this bird in St. Lawrence Island is Nelson's state- 
ment that it is " found along the entire Bering Sea coast, wherever 
suitable localities are found, extending its range to St. Matthews and 
St. Lawrence Islands." 

St. Lawrence Island birds should be carefully studied, as it may 
be that they may turn out to be shnillhna Hartert. Hartert ^^ writes 
that simillhna seems to breed only in Kamchatka and wanders over 
Bering Island, east Siberia, and Chosen. As far as I know, no one 
has actually collected any specimens on St. LaAvrence Island. 

Family FRINGILLIDAE, Finches, Buntings, Grosbeaks 

ACANTHIS LINARIA HOLBOELLI (Brehm) 

Holboll's Redpoll 

Linaria holboelUi Brehm, Handbuch Vogel Deutschlands, p. 280, 1831 (middle 

Germany=winter migrant). 
Acanthis holboelli, Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zoiil., vol. 59, p. 404, 191.5. 

" Die Vogel der paiaarktischen Fauna, vol. 1, pp. 289-291, 1905. 



ABT. 12 BIRDS OF ST. LAWRENCE ISLAND FRIEDMANN 31 

Brooks collected a breeding female on St. Lawrence Island on 
June 27, 1913. 

Collins obtained an iinsexed adult on October 16 at Gambell. 

CALCARIUS LAPPONICUS ALASCENSIS Ridgway 

Alaska LoNospim 

Calcarius Jopponicufi alascen.-iis Ridgway. Auk, vol. 15, p. 320, Oct., 1898 (St. 

Paul's Island, Prjbilov group, Alaska), 
Centrophanes lapponicus, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., Cruise of the Cor- 

win, p. 69, 1883. 
Calcarius lapponicus, Nelson, Report upon natural history collections made 

in Alaska, p. 183, 1887. 
Calcarius lapponicus alascensis, Nelson, Bird-Lore, vol. 15, p. 202, 1913. — 

Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zo()l., vol. 59, p. 409, 1915. — Bailey, Condor, vol. 

28, p. 167, 1926. 

Nelson found this longspur breeding commonly on the island. The 
Harriman Expedition stopped at St. Lawrence Island for part of 
a day, July 13, 1899, and three of the members, C. H. Merriam, A. K. 
Fisher, and L. A. Fuertes, collected five adults and one young bird. 
Doctor Fisher informs me that the bird was common and was the 
only land bird observed. 

Brooks found the birds to be numerous, as did also Bailey, who 
found a nest with four eggs. 

PLECTROPHENAX NIVALIS NIVALIS (Linnaeus) 

Snow Bunting 

Emheriza nivalis Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 10, vol. 1, p. 176, 1758 (in 
Alpibus Lapponiae, etc.=Lapland). 

Plectrophcnax nivalis, Nelson, Birds of Bering Sea, etc., pp. 68, 69, 1883; Re- 
port upon natural history collections made in Alaska, p. 180, 1887. 

Plectrophenaoo nivalis nivalis, Brooks, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 59, p. 407, 
1915.— Bailey, Condor, vol. 28, p. 166, 1926. 

Nelson found this bird breeding on St. Lawrence Island. Brooks 
found it common there in June, as did also Bailey in July. 

Collins obtained a fully grown young bird at Gambell. Unfor- 
tunately, the specimen lacks data. 



U. S. eOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: I9>l 



THE BRACHIAL FLEXOR MUSCLES IN PRIMATES 



By A, Brazier Howell and William L. Straus, jr. 

Dvpaj'tment of Anatomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore. Md. 



The investigator who undertakes to dissect the musculature of a 
considerable number of mammals will at once find a diversity of con- 
ditions in the brachial flexor muscles that may well puzzle him. Re- 
course to the literature on the subject may shed but little light upon 
his particular problems, for the reason that there is considerable 
confusion and ambiguity in the manner in which authors dispose 
of this group. 

The present writers found this state of affairs so unsatisfactory 
that they undertook an investigation of the brachial flexors that was 
sufficiently extensive to give them what they believe to be a proper 
understanding of conditions. No attempt has been made to study 
the situation found in a great number of genera, but fortunately 
their own dissections have chanced to illustrate a number of differing 
brachial details, which they believe to be sufficient for the purpose 
stated. Primates only are herein considered, except that the inter- 
esting condition in the opossum {Didelphis) is also mentioned, to- 
gether with isolated details of representatives of one or two addi- 
tional orders. The brachial flexors of these pertinent specimens 
will first be described, and a discussion Avill then follow. 

Grateful acknowledgment is made to the officials of the United 
States National Museum for the loan of four of the specimens dis- 
sected, as well as for the numerous skeletons we have examined. In 
addition, six of the specimens used and now designated by Johns 
Hopkins University numbers were generously contributed, after their 
death, to that institution by the National Zoological Park. For 
ease of comparison the drawings have been made of uniform size, 
without regard to the real dimensions of the specimens. The hu- 
meral length, as given to indicate actual size, was taken from the 
head of the humerus to the lateral condyle. 

No. 2913.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 13. 

70826—31 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS 

Pan sp. — Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 38, male, with humeral length 
of 222 mm. ; right side. 

M. hice'ps hrachii^ capita longuin et hreve. — The caput longum 
arose from the supraglenoid tuberosity of the scapula as usual and 
passed over the bicipital groove, which is very deep in the chimpan- 
zee. There was also an accessory, weaker head from the capsule 
of the joint. These two heads fused some 60 mm. below the head of 
the humerus. Caput breve, of about equal mass but broader than 
caput longum, arose with the coracobrachialis from the coracoid 
process. The two biceps divisions, longum and breve, fused some 70 
mm. from insertion upon the radial bicipital process. The terminal 
tendon was about 25 mm. in length. There was quite a well-marked 
lacertus fibrosus. 

M. coracohi'achialis, partes supe^'ficialis et media. — The anomalous 
superficial portion took origin in common with, and upon the medial 
side of, the short biceps origin from the coracoid. It continued en- 
tirely superficial to all nerves and muscles of the brachium, except the 
dorsoepitrochlearis, to its insertion upon the medial epicondyle. It 
was slender but sharply defined, the distal half being nonmuscular 
and weakly tendinous. The musculocutaneous nerve passed between 
it and the coracobrachialis medius. The latter muscle constituted at 
first a deeper, broader layer of the common coracoid tendon. The 
most proximal point at which its fibers inserted upon the humerus 
was 10 mm. above the most distal part of the deltoid, and 15 mm. 
below the latissimus tendon ; so no part of it could be considered as 
representing a coracobrachialis profundus (brevis). Insertion thence 
continued for 70 mm., or to a point 60 mm. above the condyle. 

M. hrachialis. — The medial belly of this muscle was partly divisible 
from the lateral along the line shown in Plate 1. The medial had 
the more extensive origin from the distal half of the humerus and 
quite to the epicondyle, and the insertion was broad and tendinous 
into the fossa upon the ulna just distal to the coronoid process. The 
partially separable lateral portion of the brachialis had a shorter 
origin adjoining and partly surrounding the deltoid insertion, the 
muscle beginning farther proximally on the lateral than it did on 
the medial side of the deltoid insertion. Most of this division was 
situated lateral to the biceps, but distally it twisted to the rear of the 
latter, the fibers being pennated upon a narrow, tendinous band, 
which fused with the anterior border of the main insertion of the 
brachialis medialis. 

M. epitrochleo-anconeus. — This slip does not belong with the 
brachial flexors, for it is innervated by the ulnar nerve, as we have 



AKT. 13 BKACHIAL. FLEXOES IN" PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 6 

repeatedly found. Yet it is so easily mistaken either for a part of 
the brachialis or of the coracobraehialis, according to variations in 
other details, that it will be mentioned. In this chimpanzee it was 
quite robust, arising from the entepicondyloid ridge and inserting 
fleshily upon the olecranon. 

Pan sp. — Left side. 

M. biceps hrachii, capita longu^n et breve. — Origin of the caput 
longum had three separate attachments, two as on the right side and 
the third almost as tendinous as, and covering, the proprius origin. 
Also the tendinous part of the origins of both biceps divisions was 
markedly shorter (more fleshy) than on the right. Upon the latter 
side the broadest part of the biceps (at the distal third) was 36 mm.; 
upon the left, 60 mm. Other details were bilaterally similar. 

M. co7'acobrachialis 7nedius. — This had the usual origin from the 
deep part of the common coracoid tendon but was slightly broader 
than on the right and more flesh}^ The medial part of the origin 
continued superficial to the musculocutaneous nerve, while the re- 
mainder, or more lateral part of origin, passed deep to the nerve. 
The latter therefore pierced the muscle, and at this point the two 
parts of the muscle were about of the same mass. The part located 
deep to the nerve was inserted narrowly (less than 1 cm.) imme- 
diately below the latissimus tendon, but the more medial portion was 
continued as a narrow, fibrous band distal to the other head. With 
the exception of this tendon there was a hiatus of some 18 mm. 
between the insertions of the two parts of the coracobraehialis, and 
the division superficial to the nerve thereafter inserted upon the 
humeral shaft for a distance of some 30 mm. In the vicinity of the 
elbow the median nerve passed superficial to all parts of the coraco- 
braehialis. 

The remainder of the flexor details were similar to those of the 
right side. 

Hylobates lar. — Johns Hopldns Anat. No. 261, male, with 
humeral length of 215 mm. ; right and left sides. 

M. biceps brachii^ capita longwn et hmnerale. — In this gibbon the 
long head had a normal origin from the glenoid border of the scapula, 
except that the tendon was hollow, taking a stout probe for its full 
length, and this tendinous cylinder was naturally split along one side 
where the muscle fibers began. It inserted by a strong tendon upon 
the radius. The other head, termed humerale rather than breve for 
the reason that it differed markedly from the latter and that there is 
no absolute assurance that it was derived from the more usual breve, 
took origin not from the coracoid, but by tendon from the lesser 
tuberosity immediately adjoining the bicipital groove. Its tendon 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

was several centimeters long, and upon it was directly inserted the 
pectoralis major, without accessory attachment to the bone. The 
dorsomedial border of the proximal third of the fleshy portion of 
this biceps head was fused with the ventral border of the dorso- 
epitrochlearis and medial intermuscular septum, and a slender ten- 
don, extending along the dorsomedial border of this biceps head, 
fused with the other slender tendon continuing distally from the 
dorsoepitrochlearis, attached to the epicondyle. Below the point of 
fusion the more dorsal fibers of the distal part of this biceps arose 
from the above common tendon. The two heads of the biceps fused 
at about the middle of the brachium, but the humeral head again 
separated at the point where the insertional part of the long head 
became tendinous, and the humeral head, passing medially upon the 
antibrachium, was inserted neither by a lacertus nor upon the ulna, 
but powerfully and fleshily into the substance of the flexor digitorum 
sublimis going to the fourth and fifth fingers, the fibers of the two 
muscles being uninterruptedly continuous. Thus the humeral biceps 
and the superficial digital flexor may act as one continuous, long 
muscle. 

M. coracohrachialis medius. — No profundus (brevis) was present 
and the musculocutaneous nerve passed neither through the muscle 
nor between it and the bone. In other words, the nerve passed en- 
tirely medial and superficial to the coracobrachialis without crossing 
the brachium. The muscle arose broadly and almost entirely fleshily 
from the coracoid. The insertion was in no part upon the latissimus 
tendon, as has been stated by Kohlbriigge (1890), but began upon 
the bone of the humeral shaft immediately adjoining the termination 
of the latissimus tendon along its distal third, and thence for a dis- 
tance of 48 mm. 

M. hrachialis. — This was represented almost entirely by the inter- 
nal head, origin beginning 23 mm. above and medial to the deltoid 
termination, which continued unusually far down the arm in this 
animal. Insertion was as usual upon the ulna, broad, and partly 
fleshy. 

There was no trace of an efitrochleo-anconeus. 

Pithecus rhesus. — Carnegie Lab. Embryol., female, with hum- 
eral length of 131 mm. ; left side. 

M. biceps hraehii, capita longuni et breve. — In the macaque the 
attachments were found to be as usual, origin being from the glenoid 
border and the coracoid, respectively, and insertion tendinously uj^on 
the bicipital process of the radius. The bicipital groove was shallow, 
and both bellies were relatively much more slender than in the chim- 
panzee. Both heads were of equal size and separable to within a 



ART. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXOES IN" PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 

short distance of insertion. The short head was more completely 
integral with the coracobrachialis origin than in Pan or man, many 
of its deeper fibers arising directly from the coracobrachialis tendon 
and the two not separating completely until after passing the latis- 
simus tendon. There was no lacertus fibrosus. 

M. coracobrachialis^ partes profunda et media. — The pars pro- 
funda was entirely distinct from the media, arising fleshily, mostly 
from the posterior (medial) border of the common coracoid tendon 
but also partly deep to the tendon and from the coracoid proper. It 
curved around deep to the tendon to insert upon the surgical neck 
of the humerus, mostly proximal to the latissimus insertion, although 
a few fibers overlapped the latter for a couple of millimeters, both 
superficial and deep to its proximal border. The pars media was 
very slender and small, with the musculocutaneous nerve passing 
between all of it and the bone. Its fibers arose from an aponeurosis 
upon its deep surface, which in turn was a continuation of the cora- 
coid tendon, and it inserted upon an area but 10 mm. long beginning 
23 mm. below the latissimus tendon. 

M. hrachialis. — This muscle was not longitudinally divisible and 
was relatively much less robust than in Pan. Origin began from an 
oblique line that extended from above the termination of the deltoid 
on the lateral aspect of the arm to a point well below the deltoid on 
the medial aspect, and thence straight to the fieshy insertion, which 
was partly upon the joint capsule but chiefly upon the ulna. 

There was no epitrochleo -anconeus. 

Cebus variegPvtus. — Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 1. male, with a 
humeral length of 78 mm. ; right side. 

M. biceps brachli., capita (onywvi et breve. — The two heads had 
their usual origins, and the tendon of the longum was completely 
within the shoulder capsule, although the bicipital groove was not 
particularly deep. Muscle fibers developed at about the level of the 
latissimus tendon. Fusion of the two heads took place at the distal 
third of the brachium, and the common, tendinous insertion was 
upon the radius. There was no trace of a lacertus fibrosus. 

M. coracobrachialis., partes profunda et med/ia. — The deep or short 
part was large and well developed, with fleshy origin from the cora- 
coid deep to the common tendon, and insertion upon the surgical 
neck of the liumerus behind the latissimus tendon. In a second 
specimen of Cebus {0. apella, Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 2) this part 
of the coracobrachialis was absent. 

The coracobrachialis medius split from the conmion coracoid 
tendon just below the latissimus and inserted upon the humerus, 
beginning about 9 mm. below the latissimus and continuing for about 



6 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIOITAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

8 mm. thereafter, but there was intimate connection with the inter- 
muscular septum and the medial head of the triceps. It ended far 
above the epicondyloid ridge, and the musculocutaneous nerve 
crossed the brachium deep to all of it. 

M. hrachicdis. — This was in no degree separable into two parts 
and was of the usual form, its origin embracing the deltoid. Me- 
dially it arose from the humerus between a point a few millimeters 
above the deltoid termination and 8 mm. above the entepicondylar 
foramen. Laterally it extended some 5 mm. above the deltoid in- 
sertion and distally as far as the lateral condyle. The insertion upon 
the ulna was by a strong tendon. 

M. epitrochleo-anconeus. — This was possibly, though not certainly, 
represented by a few fibers, which bridged the ulnar nerve. In the 
second specimen it was absent. 

Galago sp. — U.S.N.M. No. 251756, male, with humeral length 
of 33 mm. ; right side. 

M. biceps brachii, capita longum et breve. — The long head was as 
usual. Over the proximal half of the brachium the short head of 
the biceps and coracobrachialis medius, with common origin from 
the coracoid, constituted a single, bipennated muscle, the two thence 
continuing separately. Insertion of the short head was by means 
of (1) a lacertus fibrosus superficially over the medial antibrachium ; 
(2) an aponeurosis passing medially between the pronator teres and 
flexor carpi radialis, this undoubtedly operating upon the ulna by 
means of the intermuscular septum; and (3) a slender, tendinous 
band passing from the lateral belly of the short biceps to the tendon 
of the long head inserting upon the radius. 

M. coracobrachialis^ partes profunda et media. — The short, deep 
head passed from the coracoid deep to the teres major insertion, the 
latter being entirely fleshy and broader, both proximally and dis- 
tally, than the latissimus insertion. The musculocutaneous nerve 
crossed the humerus entirely deep to the media division, not imme- 
diately adjoining its insertion, but quite far above it. Insertion was 
upon an area of the humerus from the teres major tendon to the 
level of the entepicondylar foramen. 

M. brachialis. — This muscle was not longitudinally separable, at 
least with any clarity, as was the case with Tarsius. Otherwise it 
was similar in both. 

M. epitrochleo-anconeus.- — Origin was from the entepicondyloid 
ridge below the level of the foramen. It was smaller than in 
Tarsius. 

Nycticebus sp. — U.S.N.M. No. 142235, male, with humeral length 
of 54 mm. ; right side. 



AKT.13 BRACHIAL FLEXORS IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 7 

M. biceps hrachii longum. — The single head of this biceps was 
quite robust. It arose by a sharply defined tendon from the glenoid 
border at the coracoid base, passed through a well-defined bicipital 
groove, and inserted upon the radius only. There was no lacertus 
fibrosus. 

M. coracohrachicdis, partes iiiedia et profunda. — Common origin 
was shortly tendinous from a coracoid process that was unusually 
long. Pars profunda was short and inserted upon the surgical 
neck on a level with the teres major insertion, which was very 
broad and which extended above the latissimus tendon at this point. 
Pars media was entirely superficial to the musculocutaneous nerve 
and was exceedingly long, inserting from the teres major practically 
to the epicondyle. Just above the latter point the muscle divided 
into two slips between which passed the median nerve, which then 
continued to the entepicondylar foramen. The manner in which 
this muscle passed upon either side of the median nerve was en- 
countered in no other simian or prosimian dissected. 

M. hrachialis., partes lateralis et medialis. — This muscle was al- 
most completely divisible. No part of the medial division originated 
above the deltoid insertion and it was much smaller than the lateral 
division, which took origin not only from the humerus but also from 
the aponeurotic investment of the deltoid along the oblique line of 
its insertion. Insertion of the brachialis was upon the ulna, as usual. 

No trace of an epitrochleo-anconeus was encountered. 

Tarsius (philippinensis?).— U.S.N.M. No. 218238, male, with 
humeral length of 29 mm. ; right side. 

M. hiceps hrachii^ capita longv/m et hreve. — These heads had the 
usual origins from the glenoid border and the coracoid, respectively, 
and both inserted upon the bicipital process of the radius; but they 
were entirely separable throughout their length. The same condi- 
tion was encountered in Tarsius saltator (Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 
169, female). Distally the long head was situated fairly anterior to 
the short one (there was no twisting), and the insertion of the latter 
was slenderly tendinous, but the former was chiefly fleshy and was 
the broader throughout its length. There was no sign of a lacertus 
fibrosus. 

M. coracobrachialis., partes profumda et media. — The pars pro- 
funda may be said to have had no connection with the common 
coracoid tendon but arose independently and fleshily from the 
coracoid, thence extending directly to the surgical neck of the 
humerus and inserting as far as the distal border of the teres major 
tendon (in this animal quite separate from the latissimus tendon) 
and entirely deep to the tendon. The pars media split cleanly from 
the biceps breve some 6 mm. from the origin. The musculocutaneous 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM voi,. SO 

nerve passed entirely deep to the muscle, and insertion was upon 
the shaft from a point immediately beyond the latissimus tendon 
to a situation upon the epicondyloid ridge just short of the entepi- 
condylar foramen, and hence not to the epicondyle proper. 

M. hrachialis, partes lateralis et medialis. — The brachialis was 
primitively and entirely separable throughout its length. The more 
medial head originated fleshily from the humeral shaft just beyond 
the pectoralis insertion, while origin of the lateral head was chiefly 
tendinous from the extreme proximal part of the surgical neck. 
Insertion was by two tendons upon the ulna. 

In Tars^ius saltator the brachialis could not be clearly separated 
into two parts, there being only slight indications of a longitudinal 
splitting. The insertion was by a single tendon upon the ulna. 

M. epitrochleo-anooneus. — This small slip, innervated by the ulnar 
nerve, arose from the epicondyloid ridge below the level of the ente- 
picondylar foramen, and its conformation was such that it would be 
extremely easy to mistake it for a condylar extension of the coraco- 
brachialis medius. 

Didelphis virginiana. — Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 117, male, 
with humeral length of 57 mm. ; left side. An opossum was dissected 
in order to present the arrangement of the brachial flexors in a 
primitive marsupial. 

M. biceps brachii, capita longum et breve. — The long head arose 
from the supraglenoid border of the scapula by a tendon that passed 
through the bicipital groove and that seemed to be at least partially 
within the capsule of the shoulder joint. The short head took origin, 
by fibers partly muscular and partly tendinous, from the inner side 
of the tip of the coracoid process. This head crossed in front of the 
caput longum at the elbow and inserted upon the radius by a strong- 
tendon. The long head, passing inward, united with the brachialis 
to insert by a tendon upon the ulna. It is thus apparent that the two 
heads were separate for their entire length. There was no lacertus 
fibrosus. 

M. ccyracohrachialis profundus. — Since the medius division was 
entirely absent, the coracobrachialis was represented only by the 
short or profundus element. This was a large and well-developed 
muscle. Its origin was by a tendon from the inner and under aspects 
of the coracoid process. Broadening and developing muscle fibers, 
it inserted upon the medial side of the neck of the humerus above and 
behind the tendons of the teres major and latissimus dorsi. 

M. hrachialis. — This arose strongly from the outer side of the 
humerus as high as the level of the latissimus insertion and from 



ART. 18 BRACHIAL PLEXOES IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 9 

the anterior surface of the bone as high as the prominence marking 
the end of the deltoid ridge, continuing along the outer side of same 
for a few millimeters. These two origins were partially separable 
almost as far distally as the tendon. The insertion was in common 
Avith the long biceps head by a common tendon on the ulna. 

There was no epitroclileo-ancoiieus^ but just dorsal to the region 
where this muscle might be expected to occur there was a M. anconeus 
intemus, which was served by the radial nerve and passed from the 
posterior portion of the epicondyle to the olecranon. The position 
of this slip, which is a triceps element, served in this case to dis- 
tinguish it from a true epitrochleo-an^oneus^ originating from the 
anterior epicondyle; but in some mammals (rodents) this topo- 
graphical difference seems not to exist, and identification is determi- 
nable on innervation alone. 

In addition to the specimens described above, we have examined 
the brachial flexors of certain other primates: The Old-World 
monkeys Pygathrtx entellus (U.S.N.M. No. 25215), Pa/pio hariiadryas 
(Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 149), and Lasiopyga pygerythra (Johns 
Hopkins Anat. No. 148) ; the New- World monkeys A teles geoffroyi 
(Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 190), Alouatta seniculus (Johns Hopkins 
Anat. No. 13), Saimiri sciweus (Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 8), Aotiis 
zonalis (2 specimens, Johns Hopkins Anat. Nos. 237 and 244), and 
Oediponiidas geoffroyi (Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 234) ; and the 
lemur Perodicticus potto (Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 283). These do 
not depart in any significant respect from the other specimens of Old 
and New World monkeys and lemurs described, and detailed accounts 
of them are therefore omitted. Certain arrangements in the muscula- 
ture and nerves of these primates are, however, referred to in the 
succeeding discussion. 

DISCUSSION 

The intrinsic musculature of the brachium comprises only the 
so-called extensors of dorsal innervation — the triceps complex — and 
the so-called flexors of ventral innervation served by the musculocu- 
taneous nerve. It is only with the latter group that we are at present 
concerned, although for convenience we have also mentioned the epi- 
trochleo-anconeus. The latter is served by the ulnar nerve and is 
clearly a derivative of the antibrachial flexor carpi ulnaris element, 
although some authors have erroneously classified it with the triceps 
group. Its fibers have secondarily migrated above the elbow or else 
represent a primitive humeral origin of the ulnar flexor. It is not 
clear which of these interpretations should be regarded as the more 
probable. 

70826—31 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

The brachial flexor group as it now occurs in mammals comprises 
the so-called biceps brachii, coracobrachialis, and brachialis. As they 
are all served by the musculocutaneous nerve, they should be regarded 
as originally a single genetic complex, which later differentiated into 
the existing elements, and it is more difficult to assign to each its 
precise phylogenetic position than would be the case if the group were 
innervated by two or more nerve components. 

It seems likely that the ideally primitive differentiation of this 
complex into separate elements was upon the plan of a single, long, 
or two-joint flexor from the shoulder to the antibrachium (coraco- 
antibrachialis), and two short or one joint flexors, a proximal one 
from the shoulder to the humerus (coracobrachialis) and a distal one 
from the humerus to the antibrachium (brachio-antibrachialis). As 
there is still controversy over the question of whether the present 
mammalian coracoid actually represents the primitive coracoid or the 
procoracoid, it seems futile to speculate seriously as to the exact point 
upon the primitive shoulder girdle from which arose the two ideally 
primitive flexors of the brachium that were attached thereto. 

The long flexor and the more proximal of the short flexors above 
referred to were the precursors of the biceps and coracobrachialis. 
That the short biceps, from the coracoid, represents a more primitive 
arrangement than the long head, with its origin from the bicipital 
tubercle upon the glenoid border of the scapula, is indicated by the 
fact that the long head, as such, is apparently found only in those 
vertebrates higher than the reptiles. 

Whatever was precisely the original arrangement of these two 
flexors, there accordingly seems to have been a later stage during 
which they were confined to an exclusive origin, both of them from 
the coracoid process of the scapula. At that time, therefore, they 
probably had much in common, and it is likely that the part repre- 
senting the biceps inserted upon both radius and ulna, while that 
representing the coracobrachialis inserted upon the humeral shaft. 
Because of their community of origin, however, it is possible that 
some interchange of fibers took place as specialization occurred. In 
other words, some of the true biceps fibers, partially fused with the 
coracobrachialis, may secondarily have developed attachment to the 
humerus, thereby increasing the area of coracobrachialis insertion, 
while some of the true coracobrachialis fibers could conceivably have 
separated and taken on an elongated form that would later give 
them considerable resemblance to a biceps division. And their inner- 
vation would not help us to segregate them according to their actual 
derivation. 

At least the assumption may be granted, however, that the brachial 
flexor now passing from the coracoid to the forearm (caput breve) 



ART. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXOES IN PRIMATES HOWELL. AND STRAUS 11 

represents a portion of the original biceps element, from which was 
later derived that element (caput longum) almost invariably encoun- 
tered in mammals, from the glenoid border to the forearm. Simi- 
larly it must be conceded, for convenience at least, that those elements 
passing from the coracoid to any part of the humerus represent the 
coracobrachialis. 

Representing the third primitive flexor of the brachium is the 
brachialis, the more distal of the two short flexors. Although the 
mas-s may be either longitudinally divisible or single, and the origin 
may migrate up or down the humerus, it is always composed of 
fibers arising from the humeral shaft and inserting upon the ulna. 
In its idealistically primitive form its plan probably corfsistcd of an 
origin from the entire humeral shaft, and insertion upon both anti- 
brachiai bones. 

M. hiceps hrachii. — As the long head of the biceps is absent in all 
vertebrates below the reptiles, we may presume that it was a later 
development from the short or coracoid head. This being the case, 
it is somewhat unexpected to find that in mammals the long head is 
by far the more conservative, apparently being always present. It 
arises from the bicipital tuberosity, or tuberositas supraglenoidalis, 
of the scapula at the lateral base of the coracoid process. It passes 
ov^er the head of the humerus, either partially or com.pletely deep to 
the shoulder capsule, and through the bicipital groove, or sulcus in- 
tertubercularis, between the greater and lesser tuberosities of the 
humerus. This groove is shallow or deep. The muscle ends invari- 
ably in a tendon, which inserts upon the bicipital or radial tuberosity 
of the radius, or the adjoining part of the ulna, or both. The inser- 
tion has fair but not complete group constancy. In marsupials the 
short head always goes to radius, the long head to ulna (Leche, 1900). 
Among primates, on the other hand, it is the rule for both heads to 
have a common tendon of insertion upon the radius alone. In many 
rodents there is but a single head, and where this is the case the 
tendency seems to be for the insertion to be ulnar; but in the seal and 
sea lion the single head has the radial attachment. At any rate the 
attachment of this head is always firmly upon the bone. 

Among primates, apparently only the lorises {Nycticelus, Loris, 
and Stenops) normallj^ have but a single biceps head, of the long 
variety (Owen, 1868; Murie and Mivart, 1872; Zuckerkandl, 1898; 
Howell and Straus), yet even in these animals a short or coracoid 
head may occasionally be present (see Murie and Mivart, 1872). 

Where a second head is present this usually arises from the cora- 
coid process and constitutes the regular caput breve. In reality 
there may be considered to be a common tendinous origin of this 
head and the coracobrachialis, from the superficial aspect of which 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

the tendon of the short biceps may usually separate quite high up at 
times (as in Pithecus)^ with some of the biceps fibers arising from 
the coracobrachialis tendon below the point of separation. More 
rarely the fission does not occur until quite at the middle of the 
brachium (as in Galago). 

Usually there is fusion of the long and short heads of the biceps, 
most frequently at about the middle of the brachium or a bit below 
(as in Pan. Papio^ PygatJirix^ Gebus^ Aotits, and Perodicticus)^ or 
occasionally this does not take place until within a short distance 
of the insertion (as in Pithecus, Lasiopyga^ and Ateles). and rarely 
the two heads are entirely separate throughout their length (as in 
Tarsius and Didelphis). In man the two heads of the biceps usu- 
ally fuse well above the tendon, but at least in some of those cases in 
which the two are separable as far as the tendon it is easily demon- 
strable that both heads are concerned with the formation of the 
radial bicipital tendon, 

^Yliereas insertion of the longer biceps is invariably on bone, that 
of the shorter head is more variable, going in some cases to the 
radius, to the ulna, or having a variety of fascial attachments. The 
best known of the latter is represented by the lacertus fibrosus or 
semilunar fascia as of man. This takes the form of a tough fascial 
connection between chiefly the short biceps and the medial anti- 
brachium, concerned with certain of the antibrachial flexors. This 
we liave found to be indubitably present in such primates as Pan, 
Ateles, Aohas (2 specimens), and Galago; absent in Hylohafes, 
PygatliTix, Papio, Plthecus, Lagtopyga, Gebus (2 specimens), 
Sahniri, Nycticehus, Perodicticus, and Tarsius (2 specimens) . From 
the condition typical of man there are found several fascial 
variations. In Galago, for instance, we found that there was not 
only a superficial lacertus as well as tendinous attachment of the 
short head to the radial insertion of the longum but in addition a 
fascial band that was intermediate in position between the other two 
and that passed deep between the pronator teres and flexor carpi 
radialis, probably operating directly upon the ulna by means of the 
intermuscular septum. On the other hand, in Hylohates lar the 
shorter biceps head, analogous and possibly homologous to the usual 
caput breve, diverged from the common biceps mass to fuse com- 
pletely with the substance of the flexor digitorum sublimis, the fibers 
of the two being perfectly continuous and acting in some respects as 
a single muscle extending from shoulder to digits. It is easy to see 
how such a situation could have developed from a lacertus, or how 
insertion by means of the latter could shift to intermuscular septa 
and so reach the bone. 



ABT. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXORS IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 13 

In a chimpanzee dissected by Gronroos (1903), the bicipital slip 
to the forearm fascia was fleshy, thereby contributing a '' lacertiis 
carnosus.-' Duvernoy (cited by Sommer) and Sommer (1907) found 
quite similar arrangements in their gorillas, as did Duckworth 
(1915) in Lemur. This condition, however, appears to be quite dif- 
ferent from the arrangement in gibbons. In general, the lacertus 
fibrosus is much more frequently absent in prosimians, monkeys, and 
anthropoids than it is in man. 

In man there may be accessory heads to the biceps, usually con- 
cerned with the caput longum, to the number of three. Very rarely 
are there this many, but it is not very unusual to find at least one. 
Such an extra head does not mean an extra muscle, of course, but 
only that one lieacl of the biceps has more than one attachment at 
origin. These extra heads may arise in various ways; for example, 
very frequently from the capsule of the shoulder joint or from the 
shaft of the humerus itself. 

We were fortunate in finding a condition of the former sort in 
the chimpanzee that we dissected. Upon the right side the origin 
of the caput longum had two attachments, one proper and the other 
from the capsule of the joint, both fusing some 60 mm. below the 
humeral head. Upon the left side there were two extra attachments 
to the capsule. 

In one specimen of Aotus (Johns Hopkins Anat. No. 237) we 
found in the left arm what was apparently a liinneral biceps head. 
This arose from the medial edge of the bicipital sulcus, immediately 
adjacent and lateral to the insertion of the coracobrachialis medius, 
beginning a few millimeters above the distal border of the latissimus 
dorsi tendon and continuing for a short distance below. This 
muscle was smaller than either of the two usual biceps heads, both 
of which had their customary attachments. The exact distal con- 
nections of this extra muscle could not be ascertained because of the 
fragile condition of the tissues of tliis specimen. Accessory biceps 
heads with origin very similar to that occurring in this Aotus appear 
to be not infrequent in man, as observed by us and others in the 
dissecting room. Thus among 37 arms (23 negro, 14 white), rep- 
resenting 20 bodies (12 negro, 8 white), in which this detail was 
particularly sought, we found an accessory humeral head occuri'ing 
six times (5 negro, 1 white), and an accessory capsular head once 
(negro). Testut (1884) has reported the occurrence of a humeral 
biceps head in 31 out of a total of 299 subjects, all of which were 
presumably white. Our own figures in this coimection suggest that 
accessory humeral heads may occur more frequently in negroes than 
in whites. Naturally, however, our data are as yet too meager for 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

any emphasis to be placed upon this point. These humeral heads, 
although fleshy, were usually rather weakly developed. Origin was 
always above the middle of the humerus lateral to and coextensive 
with the insertion of the coracobrachialis medius; while insertion 
was into the posteromedial aspect of the common biceps mass just 
above the elbow. 

The occurrence of a humeral biceps head in Aotus, as mentioned 
above, should not be regarded as normal for the genus, however, for 
this extra muscular slip was not present in the other arm, nor in 
the upper extremities of an additional specimen (Johns Hopkins 
Anat. No. 244) that we investigated. Nor does the presence of 
accessory biceps heads in our chimpanzee represent the normal con- 
dition in this animal. In fact, accessory heads for the biceps would 
seem to occur quite infrequently in primates other than man and 
gibbons. Testut (1884) described an extra or capsular head in a 
Cercopithecus { = Lasiopyga). Chudzinski (cited by Kohlbrtigge, 
1897) found a humeral head in two out of five orang-utans that he 
studied. This extremely low frequency of extra heads in monkeys 
is worthy of note, especially in view of Gronroos's (1903) specula- 
tions concerning the evolution of the human biceps. This theory 
will be considered subsequently. 

In some respects these accessory biceps heads may be largely 
fortuitous, although possibly atavistic,^ but it is at least shown that 
this detail readily responds to variational stimuli. If it be in 
response to some need for a humeral attachment, then a continuation 
and strengthening of the stimulus might well result, finally, in the 
migration of a part, or indeed the whole, of the primitive coracoid 
head to the humerus. This, we are inclined to think, may be just 
what has happened in the case of Hylobates. In the specimen of the 
latter dissected by us the long head had, immediately adjoining, 
another head, which in all respects was comparable to a caput breve 
except for the fact that origin was strongly from the lesser tuberosity 
of the humerus immediately adjacent to the bicipital groove and 
not at all from the coracoid. This would appear to be the usual 
arrangement in the Hylobatidae. Though this assumed migration 
of the caput breve was complete in our gibbon, it appears to have 
been incomplete in other instances. For example, the rodent Visca- 
cha was found by Parsons (1894) to have, in addition to a normal 
longum and breve, just such a humeral head, but from the greater 
instead of the lesser tuberosity. Kohlbrtigge (1890) found similar 
conditions in Hylobates leuciscus^ but in H. syndactylus the cora- 

^ The accessory biceps head in our chimpanzee, arising superficially from the capsule, 
and the comparable conditions occurring in man might be interpreted as indicating tran- 
sitional stages In the migration of the long head from a coracoid to a supraglenoid 
origin. 



ART. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXOES IK PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 15 

coid head was vestigial, and in H. agilis entirely absent. The 
assumption of complete or partial migration of the coracoid 
head in Hylohates is strengthened by the fact that in the occa- 
sional instances in which both coracoid and humeral heads occur 
in the same specimen of gibbon, the former, according to data col- 
lected by Gronroos (1903), is usually weakly developed. But Gron- 
roos did not consider the humeral head (which he termed caput 
tuberculo-septale) of the Hylobatidae as homologous with the usual 
coracoid head, but rather that the two are distinct structures, of 
which as a rule only one develops; for example, in man the cora- 
coid and in the gibbon the " tuberculoseptal " head. This assump- 
tion is hardly justified by comparative anatomical facts, despite its 
ingenious application by Gronroos in attempting to explain the 
accessory biceps heads in man. 

Eeally the most interesting and peculiar thing about the condi- 
tion in Hylobates is that the pectoralis major is inserted directly 
upon the tendon of origin of this caput humerale of the biceps.^ 
This is very significant. By this means flexion of the pectoralis 
not only acts through the biceps, but continuously as far as the 
wrist by virtue of biceps-flexor digitorum sublimis fusion. If the 
pectoral thus acted upon a biceps with long tendon from the scapula 
the effect might be much less efficient, because a longer tendon would 
give more slack than one firmly anchored to the lesser tuberosity. 
One should note that this action of the pectoral through the biceps 
is more effective when the gibbon arm is elevated sideways, thus 
putting the pectoral under tension, than when elevation is accom- 
plished in the sagittal plane. 

This does not exhaust the interesting details of the gibbon biceps, 
however. The dorsomedial border of the proximal third of the 
fleshy portion of the humeral head was fused with the ventral 
border of the dorsoepitrochlearis, and a slender tendon, running 
along the dorsomedial border of this biceps head, fused with the 
slender tendon continuing to the epicondyle from the dorsoepitroch- 
learis. It thus appears that when the pectoralis is acting upon the 
antibrachium through the humeral biceps, the fusion of the latter 
with the dorsoepitrochlearis prevents the biceps from springing for- 
ward unduly and thus weakening the action. Gronroos (1903) has 
also discussed the action of such a muscle complex; that is, from 
latissimus dorsi through latissimo-condyloideus (sive dorsoepitroch- 
learis) through caput tuberculoseptale (sive caput humerale) to 

- Gronroos apparently doubted that the humeral head ever arises in Hplohates from 
the pectoralis major tendon, as some authors have stated, and In his specimens he inter- 
preted the situation as fusion of the two structures. In our specimen, at least, there 
was no shadow of doubt that the pectoralis major was actually inserted upon, or into, 
the tendon of the humeral head. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

flexor digitorum sublimis. He indicated that such an arrangement 
is important to the gibbons in making their tremendous leaps from 
branch to branch. 

This curious-and apparently unique specialization of the brachial 
flexors in the gibbon appears to us more as a secondary adaptation 
of purely functional significance, and we are of the opinion that little 
or no phylogenetic import should be attached to it. In this view we 
disagree completely with Gronroos, who concluded that the three 
great apes, the gibbons, and man all passed through a stage in which 
the biceps brachii possessed three heads — supraglenoid, coracoid, and 
tuberculoseptal. His ingenious theory, based chiefly upon the posi- 
tions of supernumerary humeral biceps heads (which he regarded as 
remnants of the caput tuberculoseptale) appears to us as unconvinc- 
ing, for consideration of the biceps morphology in the various groups 
of primates does not lend support to his views. 

Mention should also be made of other theories concerning the 
phylogeny of the biceps. Humphry (1872) homologized the two 
heads of the biceps of man with the entire coracoradialis (caput 
longum) and the outer portion of the coracobrachialis longus (caput 
breve) of the urodele amphibian Cryptohranchus japonicus. Welcker 
(1878) found that in some mammals (as the tapir) the tendon of 
the caput longum lay outside of the capsule. In other forms the 
tendon exhibited various degrees of encapsulation. He likewise 
found a gradual ontogenetic migration within the capsule occurring 
in some forms (beaver, Cebu^, man), and therefore came to the 
conclusion that the tendon of the caput longum has secondarily 
migrated within the capsule of the shoulder joint. This supports 
other comparative evidence that indicates that the supraglenoid 
origin of the long head is a relatively late phylogenetic acquisition. 
Fiirbringer (1876) was inclined to the view that the caput longum is 
homologous with the entire coraco-antibrachialis of reptiles, the 
caput breve being derived from the coracobrachialis. Eisler (1895) 
secondarily derived the caput breve from both the coracoradialis and 
coracobrachialis longus of urodele amphibians. He did not definitely 
commit himself in respect to the caput longum, but listed three possi- 
ble explanations: (1) It is a part of the coracoradialis proprius, 
which has gained attachment to the scapula; or (2) it is a part of the 
caput breve, which has become attached to the ligamentum humero- 
radiale (sive capsuloradiale), which is itself the degenerated tendon 
of the original coracoradialis proprius; or (3) it represents a com- 
bination of the two preceding processes. Lubosch (1899) regarded 
the caput longum as a derivative of the accessory or humeral head of 
the coraco-antibrachialis of reptiles. 



ART. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXORS IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 17 

Despite the differences in these theories there seems to be general 
agreement that the supraglenoid origin of the long head is a sec- 
ondary occurrence, xls stated earlier in this paper, we are personally 
inclined to favor the theory that derives both bicei^s heads from a 
primitive coraco-antibrachial flexor, the outer portion of which has 
migrated to the supraglenoid border, while the inner has retained 
its coracoid origin, possibly strengthened by additional fibers from 
the primitive coracobrachialis. 

Attention must be given to tiie possible significance of the lacertus 
fibrosus. Gronroos regarded this as a vestigial structure, the remains 
of the fleshy ulnar extension of the supposedly primitive caput 
tuberculoseptale of the gibbons. The frequent absence of the lacertus 
fibrosus in the three great apes, together with the fact that super- 
numerary biceps heads apparently occur less frequently in these 
animals than in man, led him to the conclusion that the biceps muscle 
in all three anthropoids is more specialized than in man. It seems 
that he was probably correct in asserting that retention of the lacertus 
is more primitive than is its loss. There is, however, no reason for 
regarding the condition in the gibbons as other than an extreme 
specialization. The lacertus possibly represents a portion of the 
original ulnar insertion of the primitive coraco-antibrachial flexor. 
At least the conditions in our Galago are extremely suggestive of 
such an interpretation. 

M. coracohrachialis. — In man, where ordinaril,y there occurs but 
one well-defined coracobrachialis element, inserting upon the middle 
of the humeral shaft, there is no difficulty met with, or at least any 
question that may occur does not greatly worry the human anato- 
mist. But in many other mammals the conditions that occur in this 
muscle have been extremely puzzling, which is largely attributable 
to the loose manner in which the term " longus " has been used for an 
occasionally present distal extension. 

Comparative anatomists usually follow Wood (1867) when differ- 
entiating parts of the coracobrachialis. This authority recognized a 
pars brevis, or coracocapsularis, arising from the coracoid and insert- 
ing upon the neck of the humerus above the tendon of the latissimus 
dorsi, a pars media or propria, inserting below the latissimus, and a 
pars longa. In regard to the last his statements were at times 
ambiguous, and he seems to have used the term indiscriminately to 
designate both the distal part of the pars media, when this extended 
down the shaft to a marked extent, and another structure, totally 
distinct in conformation. The latter has probably been found by few 
anatomists, and by the same token it is probably poorly understood, 
so that subsequent writers have readily fallen in with the same 
ambiguity of Wood's paper. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM VOL.80 

As it is likely that all parts of the present coracobrachialis are 
derivatives of one original component, the terms by which we desig- 
nate the several divisions that may occur are not of paramount 
importance, but at least they should be uniformly applied. For the 
reason that there has been so much confusion in the treatment of the 
so-called long division, we prefer to abandon this term in favor of 
" superficialis." 

Occasionally in man there occurs a coracobrachialis brevis, or 
"profundus," as we designate it (also termed coracocapsularis, cora- 
cobrachialis superior, coracohumeralis superior, and rotator humeri). 
Eisler (1895) saw it at least twenty times in nine years, and Wood 
reported that he had met with it four times. Among 39 arms (24 
negro, 15 white), representing 20 individuals (12 negro, 8 white), 
examined carefully for this detail, we found a coracobrachialis pro- 
fundus in three instances (2 negro, 1 white). In each case the 
nerve supply had unfortunately been destroyed before we saw the 
muscle. These three examples exhibited certain differences in their 
morphology, and it seems worth while to describe them in some detail. 

In the left arm of an extremely muscular male negro a coracobra- 
chialis profundus arose from near the tip of the coracoid process as 
a broad and fleshy slip, which inserted above and behind the latissi- 
mus dorsi tendon. The coracobrachialis proprius (or medius) ex- 
hibited its customary relations, and it was pierced as usual by the 
musculocutaneous nerve. Upon the right arm the profundus element 
was entirely absent. 

The second example of this muscle was found in the right arm 
of a well-developed male negro. It arose from near the anterior 
end of the coracoid process and continued fleshily to insert above and 
behind the latissimus dorsi tendon ; and likewise by a short, tendinous 
extension upon a second, long tendon, which arose from the surgical 
neck of the humerus and which continued distally to pass uninter- 
ruptedly into the medial intermuscular septum. The coracobra- 
chialis proprius was quite normal and was pierced by the musculocu- 
taneous nerve. There was no trace of a coracobrachialis profundus 
upon the left arm. 

The third occurrence of this slip was upon the right arm of a 
male white. It was unusual in that it arose not from the coracoid 
tip, but broadly and fleshily from the medial border of this process 
for a considerable distance. It inserted above the latissimus dorsi 
tendon. The coracobrachialis proprius was normal and was pierced 
by the musculocutaneous nerve. The left arm exhibited no trace of 
a profundus element. 

In primates the coracobrachialis profundus is a short and rela- 
tively broad, entirely fleshy slip arising either from the deep part 



AKT.13 BRACHIAL, FLEXORS IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 19 

of the common coracoid tendon, or else from the coracoid proper 
posterior to the tendon. Insertion is invariably upon the neck of 
the humerus either entirely proximal to, and back of, the tendon of 
the latissimus dorsi, as we found, for example, in the potto {Pero- 
dicticus), or else overlapping the tendon by only a couple of milli- 
meters, as we found in the macaque {Plthecus). Occasionally it is 
extremely slender, as in the spider monkey (Ateles) that we dissected. 

According to Parsons (1898) this slip is present in some genera 
and absent in others of the marsupials, edentates, cetaceans, ungu- 
lates, rodents, carnivores, insectivores, and primates, and is always 
absent in bats. Parsons and other authors give long lists of the 
genera concerned, but there is no need to repeat these lists here. 
Among the primates, however. Parsons stated that it is present in 
more than 30 per cent of chimpanzees but is less frequent in gorillas 
and orangs, while it is always present in lemurs. Keith (cited by 
Parsons, 1898) reported it as rarely absent in cynomorphous 
monkeys. 

A survey of the available literature reveals the fact that this 
muscle is present regularly in lemurs and Tarsius, is usually present 
in both catarrhine and platyrrhine monkeys, and occurs only very 
occasionally in anthropoid apes other than the chimpanzee.^ 

Apparently, then, this structure is present in some genera of all 
primate families but is absent in others, and so it is not a very im- 
portant phylogenetic index; but whether its significance is purely 
functional it is difficult to say. Parsons (1898) suggested that the 
suppression of this muscle might be attributable to, or correlated 
with, the setting back of the shoulders. In general, however, it is 
usually present in the more primitive primates and tends toward 
complete disappearance in the so-called " higher " forms. The im- 
portant point is that when it occurs at least most of its fibers are 
located entirely proximal to, and usually deep to (behind), the 
latissimus tendon. Therefore it is usually separated from the pars 
media by the latter tendon. 

The coracobrachialis medius, or " proprius," always originates 
from the coracoid, and it can always be identified by this fact, 
together with the circumstance that it inserts upon the shaft of the 
humerus, although occasionally the relationship of its terminal fibers 
with those of the medial triceps is extremely close (as in Cehus and 
Perodicticus) . Otherwise it is quite variable. Origin is usually 

8 According to the data that we have collected from the literature and to which we 
have added the results of our own dissections, the coracobrachialis profundus (brevis) 
has been found in 1 out of 10 gorillas (10 per cent), 4 out of 13 chimpanzees (31 per 
cent), and 1 out of 10 orang-utans (10 per cent). It was not found among 8 gibbons. 
We ourselves have met this structure, but in various degrees of development, in Pithecus, 
Papio, Lasiopyga, Ceius (first specimen), Saimtri, Ateles, Aotus (two specimens), Oedi- 
pomidas, Oalago, Nycticeius, Perodicticus, and Tarsius (two specimens), but not in 
Pan, HyJotates, Pygathruc, and Alouatta, nor in our second specimen of Cehus. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

tendinous, the common tendon of this and the short head of the 
biceps being separable into two tendons a short distance from the 
coracoid. Occasionally fission takes place somewhat farther down 
the arm (as in Saiviiri), or the tendon does not divide at all, the 
fleshy part of both biceps and coracobrachialis originating from the 
common tendon in a bipennated manner (as in Perodicticus and 
Galago), the two being separable only over the distal half of the 
brachium (as in Galago). Or, again, in many rodents that have 
this muscle in depauperate form the fibers of the coracobrachialis 
originate directly from the single tendon of the caput breve of the 
biceps. At times in man we have found the more proximal fibers 
of the coracobrachialis medius inserting not upon the bone, but 
directly upon a flat tendon (internal brachial ligament of Struth- 
ers) that arises from the upper part of the humeral shaft and 
eventually disappears at the point where the medius begins its 
osseous insertion. There was a suggestion of such an arrangement 
in our specimen of Lasiopyga. Testut (1884) has suggested that 
this long tendinous band may be a possible vestige of the cora- 
cobrachialis longus (of Wood). It appears to us, however, as ex- 
tremely unlikely that this could represent the coracobrachialis 
longus (superficialis) as recognized by us. The band is applied 
to the deep surface of the coracobrachialis proprius, whereas the 
pars longa, when present, lies superficial to all the muscles of the 
brachium except the dorsoepitrochlearis. This feature of the pars 
longa will be discussed subsequently. 

Another feature that is extremely variable is the position of the 
musculocutaneous nerve in relation to the muscle. This nerve may 
cross the brachium above and beneath the whole muscle, or pierce it, 
or pass entirely below it in a manner that appears indiscriminate, 
not only in closely related species but also in individuals of the same 
species. In illustration of such variation we may cite the conditions 
in 32 adult white and negro cadavers that we have examined in the 
dissecting rooms of the Johns Hopkins University Department of 
Anatomy. In all but five cases, both sides were dissected. Out of 
59 arms, the musculocutaneous nerve pierced the coracobrachialis in 
55 instances and passed below (superficial to) the muscle in 4 (on 
the left side in three cadavers and on the right in the other). In 
those in which piercing occurs there may be as little as approxi- 
mately one-sixth of the muscle deep to or above the nerve, or prac- 
tically all of it, but the average is about one-half of the entire muscle 
located above the nerve. This probably represents with a fair degree 
of accuracy the condition in man (subject to an unknown degree of 
racial variation). Apparently it is only very rarely that the nerve 
passes deep to the entire muscle mass in man, but in mammals below 
the anthropoids this is the usual condition. In fact Parsons, than 



ART. 18 BRACHIAL FLEXORS IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 21 

whom no one has had more extensive experience with the muscula- 
ture of the lower mammals, has stated that he has never found the 
nerve piercing the muscle in anj^thing but primates. 

Judged from our own dissections and from a consideration of the 
data given by Kohibriigge (1897) and Bolk (1902), this feature of 
piercing or nonpiercing is extremely variable in monkeys and lemurs. 
It seems to vary not only within a single genus but perhaps even 
within a species. We ourselves have found the musculocutaneous 
nerve piercing the coracobrachialis medius only in the left arm of 
our chimpanzee, in Pygathrix^ Lasio'pyga^ and Perodicticus. In the 
right arm of the chimpanzee, as in both extremities of our Hylobates^ 
the nerve passed entirely superficial to the muscle. No piercing of 
the muscle was found in any of our other specimens of monkeys or 
prosimians, in which the nerve passed entirely deep to (above) all 
the fibers of the coracobrachialis medius, between this muscle and 
the bone. This arrangement obtained regardless of the absence or 
presence of the coracobrachialis profundus. Apparently the nerve 
usually pierces the coracobrachialis medius in the great apes, though 
possibly with less frequency than in man, at least in the chimpanzee. 

Many authors, however, have evidently considered that when the 
nerve pierces the muscle in primates the portion superficial to the 
nerve and the more distally situated is a pars longa. This treatment 
we regard as unfortunate. The feature of piercing or nonpiercing 
and the proportions of the muscle parts involved are too variable to 
carry much phylogenetic or taxonomic weight, although for conven- 
ience it is legitimate to term the part of the coracobrachialis medius 
distal to the nerve b.y some such appellation as the distal portion, and 
the deeper division the proximal one. The latter we regard as never 
homologous to the coracobrachialis profundus or brevis, in spite of 
the fact that where the latter occurs the musculocutaneous nerve usu- 
ally, if not invariably, passes entirely deep to the pars media, for the 
part of the latter above the nerve, where piercing occurs, is almost 
always well segregated from the area of insertion of pars profunda. 
That this may not invariably be the case is indicated by the mention 
by Parsons (1898) that continuity has been observed between the two 
in Gorilla. Also, pars media may begin to insert higher than the 
distal bordei- of the latissimus tendon, as in the gibbon; not, we 
found, upon the tendon itself, as stated by Kohibriigge (1890), but 
just adjoining its termination. 

The same may be said of the part of the coracobrachialis medius 
that lies distal to the point of piercing. This may reach barely to 
the middle of the humerus (as in Aotus)., or it may continue well 
down the entepicondyloid ridge, an arrangement that is often or usu- 
ally the case in those mammals having an entepicondylar foramen 
(as in Tarslus, Nycticebus. and Galago). There is no justification 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

for calling this longer type of muscle a pars longa, for it is appar- 
ently strictly homologous with the shorter type. And here lies the 
ambiguity. It is usually impossible to tell whether an author, using 
the term coracobrachialis longus, has reference merely to the part 
of the muscle distal to the musculocutaneous nerve (where this 
pierces), to that part lying distal to the middle of the humerus 
(where this position is occupied), or to an entirely separate slip, as 
hereafter defined. Furthermore, when the coracobrachialis is dis- 
tally extensive one should exercise great care in dissecting the inser- 
tion free from a possible epitrochleo-anconeus. Where the statement 
is made that the former continues quite to the epicondyle we are 
suspicious that the two have not been properly differentiated — an 
error very easy to make. 

When the coracobrachialis medius is not pierced by the musculocu- 
taneous nerve the muscular belly is usually not separable into two 
distinct parts. If piercing does occur, there may be complete separa- 
tion or only partial. 

The portion of the coracobrachialis termed pars longa has caused 
us much perplexity, as explained above, for the reason that it is often 
impossible to be sure of the exact conditions found by an author. 
It is certain that frequently nothing was meant but an unusually 
long pars media, while it seems equally apparent that such authors 
as Wood and Parsons applied the same term indiscriminately to two 
different structures. Our attention was focused on this point by 
finding upon the right side of a chimpanzee a rather slender anoma- 
lous muscle that arose from the coracoid dorsally adjacent to the 
short biceps origin, and in a position corresponding to the more 
usual dorsal border of the coracobrachialis medius. This muscle was 
superficial to all others but the dorsoepitrochlearis, and maintained 
this position, by a slender tendon, quite to the entepicondyle, thus 
passing superficial to the median nerve. Its exact homology we 
can not state. It is probably a derivative of the primitive coraco- 
brachialis, but the question whether it is a relic of a muscle invariably 
present in some remote ancestor, or whether an anomalous variation 
without particular phylogenetic significance, can not now be an- 
swered, for the reason that although a precisely similar structure 
has been reported and figured in widely unrelated mammals, we do 
not know whether it is invariably present in all individuals of those 
species.* 

* This superficial portion of tlie coracobrachialis was vei'y probably included in the 
ground plan of the brachial flexors of tetrapod vertebrates. Thus Humphry (1872) 
states in regard to the coracobrachialis that " in Amphibians, Reptiles, and Monotremes 
there is commonly a third segment, an inferior coracobrachial, which extends to the 
ulnar condyle ; and the brachial artery with the median nerve passes between it and the 
middle coracobrachial" (p. 158). Judged from its superficial position in respect to the 
median nerve, this muscle described by Humphry may well be considered as homologous 
to the superficial coracobrachialis of our chimpanzee. 



ART. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXORS IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 23 

The muscular slip described by Fick (1925) in his chimpanzee 
" Tschego " is very probably homologous to the muscle in our ani- 
mal. [In Fick's animal it had a tendinous origin from the upper 
part of the coracobrachialis (medius) and passed over the brachial 
vessels and nerves to insert on the anterior border of the dorso- 
epitrochlearis (sive latissimo-tricipitalis).] 

For the reason that the term " coracobrachialis longus " has been 
so loosely and ambiguously applied, we prefer to discard this name 
completely and to call this slip, clearly worthy of a distinctive 
appellation, a coracobrachialis superficialis, to designate a muscle 
from the coracoid to the medial epicondyle that bridges over and 
passes superficial to all the brachial nerves and other muscles, except 
tlie dorsoepitrochlearis. We can, for the present, be certain that 
it has been found only in those mammals for which adequate illus- 
trations have been presented, or else in those rare instances when 
an author has stated specifically that the muscle is entirely superficial 
to the median nerve. 

Parsons (1898) gave a considerable number of genera in which 
he found that " the longus is best developed," but on the same page 
mentioned that the only instance in which he had found the muscle 
superficial to the median nerve was in the tree porcupine SphingwruSy 
for which he gave a good illustration. Likewise Wood (1867) had 
a figure of Ornithorhynchus^ which seems to have had a similar 
arrangement. But the same author presented another figure in 
which this muscle is indubitably assigned to man, in which he stated 
that this " slip is not uncommonly found." There would seem to 
be some serious question here. Le Double (1897) lists but one cer- 
tain instance of its occurrence in man, and it is almost certain that 
had it been found in any instance by a student of the department 
of anatomy of the Johns Hopkins University Medical School dur- 
ing the past 15 years the fact would have been called to the attention 
of one of the staff. During this time several hundred cadavers have 
been dissected, and no gross anatomist now on the faculty has ever 
seen it in man. 

M. hrachialis. — Whether the ideally primitive brachialis actually 
consisted of a single muscle going to both radius and ulna or of two 
slips, the evidence seems to point to the probability that the condi- 
tion of two distinct slips is more primitive than that of complete 
fusion, as now often found in man and other mammals. The inser- 
tion in mammals is usually upon the ulna, occasionally upon the 
radius, and rarely on both antibrachial bones (Leche). In such a 
basically primitive primate as Tardus there was in one specimen 
{T. philipfinensisf) a lateral head from the surgical neck of the 
humerus entirely distinct from a medial head, arising just distal to 



24 PROGEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

• 

and partly medial to the deltoid insertion. In Galago the origins 
were similar, but the two heads were not clearlj^ separable, which 
may have been partly attributable to the poor condition of the alco- 
holic specimen. Broadh' speaking, this is the general condition in 
many of the lower mammals, such as insectivores and rodents. A 
more advanced type, as typified in anthropoid apes and some of the 
monkeys, is either for the lateral head to originate a trifle above the 
termination of the deltoid insertion, and for the medial head to 
begin just below this point, or else for the origin of the two 
to form a V partly embracing the end of the deltoid. Very often, 
both in man and other primates, the brachialis is partly separable 
longitudinally (for example, in Pan, Papio^ SaimiH, Aofus, and 
Nycticebus) downward from the apex of the deltoid insertion. It is 
clear that its logical treatment should call for the recognition of a 
pars lateralis and a pars medialis. Each part is served by branches 
of the musculocutaneous nerve, but frequently the lateral head re- 
ceives in addition a fine twig of the radial nerve, indicating that 
with this head of the brachialis there may at times be incorporated 
some relatively slight element originally derived from the extensor 
complex. Occasionally the muscle may be represented almost en- 
tirely by the medial head, as in our gibbon {Hylohates). 

In some human cases the brachialis may likewise be almost com- 
pletely separated into distinct superficial and deep layers as far as 
the tendon. It is the lateral portion of this deep layer that is fre- 
quently innervated by the radial nerve. At times it is separable from 
the remainder of the muscle as a more or less distinct slip that 
joins the main tendon just before insertion on the ulna. It is not 
uncommon to find this lateral portion of the brachialis fused super- 
ficially with the inner border of the brachioradialis. This union may 
be so intimate as completely to bridge over the radial nerve. These 
variations suggest that the fibers of the extensor element incorporated 
with the pars lateralis of the brachialis are derived from the brachio- 
radialis rather than from the adjacent triceps complex. This view 
is shared by Paterson (1919). 

The only other primate in which we have encountered any radial 
innervation of the brachialis is Pygathrix. In this animal brachialis 
and brachioradialis were completely fused superficially, bridging 
over the radial nerve. The lateral portion of the brachialis was in- 
nervated by both musculocutaneous and radial twigs, but the part 
served by the latter element w^as not differentiated as a separate slip. 

In our dissections all nerves were traced to their emergence from 
the plexus, without, however, particular attention being paid to 
their finer variations. A few of the more interesting details may 
here be mentioned. 



AitT. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXORS IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 25 

We found some variation in the exact manner in which the cora- 
cobrachialis is innervated. In some animals (as Galago and Nycti- 
cehus) the entire muscle (both profundus and medius) was served by 
branches directly from the musculocutaneous nerve. Sometimes, 
however, the nerve to the coracobrachialis profundus was derived not 
from the musculocutaneous nerve proper but from another portion 
of the plexus. Such an arrangement occurred in Papio^ in Tarsius 
{pMlippinsnsisf)^^ and in Aotus (No. 237). In both the Papio and 
the Tarsius the profundus was innervated by a branch from the 
lateral head of the median nerve just below the point where the mus- 
culocutaneous nerve diverged from the lateral cord of the plexus. 
According to Kohlbrligge (1897) both Westiing and Hofer likewise 
found the coracobrachialis innervated by the median nerve in their 
orangs. This does not indicate a heterotopic innervation from the 
median nerve proper, but implies that certain fibers normally car- 
ried in the trunk of the musculocutaneous may at times continue for a 
space with those of the median. In the Aotus^ on the other hand, the 
profundus received a nerve branch from the plexus proximal to the 
origin of the musculocutaneous nerve. It is, of course, well knowm 
that in man the nerve to the coracobrachialis frequently does not 
issue from the musculocutaneous nerve, but instead has an independ- 
ent origin from the seventh (or seventh and sixth) cervical nerves. 
This indicates that these nerve fibers, usually carried with the mus- 
culocutaneous, at times become independent proximal to the forma- 
tion of that trunk. This is just the opposite to the arrangement in 
Papio and Tarsius {philippinensisf) . Bolk (1902) also found a 
separate nerve for the coracobrachialis medius in the orang-utan and 
Midas rosalia, and for the coracobrachialis profundus in Cynoceph- 
alus habuin. In the specimen of spider monkey (Ateles geoffroyl) 
we found that at the upper third of the brachium the median nerve 
sent a branch to join the terminal division of the musculocutaneous 
nerve, which then ended in the substance of the brachialis muscle. 
At the same point was the sole origin, from the median, of the lateral 
antibrachiai cutaneous nerve. In this case, therefore, the muscu- 
locutaneous nerve carried no cutaneous fibers. This arrangement 
may possibly be the rule for the spider monkey, for Bolk likewise 
found in Ateles helsehuth that the n. cutaneus antibrachii lateralis 
arose only from the median nerve, the musculocutaneous nerve ter- 
minating in the brachialis muscle. A branch from the median to 
musculocutaneous was also encountered in the baboon {Papio), the 
langur (Pygafhrix), and the guenon {Lasiopyga). In these ani- 
mals the anastomosis took place in the distal third of the upper arm. 

= In Tarsius saltator the coracobrachialis profundus was innervated by a branch 
issuing directly from the trunk of the musculocutaneous nerve. 



26 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Anastomosis of the median and musculocutaneous nerves is not un- 
common in man, but in such cases the branch is commonly from the 
musculocutaneous distalward to the median (Spalteholz) and more 
rarely vice versa, as we found in Ateles, Papio, Pygathrix, and 
Lasiopyga. 

Bolk described anastomoses of the median and musculocutaneous 
nerves in many of the primates that he dissected. In some instances 
(as in Golobus ursinus, Macacus niger, Cynocephalus hahuin, O. 
morTTion, and Mycetes seniculvs) the connecting branch passed from 
median to musculocutaneous, as we found also in Ateles geofroyi 
and Papio hannadryas; in one {Lepilemur viustelinus) it passed in 
the opposite direction as is usual in man. In SeTnnopithecus nasicus 
both median and musculocutaneous supplied a fine branch, which 
joined together and innervated the coracobrachialis medius; while 
in Cercopithecus alhigularis there was a twofold anastomosis of 
median and musculocutaneous, the upper forming a purely motor 
nerve to the brachialis muscle, the lower becoming the lateral 
cutaneous nerve of the forearm. Anastomoses of musculocutaneous 
and median have also been discussed by Kohlbriigge (1897) in some 
detail. 

We found that all the brachial nerves of Hylohates lar were gath- 
ered within a single sheath. This led to the first impression that 
the musculocutaneous nerve was not present as a separate structure, 
the nerves to the brachial flexors seeming to issue from the median. 
Fortunately, however, our specimen was dissected while fresh, so 
that upon splitting the common sheath the separate flexor nerves 
could be readily demonstrated. In an embalmed specimen this 
arrangement might easily have led to an erroneous interpretation. 
Apparently the fibers of the musculocutaneous nerve in Hylo'bates 
exhibit considerable variability in their degree of independence of 
the median nerve. Kohlbriigge (1890), for example, found no sepa- 
rate musculocutaneous nerve in either Hylo'bates syndactylus or H. 
ngilis. In both of these animals the nerves to the three brachial 
flexors arose as separate branches of the lateral head of the median 
nerve. Bolk (1902), on the other hand, found in Eylohates 
7)iulleri, a common trunk in the upper arm representing the united 
musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar nerves. Only near the elbow 
did this trunk divide into median and ulnar. Prior to this point 
there were given off from the common trunk the separate branches 
to the brachial flexors. In our Hylohates lar at least the association 
of the flexor nerves in the brachium was not so intimate as that 
described by Bolk, This author likewise found no separate musculo- 
cutaneous nerve in his chimpanzee, the brachial flexors being served 



ART. 13 BRACHIAL FLEXOES IN PRIMATES HOWELL AND STRAUS 27 

by branches issuing directly from the median. The same arrange- 
ment occurred in the chimi^anzees studied by Gratiolet and by Sutton 
(cited by Bolk). In our chimpanzee the musculocutaneous nerve 
was quite a distinct entity in each arm, and the formation and 
proximal distribution of the entire brachial plexus agreed quite 
closely with the conditions usually obtaining in man. According to 
Bolk. if the musculocutaneous nerve does not pierce the coraco- 
brachialis but lies medial to it, and if no blood vessels lie between it 
and the median nerve, there is no factor present that may hinder 
the ontogenetic union of the two nerve trunks. These ideal condi- 
tions for union were realized in both his chimpanzee and his gibbon. 
In the latter animal he regarded the union of median and ulnar 
nerves as an expression of the result of the narrow spatial relation- 
ships in the vessel-nerve canal on the medial side of the arm ; that is, 
in the sulcus bicipitalis. These hypotheses are quite ingenious and 
exceedingly plausible, but this particular subject needs further and 
more detailed investigation. 

We have usually obtained the innervation of the epitrochleo- 
anconeus, and this has always been by the ulnar nerve. Hence, this 
slip has no relationship with the triceps group. It should never be 
confused, as is usually done, with the anconeus internus sometimes 
found (as in Didelphis). This triceps element is situated more 
upon the extensor side of the epicondyle than is the epitrochleo- 
anconeus, at least in primates. 

CONCLUSIONS 

Among the primates the brachial flexors as a whole exhibit no very 
distinct phylogenetic trend. The variations are individual rather 
than generic. 

There is to be noted, among the so-called higher primates, a tend- 
ency for the two heads of the biceps brachii to fuse more completely 
and more proximally. Supernumerary biceps heads should probably 
be regarded as atavistic in some instances. In others they may rep- 
resent nothing more than fortuitous variations. The lacertus fibrosus 
is present more frequently in man than in other forms. Since this is 
probably a primitive feature, man is to be regarded as relatively 
unspecialized in respect to this character. 

The coracobrachialis, in its most complete expression, is composed 
of three parts, which we prefer to call superficialis, media, and pro- 
funda. The first of these is present only in very rare instances. 
Among the gibbons, great anthropoids, and man the pars profunda 
tends toward complete disappearance. Similarly, the pars media 
exhibits a tendency to terminate its insertion farther proximally than 



28 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vou 80 : aet. l:? 

in the more primitive primates. The musculocutaneous nerve usually 
passes between media and profunda in prosimians and monkeys, but 
in the great anthropoids and man its customary course is one whereby 
it pierces the media. 

Most constant of all the brachial flexors is the brachialis. In its 
primitive condition it was evidently entirely separable into two heads, 
and traces of this original condition are found even among the more 
advanced primates. 

The epitrochleo-anconeus, while topographically a member of the 
brachial flexor group, is really a portion of the flexor carpi ulnaris 
complex. This is indicated by its constant innervation by the ulnar 
nerve, and never by the musculocutaneous, which is the nerve of the 
true brachial flexors. This small muscle apparently occurs hap- 
hazardly among the various groups of primates. 

Most striking, perhaps, are the contrasting specializations of the 
biceps muscle in the Lorisinae, among the lemurs, and in the Hylo- 
batidae, among the catarrhines. In all other primates this muscle 
normally is composed of the usual mammalian coracoid and long 
heads. The lorises {Nycticehus^ Lons^ and Stenojys), however, nor- 
mally possess but one head, of the long variety, the coracoid head 
being absent. A quite different and most complicated arrangement 
obtains in the gibbons (Hylobatidae). This in principle consists of 
the normal absence of the coracoid head and its replacement by one 
arising from the humerus. The long head is present. There are 
exhibited most intimate connections with surrounding muscles, such 
as the pectoralis major, dorsoepitrochlearis, and the forearm flexors. 
This produces a mechanical arrangement which is well adapted to the 
extreme mode of brachiation exhibited by the gibbons. This unique 
anatomical arrangement is clearly an extreme functional adaptation 
peculiar to the gibbon. In no sense can it be regarded as represent- 
ing a stage in the evolution of the biceps of man and the anthropoiil 
apes. Though this curious structure of the gibbon's biceps seems 
undoubtedly to be adaptive, it is apparently not a necessary outcome 
of the brachiating mode of locomotion, for such able and constant 
brachiators as Ateles, Golohvs, Pan^ and Pongo exhibit no trace of 
such an arrangement. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

BoLK, L. 

1902. Beitrjige zur Affenanatomie. Ill, Der Plexus cervico-brachialis der 

Primaten. Petrus Camper, vol. 1, pp. 371-566. 
DrcKWORTH, W. L. H. 

1915. Morphology aud anthropology. Ed. 2, vol. 1. 304 pp. Cambridge. 

ElSLEB, p. 

1895. Die Humologie der Extremitaeten. Abh. Naturf. Ges. Halle, vol. 19, 

pp. 89-344. 
FiCK, R. 

1925. Beobaohtnngen an der Muskelii eiulger Schimpanseii. Zeit.scbr. f. 

Aiiat. und Entwickluugsg., vol. 76, pp. 117-141. 

I'^TIBKINGEK, M. 

1876. Zur vergleichenden Anatorule der Schultermuskeln. Morph. Jahrb.. 
vc). 1, pp. aS6-816. 
Gronboos, H. 

1903. Die Musculi biceps brachil und latissiuio-coudyloideus bei der Affen- 

gattung Hylohates im Vergleich mit den entsprechendeu Gebilden 
der Anthropoiden und des Menschen. Abh. Kon. Preuss. Akad. 
Wi.ss., Berlin, 102 pp. 

HrMPHEY, G. M. 

1872. Observations in myologj', including the myology of Cruptohranch. 
Lepidomren, dog-fish, Ceratodus and Paeudopus pallasii, with the 
nerves of Cryptoiranch and Lepidosiren and the disposition of 
muscles in vertebrate animals. 192 pp. C;imbridge and London. 

KOHLBBtJGGE, J. H. F. 

1890. Versuch einer Anatomic des Genus Hylohates. Zool. Ergeb. einer 
Reise in Niederlandisch Ost-Indien. Vol. 1, pp. 211-354. Leiden. 

1897. Muskeln und periphere Nerven der Primaten, mit besonderer Beriiok- 
sichtigung ihrer Anomalieu. Verb. Kon. Akad. van Wetenschappt'n 
te Amsterdam (Tweede Seetie), vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 1-246. 
Leche, W. 

1900. Mammalia. Bronn's Klassen und Ordnungen des Thier-Reichs. Vol. 
6, pt. 5, 1,169 pp. Leipzig. 
Le Double, A. F. 

1897. Traits des variations du syst^me musculaire de I'homme et de leur 
signification au point du vue de I'anthropologie zoologiquo. 2 vols. 
Paris. 

LUBOSCH, W. 

1899. Eiu coracoantibrachialis beim Menschen. Beit rag zur Morphologie 
des M. biceps brachil. Morph. Jahrb., vol. 27, pp. ;{()9-31G. 
MuRiE, J., and Mivaet, St. G. 

1872. On the anatomy of the Lemuroidea. Trans. Zool. Soc. London, vol. 7, 
pp. 1-113. 
Owen, R. 

1868. On the anatomy of vertebrates. Vol 3, Mammals, 915 pp. London. 

29 



30 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80: art. 13 

Paesons, F. G. 

1894. On the myology of tlie sciuromorphine and hystricomorphine rodents. 

Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1894, pp. 251-296. 
1898. The muscles of mammals, with special relation to human myology. 
II, The muscles of the shoulder and fore-limb. Journ. Anat. and 
Physiol., vol. 32, pp. 721-752. 
Paterson, a. M. 

1919. The anatomy of the peripheral nerves. 165 pp. London. 
SOMMEE, A. ij 

1907. Das Muskelsystem des Gorilla. Jen. Zeitschr. f. Naturw., vol. 42, 
pp. 181-308. 
Spalteholz, Werner. 

[No date.] Hand-atlas of human anatomy. Vol. 3, Viscera, brain, nerves, 
sense-organs. (English translation, ed. 5.) Philadelphia and 
London. 
Testut, L. 

1884. Les anomalies musculaires chez I'homme expliqu6es par I'anatomie 
comparee. Leur importance en anthropologic. 844 pp. Paris. 
Welckee, H. 

1878. Die Einwanderung der Bicepssehne in das Schultergelenk. Nebst 
Notizen iiber Ligameutum interarticulare humeri und Lig. teres 
femoris. Arch. f. Anat. und Physiol., 1878, Anat. Abth., pp. 20^2. 
Wood, J. 

1867. On human muscular variations and their relation to comparative 
anatomy. Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. 1, pp. 44-59. 

ZUCKERKANDL, E. 

1898. Zur Anatomie von CMromys madagascarensns. Denkschr. Kais. 
Akad. Wiss., Wien, Math.-Naturw. CI., vol. 68, pp. 89-200. 



ABBREVIATIONS USED IN PLATES 

AN. IN. — anconeus interuus. 

BI. BR. — biceps breve. 

BI. LG. — biceps longum. 

BI. HM. — biceps humerale. 

BR. LT. — biachialis lateralis. 

BR. MD. — brachialis medialis. 

CO. BR. MD. — coracobrachialis medius. 

CO. BR. PF. — coracobrachialis profundus. 

CO. BR. SF. — coracobrachialis superficialis. 

D. EP. — dorsoepirrochlearis. 

EP. AN. — epitrochleo-ancoueus. 

LC. FB. — lacertus fibrosus. 

LT. D. — latissimus dorsi. 

N. MED. — nervus medianus. 

N. MSC. — nervus musculocutaneus. 

N. ULN. — nervus ulnaris. 

PCT. MJ. — pectoralis major. 

R. — radius. 

T. MJ. — teres major, 

U. — ulna. 

1, 2, 3. — accessory heads of the biceps brachii. 

4. — common sheath of the flexor nerves. 

81 



U. t.COVeRNMENT PRINTINa OFFICd !•*> 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 13 PL. 1 




U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 13 PL. 2 




6 




o 


1- 


d) 




J 




^^ 




ifl 


sssS 




o 



IS 



03 



2 

D 

cn 


CL 



Q 
z 
< 

UJ 

1- 
< 

^ t^ 

rIS 



ar 



S g 



LiJ 

J 



u « 

2 i 



^ 



P3 



UPPER CRETACEOUS FORAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD 



By Joseph A. Cushman and P. W. Jarvis 

Cushman Laboratory for Foramini feral Research, Sharon, Mass. 



INTRODUCTION 

Cretaceous foraminifera have already been described from Trini- 
dad/ but further collecting and continued study of Trinidad mate- 
rial have increased considerably the fauna already described in this 
previous paper. Though the arenaceous forms are often badly dis- 
torted, on account of pressure and conditions of fossilization, the 
calcareous forms are usually well preserved and show much of 
their original detail. The entire collection represents a rather deep- 
water fauna that is not common in the Upper Cretaceous deposits 
of the general Gulf Coastal Plain of the United States, although the 
Velasco shale of the Tampico region represents most nearly the con- 
ditions under which these Cretaceous deposits of Trinidad were laid 
down. The Trinidad material, however, is very much better pre- 
served than that of most of the Velasco shale, and it is therefore 
much better for detailed studies. 

Many of the genera and also many of the species of the arenaceous 
group that are still living in the deeper waters off the coast of Trini- 
dad are to be found in this Cretaceous material, often in considerable 
numbers. Such genera as Gloinospira, ATumodiscus, Ammodiscoides, 
Affimolaffena, HorTnosina, jSaccorhisa, and others are common in the 
Trinidad collections. All these genera are known living off Trini- 
dad and usually in the same species, so that they seem to indicate 
that conditions of deposition for this material in the Upper Creta- 
ceous are not very different from those that obtain off these coasts at 
the present day. 

As already known from studies of the general Upper Cretaceous 
of the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United States, most of the species 
found are already described by various European workers from 

1 Cushman and Jarvis, Cretaceous foraminifera from Trinidad. Contr. Cushman Lab. 
Foram. Res., vol. 4, pp. 85-103, pis. 12-14, December, 1928. 

No. 2914.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 14. 

70827—32 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Cretaceous deposits of similar age from Europe and elsewhere. 
Since d'Orbigny's work in 1840, such authors as von Hagenow, 
Geinitz, Reuss, Alth, Schwager, Egger, Beissel, Franke, and others 
have described many species from the European Upper Cretaceous. 
This literature has been carefully studied, together with abundant 
material from the Upper Cretaceous of Ireland, England, France, 
Holland, and Germany, and the striking resemblance of American 
deposits to those of Europe has been constantly emphasized. As a 
result very few new forms have had to be described from this 
Trinidad material. Occasional striking forms seem to be new, but 
they are the exception. 

The Upper Cretaceous, especially of the Gulf Coastal Plain of 
the United States, is of great economic importance to the petroleum 
industry in geologic correlation. The entire region of the Gulf of 
Mexico and the Caribbean Sea was during Upper Cretaceous times 
an area of general deposition of the Upper Cretaceous. Though this 
Trinidad material is from deeper water than most of the Gulf 
Coastal Plain deposits, nevertheless it contains many species in com- 
mon with those deposits, and this paper should therefore be useful 
in connection with studies now being pursued of the various Creta- 
ceous regions of the Western Hemisphere. 

The plates are from drawings of Trinidad specimens by Miss 
Margaret S. Moore. 

In order that available literature of recent years on the Cretaceous 
of America may be available to students, a list of these publications 
is given here. Many references to these will be found in the syn- 
onymy under the various species. 

Even a slight examination of the European and other literature 
will show that later authors have diverged widely from the original 
description and figures given by the earlier authors who described 
many of the Cretaceous species. As a result it has been felt wise in 
many cases to give only the first reference to a species. The follow- 
ing papers will be of use to anyone working with American Creta- 
ceous material : 

A. BIBLIOGRAPHY OF PAPERS ON THE FOKAMINIFERA (EXCLUSIVE 
OF ORBITOIDIDAE) FROM THE AMERICAN UPPER CRETACEOUS 

Bagg, R. M. 

1898. The Cretaceous foranunifera of New Jersey. U. S. Geol. Surv. Bull. 
88, pp. 1-89, pis. 1-6. 
Carman, Kathekine. 

1929. Some foraminifera from the Niobrara and Benton formations of 
Wyomiuff. .Tourn. Pal., vol. 3, pp. 309-315, pi. 34. 
Carsey, D. O. 

1926. Foraminifera of the Cretaceous of central Texas. Univ. Texas Bull. 
2612, pp. 1-56, pis. 1-8. 



ABT. 14 FORAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 6 

Chubch, C. C. 

1929. The occurrence of Eyphopyxa in California. Journ. Pal., vol. Sr 
p. 411. 

CUSHMAN, J. A. 

1926. The foraminifera of the Velasco shale of the Tampico Embaymenc. - 
Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, pp. 581-612, pis. 15-21. 

1926, Some foramiuifera from the Mendez shale of eastern Mexico. Contr, - 

Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 2, pp. 16-26, pis. 2, 3. 

1927. Some characteristic Mexican fossil foraminifera. Journ. Pal., vol!- 

I, pp. 147-172, pis. 23-28. 

1927. Some foraminifera from the Cretaceous of Canada. Trans. Roy. Soc. 

Canada, sect. 4, pp. 127-132, pi. 1. 
1927. American Upper Cretaceous species of Bollvina and related species, 

Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 2, pt. 4, pp. 85-91, plB. 

II, 12. 

1927. New and interesting foraminifera from Mexico and Texas. Contr. 
Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 3, pp. 111-117, pis. 22, 23. 

1927. Foraminifera of the genus Siphonina and related genera. Proc- 

U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 72, art. 20, pp. 1-15, pis. 1-4. (One Uppes.- 
Cretaceous species included.) 

1928. The American Cretaceous foraminifera figured by Ehrenberg. Jourr?.. 

Pal., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 213-217, pis. 34-36, Jan. 
1928. A Cretaceous Cyclammina from California. Contr. Cushman Lab. 

Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 70, pi. 9, figs. 5a, &. 
1928. A peculiar ClaviiUna from the Upper Cretaceous of Texas. Contn 

Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, pp. 61, 62, pi. 8, figs. 1, 2. 

1928. Fistulose species of Gaudrytna and HeterostomcUa. Contr. Cushman 

Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, pp. 107-112, pi. 16. (Includes Cretaceous 
species. ) 

1929. Kyphopyxa, a new genus from the Cretaceous of Texas. Contr. 

Cushman Lab, Foram. Res., vol. 5, pp. 1-4, pi. 1, figs. 1-7. 

1929. Some species of SipTiogencrinoides from the Cretaceous of Venezuela. 

Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 5, pp. 55-59, pi. 9, figs. 5, 
6, 11-15. 

1930. Notes on Upper Cretaceous species of VaginuUna, FlabelUna, an& 

Frondicularia from Texas and Arkansas. Contr. Cushman Labv. 
Foram. Res., vol. 6, pp. 25-38, pis. 4, 5. 

CuBHMAN, J. A., and Chuech, C. C. 

1929. Some Upper Cretaceous foraminifera from near Coaliuga, Califor- 

nia. Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, no. 16, pp. 491-- 
530, pis. 36-41. 
Cushman, J. A., and Haeeis, Reginald W. 

1927. Some notes on the genus CeraiobuUmina. Contr. Cushman Lai^, 

Foram. Res., vol. 3, pp. 171-179, pis. 29, 30. (One species from the- 
Navarro of Texas included.) 
Cushman, J. A., and Hedberg, Hollis D. 

1930. Notes on some foraminifera from Venezuela and Colombia. Gontr^ 

Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 6, pp. 64-69, pi. 9, figs. 1-13. 
Cushman, J. A., and Jaevis, P. W. 

1928. Cretaceous foraminifera from Trinidad. Contr. Cushman Lafci 

Foram. Res., vol. 4, pp. 85-103, pis. 12-14. 



4 PEOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

CusHMAN, J. A., and Ozawa, Yoshiaki. 

1930. A monograph of the foraminiferal family Polymorphinidne, Recent 
and Fossil. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 77, art. 6, pp. 1-185, figs. 1, 
2 (in text), pis. 1-40. (Contains numerous Cretaceous species.) 

CusHMAN, J. A., and Waters, J. A. 

1927. Some arenaceous foraminifera from the Upper Cretaceous of Texas. 

Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 2, pt. 4, pp. 81-85, pi. 10. 

1929. Some Arenaceous foraminifera from the Taylor Marl of Texas. 

Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 5, pp. 63-66, pi. 10, figs. 3-7. 
Cushman, J. A., and Wickenden, R. T. D. 

1928. A new foraminiferal genus from the Upper Cretaceous. Contr. Cush- 

man Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, pp. 12, 13, pi. 1, figs. 1, 2. 

1930. The development of Haiitkenina in the Cretaceous with a description 

of a new species. Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 6, pp. 
39-43, pi. 6, figs. 1-6. 

JARVIS, p. W. 

1929. Some notes on Cretaceous occurrences at Lizard Springs, Trinidad. 

Journ. Inst. Petr. Tech., vol. 15,, pp. 44CM42. 

.MCBEMAN, W. L. 

1927. Fossil zones of the Eagle Ford of north Texas. Journ. Pal., vol. 1. 
pp. 89-101, pis. 13-16 [pp. 98-100, pi. 16]. 

MOKRISON, T. E. 

1929. First authentic Cretaceous formation found on Gulf coast Snlt Domes 
of Texas. Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 13, pp. 1065-1069. 
Reuss, a. E. 

1861. PalJiontologische Beitrjlge. 4, Die Foraminiferen des senonischen 
Griinsandes von New Jersey. Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44, 
pp. 334-340. 
Tyrrell, J. B. 

1890. Foraminifera and Radiolaria from the Cretaceous of Manitoba. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, vol. 8, sect. 4, pp. 111-115. 
Weller, S. 

1907. A report on the Cretaceous paleontology of New Jersey. Geological 
survey of New Jersey — Paleontology. Vol. 4, pp. 189-265, pis. 1-4. 
White, Maynard P. 

1928-29. Some index foraminifera of the Tampico Embayment area of 
Mexico. Journ. Pal., vol. 2, pp. 177-215, pis. 27-29; pp. 280-317, 
pis. 3&-42 ; vol. 3, pp. 30-58, pis. 4, 5. 

Family ASTRORHIZIDAE 

Genus RHABDAMMINA M. Sars, 1869 

RHABDAMMINA DISCRETA H. B. Brady 

Plate 1, Figures 1, 2 

In our material we have abundant broken specimens similar to 
those here figured. They have been referred to Brady's species, 
which they very closely resemble. The surface is roughened, but 
none of them shows any central chamber. It is worthy of note here 
that Franke in his work on the Cretaceous of Germany described a 
species as Astrorhisa cretacea Franke. It may be possible that our 



ART. 14 FORAMINIFEEA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JABVIS 5 

fragmentary specimens represent the arms of some such form, but 
until complete specimens are obtained it may be left under Rhab- 
dmnmhia. 

Family SACCAMMINIDAE 

Subfamily Saccammininae 

Genus SACCAMMINA M. Sars, 1869 

SACCAMMINA RHUMBLERI (Franke) (?) 

Plate 1, Piguke 3 

There are smooth specimens of a globular shape such as are figured 
here, the position of which is more or less questionable. In their 
general characters they resemble specimens that Franke has referred 
to as " Orbulmaria rhumbleH.'''' These specimens of ours seem to 
belong to the genus Saccamviima^ but otherwise they are very close 
to the German ones. 

Subfamily Pelosininae 

Genus PELOSINA H. B. Brady, 1879 

PELOSINA COMPLANATA Franke 

Plate 1, Figures 4-6 

Pelosina complanafa Franke, Jahrb. kon. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. 32, pt. 2. 

p. 107, pi. 3, figs, la, b, 1911; Abb. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 10, 

pi. 1, fig. 6, 1928. 
Saocatnmina scruposum White (not Hai)Jophragmium scruposum Berthelin), 

Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 183, pi. 27, fig. 5, 1928. 
Test free, single, invariably crushed to a lenticular shape; wall 
replaced by amorphous silica, rough; aperture single, round, with 
short neck. 

There are abundant specimens, especially in the Hobson clay from 
the Cretaceous of Trinidad, similar to those figured. They vary 
considerably in the coarseness of the material of the test, but this 
character is a common one in the general arenaceous group. Speci- 
mens have a definite protuberant neck with a circular aperture. The 
specimens are always collaj)sed, and the center is usually occupied 
by a depressed area. They seem to be identical with the specimens 
described and figured by Franke under the above name. They are 
apparently identical with the specimens referred to by White under 
the above reference. There is a possibility that these represent the 
megalospheric form of the species referred to further on in this 
paper as Hormosina glolmllfera. In Recent material of that species 
megalospheric forms are often found with a single large chamber 
and usually in considerable abundance. These specimens, therefore, 
are placed here with considerable doubt as to their true position. 



6 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Family HYPERAMMINIDAE 
Subfamily Hyperammintnae 

Genus HYPERAMMINA H. B. Brady, 1878 

HYPERAMMINA ELONGATA H. B. Brady 

Plate 1, Figubes 7, 8 

Hyperammina elongata H. B. Bbady, Ann, Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 5, vol. 1, p. 433, 
pi. 20, figs. 2a, b, 1878. — Cushman and Jakvts, Contr. Cushman Lab. 
Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 86, pi. 12, fig. 1, 1928. 

There are in the Cretaceous material from Trinidad a number of 
specimens evidently belonging to Hyperanimina that have been 
already recorded in the above reference as Hypermnmina elongata 
H. B. Brady. There is considerable variation in the relative quan- 
tity of cement used in the test, and consequently some of these are 
smoothly finished and others in which the quantity of arenaceous 
snaterial is large are roughened. Similar conditions are found in 
Hecent material. Franke notes the occurrence of a Hyperaminina in 
sthe German Cretaceous, but does not give a definite name to his 
smaterial. 

HYPERAMMINA (?) sp. (?) 

Plate 1, Fiqttee 9 

There are a number of specimens in our material similar to that 
here figured, which, as one end is closed and the other open, seem 
to belong to this genus. All these, however, have a distinctly col- 
lapsed appearance and are more or less distorted, and so there may 
be some question as to the true generic position. They are given 
here for future reference for other workers on the group. 

Subfamily Dendrophryinae 
Genus SACCORHIZA Eimer and Fickert, 1899 

SACCORHIZA RAMOSA (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 1, Figures 10-12 

Hyperammina ramosa H. B. Brady, Quart. Jouvn. Micr. Sci., vol. 19, p. 33, pi. 3, 
figs. 14, 15, 1879; Denkschr. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 42, p. 98, 1881; Rep. 
Voy. Challenger, Zoology, vol. 9, p. 261, pi. 23, figs. 15-19, 18S4.— H. B. 
Brady, Parker, and Jones, Trans. Zool. Soc. London, vol. 12, no. 7, p. 217, 
pi. 41, figs. 1-4, 13, 1888.— Egger, Abh. kon. bay. Akad. Wiss. Munclien, 
vol. 18, p. 255, pi. 4, fig. 15, 1893.— Goios, Kongl. Svensk. Vet. Akad. Handl., 
vol. 25, no. 9, p. 18, pi. 4, figs. 61, 62, 1894 ; Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 29, 
p. 22, 1896.— Chapman, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1895, p. 13; Biological 
results fishing experiments Endeavour 1909-14, vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 13, 1915.— 
FuNT, Rep. U. S. Nat. Mus. for 1897, p. 270, pi. 11, fig. 1, 1899.— Rhumbler, 



ABT. 14 FOEAMI]SriFEEA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAIST AND JARVIS 7 

Arch. Prot., vol. 3, p. 260, figs. 101 a, b (iu text), 1903.— Heron-Allen and 
Eakland, Trans. Linn. Soc. London, vol. 11, pt. 13, p. 220, 1916. 
Saccorhiza ramosa Eimeje and Fickebt, Zeitsclar. Wiss. Zool., vol. 65, p. 670, 
1899.— CusHMAN, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 71, pt. 1, p. 65, fig. 81 (iu text), 
1910 ; U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 81, pi. 30, figs. 3, 4, 1918.— Peabcey, 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, vol. 49, p. 1004, 1914. 

There are numerous fragmentary specimens in the Cretaceous from 
Trinidad that may be referred to the above species with little ques- 
tion. The tubes are somewhat collapsed, but they have the character- 
istic irregular curvature and especially the roughened surface often 
carrying broken spicules. No branching specimens were found. 
Franke ^ has recorded very similar, branching fragments from the 
German Cretaceous as '"'' Rhizmmnina algaejormis.'''' White ^ records 
a tubular fragment from the Velasco shale of Mexico as '"'' Rhizam- 
nrnia indivisa.'''' 

Family REOPHACIDAE 

Subfamily Reophacinae 

Genus REOPHAX Montfort, 1808 
REOPHAX sp, (?) 

Plate 1, Figtjbe 13 

Reophax sp. (?) Cushman and Jaevis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Forain. Res., vol. 4, 
p. 86, pi. 12, fig. 2, 1928. 

No further specimens were found of the form figured here, which 
is the same one figured in the above reference. 

Genus HORMOSINA H. B. Brady, 1879 

HORMOSINA GLOBULIFERA H. B. Brady 

Plate 1, Figure 14 

Eormosma globuUfera H. B. Bbady, Quart. Jouru. Micr. Sci., vol. 19, p. 60, 
pi. 4, figs. 4, 5, 1879 ; Rep. Voy. Challenger, Zoology, vol. 9, p. 326, pi. 34, 
figs. 1-6, 1884. — Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., 
vol. 4, p. 86, pi. 12, fig. 3. 1928. 

Specimens of this species are usually collap.sed to some extent, 
especially the later chambers, like those in the specimen here figured. 
The Cretaceous specimens seem to be exactly identical with the Re- 
cent ones that occur in Atlantic waters. As already noted under 
Pelosina complanata^ there is a distinct possibility that those speci- 
mens may represent the megalospheric stage of Eormosma glohuli- 
fera. This is one of the species that give the close relationship of 

'Abh. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 12, pi. 1, fig. 1.3, 1928. 
'Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 184, pi. 7, flg. 2, 1928. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

this Cretaceous material to the Recent deep-water fauna of the 
Atlantic. 

Genus NODELLUM Rhumbler, 1913 

NODELLUM VELASCOENSIS (Cushman) 

Plate 1, Figuees 15-17 

Nodosinella velascoensis Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 
583, pi. 20, fig. 9, 1926.— White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 309, pi. 41, fig. 15, 
1928. 

This species has already been recorded from the Velasco shale of 
Mexico, where it occurs in some abundance. It is very abundant, 
however, in the Hobson clay of Trinidad. Though it is usually dis- 
torted, as in Mexico, specimens are so abundant that a certain pro- 
portion of them may be found that shows the normal form of the 
species. The proloculum is always longer than broad and somewhat 
pear-shaped. The following chambers in the megalospheric form 
increase very little if at all in diameter, while in the microspheric 
form they are much more numerous and increase rapidly in size as 
added. The wall seems to be almost entirely chitinous and nearly 
transparent, a fact that accounts for specimens being usually very 
much distorted. The other specimens of this genus are characteristic 
of comparatively deep water of the present oceans. 

Family AMMODISCIDAE 

Subfamily Ammodiscinae 

Genus AMMODISCUS Reuss, 1861 

AMMODISCUS GLABRATUS Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 2, Figure 1 

Ammodiscus glabratus Cushman and JAK\^s, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. 
Res., vol. 4, p. 86, pi. 12, figs. 6 a, b, 1928. 

Test planispiral, much compressed, concave on both sides, periphery 
broadly curved; tubular chamber very gradually and uniformly in- 
creasing in size with succeeding coils; wall thin, composed almost 
entirely of cement, of a brownish color, very smooth and polished; 
aperture semicircular, at the end of the tubular chamber. 

This species was originally described from the Lizard Springs 
material, and also occurs in the later collections from the Hobson 
clay of San Fernando. The material of the test is almost entirely 
pure cement, although with a considerable magnification fragmen- 
tary material of small size can be seen. 



ART. 14 PORAMIISriFEEA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JAEVIS 9 

AMMODISCUS PENNYI Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 2, Figxires 2. 3 

Animodisous pennyi Cushman and Jabvis, Coutr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., 
vol. 4, p. 87, pi. 12, figs. 4, 5, 1928. 

Test planispiral, comparatively large, periphery broadly rounded, 
of a few coils, the tubular chamber increasing gradually in diameter ; 
suture deep and distinct; wall thick, conspicuously arenaceous but 
fairly smoothly finished; aperture semicircular at the end of the 
tube. 

This is one of the largest species of the genus and is represented 
by both megalospheric and microspheric specimens. In contrast with 
the preceding species, the wall is very thick and has much arena- 
ceous material. It occurs in the pit at Lizard Springs, as well as at 
a depth of Y20 feet. 

Genus AMMODISCOIDES Cushman, 1909 

AMMODISCOIDES TURBINATUS Cushman 

Plate 2, Figures 4, 5 

Ammodiscoides turWnatus Cushman, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 36, p. 424, pi. 
33, figs. 1-6, 1909; U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 98, pi. 36, figs. 3-6, 
pi. 37, 1918.— Rhumbler, Foraminifera of the Plankton-Expedition, pt. 2, 
p. 388, figs. 124 a. d (in text), 1913. 

The Cretaceous material referred to this species has been very care- 
fully compared with the types in Kecent dredgings, and there are no 
characters by which they may be separated. Except for the differ- 
ences due to fossilization, it would be impossible to tell the fossil 
and Kecent specimens apart if they were mixed. This seems to be 
an excellent example of the persistence of a species over a long 
period where unchanged ecologic conditions have prevailed. 

The early whorls form a low cone on one side, and on the opposite 
side a distinct depression, after which the succeeding coils are prac- 
tically in a single plane. The genus is already known from the 
Paleozoic and Recent collections, and this Cretaceous one is inter- 
esting as partially filling the gap between these. This species was 
originally described from dredgings in the Gulf of Mexico, so that 
it has persisted under similar conditions since the Cretaceous at least. 

Genus GLOMOSPIRA Rzehak, 1888 

GLOMOSPIRA GORDIALIS (Jones and Parker) 

Plate 2, Figures 6, 7 

Trochammina squamata var. gordialis Jones and Parkek, Quart. Journ. Geol. 
Soc, vol. 16, p. 304, 1860. — Parker and Jones, Philos. Trans., vol. 155, p. 
408, pi. 15, fig. 82, 1865. 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Olomospira gordialis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 99, pi. 36, 
figs. 7-9, 1918.— White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 187, pi. 27, fig. 8, 1928.— 
Cushman and Jabvis, Contr, Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 87, 
pi. 12, figs. 7, 8, 1928. 

As is usual in Kecent material this species shows a very consider- 
able variation in the shape of the test, which is typically compressed 
in distinction from the following one, which is more or less globular 
in shape. Specimens appear to be identical with Recent material 
from this same general region in comparatively deep water. 

GLOMOSPIRA CHAROroES (Jones and Parker) var. CORONA Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 2, Figitrbs 8-10 

Olomospira charoides (Jones and Parker) var. corona Cushman and Jarvis, 
Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 89, pi. 12, figs. 9-11, 1928. 

Glomospira charoides (Jones and Parker), Whitei, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 187, 
pi. 27, fig. 8, 1928. 

Variety differing from the typical in having the irregularly coiled 
later portion in a sort of irregular crown at the end of the test in- 
stead of coiling about the whole test as in the typical form. 

This variety also occurs in the Cretaceous, Velasco shale of Mex- 
ico from which we have specimens. It is the form figured by White * 
from the Velasco. Recent specimens that we have seen, as well as 
those figured, have the later portion coiling in the long axis of the 
test after the spiral is completed. 

Genus LITUOTUBA Rhumbler, 1895 

LITUOTUBA LITUIFORMIS (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 2, Figures 11 a, h 

Trochammina lituiformis H. B. Beadt, Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci., vol. 19, p. 59, 

pi. 5, fig. 16, 1879. 
lAtuotuba lituiformis Rhumbler, Nachr. Kongl. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen, p. 84, 

1895 ; Arch. Prot, vol. 3, p. 279, figs. 128, a, h, 1903.— Cushman, U. S. Nat. 

Mus. Bull. 71, pt. 1, p. 114, fig. 175 (in text), 1910.— Cushman and Jarvis, 

Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 90, pi. 12, figs. 15 a, 6, 1928. 

The figured specimen is evidently megalospheric and may be a 
distinct species, but the microspheric form should be studied. The 
uncoiled portion is partially collapsed. 

No further specimens of this species have been found in a further 
search of the Trinidad Cretaceous. It has been left under Brady's 
species for the present at least. Franke, however, has described a 
somewhat similar species as " Lituotuha incertus " from the Upper 
Cretaceous of Germany. Further specimens may show that Cre- 
taceous specimens of Germany and America are identical and distinct 
from the Recent one. 



* Journ. Pal., vol. 2, pi. 27, fig. 7, 1928. 



AHT. 14 FORAMINIPERA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN" AND JARVIS 11 

Subfamily Tolypammininae 
Genus AMMOLAGENA Eimer and Fickert, 1899 

AMMOLAGENA CLAVATA (Jones and Parker) 

Plate 2, Figube 12 

Trochammina irregularis var. clavata Jones and Pakkeb, Quart, Journ. Geol. 

Soc, vol. 16. p. 304, 1860. 
Wehbina clavata H. B. Bkady, Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, vol. 11, p. 711, 1882; 

Rep. Voy. Challenger, Zoology, vol. 9. p. 349, pi. 41, figs. 12-16, 1884. 
Ammolagena clavata Eijier and Fickeet, Zeitschr. Wiss. Zool., vol. 65, p. 673^ 

1899.— CusHMAN, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 71, pt. 1, p. 68, figs. 86-89 (in text), 

1910. — CusHMAN and Jabvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, 

p. 90, pi. 12, fig. 14, 1928. 

A single specimen of the megalospheric form is shown in the ac- 
companying figure. There are other specimens that evidently are 
microspheric, in which the proloculum is much smaller and the tube 
much longer, as in Recent specimens. There seems to be no difference 
between these Cretaceous forms and Recent forms from the same- 
general area. Specimens were found attached to Ammodiscus pennyi, 
Glomospira gordialis^ and Hyperammina elongata. These show that 
the same general relationship of these genera was already definitely 
present in the Upper Cretaceous. In the present oceans Ammolagena 
clavata is often found attached to these genera and others of the 
arenaceous group, as well as to some of the flattened calcareous forms. 
This is another of the species that has kept its identity and its char- 
acters at least since Cretaceous times without any distinct change 
that is apparent. 

Family LITUOLIDAE 

Subfamily Haplophragmiinae 

Genus KAPLOPHRAGMOIDES Cushman, 1910 

HAPLOPHRAGMOIDES CORONATA (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 2, Figures 13-15 

Trochammina coronata H. B. Brady, Quart. Journ. Micr. Sei., vol. 19, p. 58, 

pi. 5, fig. 15, 1879; Rep. Voy. Challenger, Zoology, vol. 9, p. 340, pi. 40, figs, 

10-12, 1884. 
Haplophragmoides coronata Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 71, pt. 1, p. 90, 

figs. 145-147 (in text), 1910. — Cushman and Jakvis, Contr. Cushman Lab, 

Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 90, pi. 12, fig. 17, 1928. 
Trochamminoides irregularis White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 307, pi. 42, fig. 1, 1928, 
Trochatnminoides proteus White (not Karrer), vol. 2, p. 308, pi. 42, fig. 2, 192& 

The Cretaceous specimens, while most of them are distorted and 
collapsed, have the general characters of the Recent species that 
occurs often abundantly in the present ocean in this same general 
region. Often the color of the Recent and Cretaceous forms is very 
similar. It is somewhat difficult to distinguish this species from 



i 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

TrocJiammina glohigeriniforinis, noted later, on account of the dis- 
tortion that takes place in fossilization, resulting in some very queer- 
shaped specimens. The specimens described by White in the above 
references are probably distorted forms of this species. His Trocham- 
minokles irregularis is probably the megalospheric form, and T. 
proteus the microspheric form. These may, however, be much dis- 
torted forms of T. glohigeriniformis, and without seeing the original 
specimens it is difficult for one to determine this, even if it might 
then be possible. The distortion produced is often so great as very 
largely to obliterate the original form. 

HAPLOPHRAGMOroES EXCAVATA Cushman and Waters 

Plate 3, Figure 1 

Haplophragmoides excavata Cushman and Watees, Contr. Cushman Lab. 

Foram. Res., vol. 2, pt. 4, p. 82, pi. 10, figs. 3 a, &, 1927. — Cushman, Trans. 

Roy. Soc. Canada, sec. 4, p. 128, pi. 1, fig. 1, 1927. 
Haplophragmoides sp. (?) Cushman and Jaevis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. 

Res., vol, 4, p. 91, pi. 12, fig. 16, 1928. 

This species was originally described from the Upper Cretaceous, 
Navarro formation of Hunt County, Tex., where it is a common 
species. It has also been recorded from the Upper Cretaceous of 
western Canada in the above reference. Its distribution is very wide, 
and it is one of those sjDecies that persist in leached material where 
many of the calcareous forms have disappeared. 

HAPLOPHRAGMOIDES EGGERI Cnshman 

Plate 3, Figures 2 a, 6 

Haplophragmium fontinense Egger (not Terquem), Ber. nat. Regensburg, vol. 

12, 1907-1909, p. 10, pi. 3, figs. 16-18, 1910. 
Haplophragmoides eggeri Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 

583, pi. 15, figs. 1 a, ft, 1926. 
Haplophragmoides cf. siihglobosum (G. O. Saks), Cushman and Jaevis, Contr. 

Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 91, pi. 12, figs. 13 a, h, 1928. 

This species, described previously from the Velasco shale of Mexico, 
occurs in Europe, Mexico, and Trinidad, and probably elsewhere. It 
is somewhat variable and on account of distortion assumes various 
shapes. 

Genus CRIBROSTOMOIDES Cushman, 1910 

CRIBROSTOMOIDES TRINITATENSIS Cushman and Jarvia 

Plate 3, Figure 3 

'CrUyrostomoddes trindtatensis Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. 
Res., vol. 4, p. 91, pi, 12, figs. 12 a, b, 1928. 

This genus has apparently not been recorded elsewhere in the Cre- 
taceous. It is a somewhat broader, more globular form than the 



ART. 14 FORAMINIFEEA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JAEVIS 13 

Kecent species and is fairly abundant in the material from Lizard 
Springs, but it was not found in the other collections. 

Genus AMMOBACULITES Cushman, 1910 

AMMOBACULITES COPROLITHIFORME (Schwager) 

Plate 3, Figures 4, 5 

Eaplophrmjmium coprolithiformc Schwager, in Benecke's Geogn.-pal. Beitrage, 

vol. 1, p. 654, pi. 34, fig. 3, 1868. 
AmmobacuHtes coprolithiforme Cushman, Trans. Roy. See. Canada, sec. 4, p. 

130, pi. 1, figs. 6, 7, 1927. 

Test elongate, early portion close coiled, later chambers rectilinear, 
of uniform width, generally circular in section; sutures distinct, 
depressed ; wall arenaceous but smoothly finished ; aperture circular^ 
terminal. 

This species originall}^ described from the Cretaceous of Europe 
has already been recorded from the Upper Cretaceous of western 
Canada. Identical specimens occur in the Cretaceous of Trinidad^ 
and the striking similarity of these may be seen by comparison of 
the hgures of the specimens of the two regions. It is quite probable 
that some of the European specimens referred to Ammohaculites 
agglutinans may belong to Schwager's species. The figures seem to 
be similar. 

Subfamily Lituolinae 
Genus CYCLAMMINA H. B. Brady, 1876 

CYCLAMMINA ELEGANS, new species 

Plate 3, Figures 6 o, 6 

Descript/ion. — Test comparatively large, close coiled, i^eriphery 
somewhat lobulated and subacute, or at least compressed; chambers 
numerous, usually 10 to 12 in the last-formed coil; sutures distinct, 
slightly depressed, usually sigmoid; wall smooth, distinctly arena- 
ceous, thin, with a very even cancellated structure of the interior 
showing through; aperture consisting of a low curved arch at the 
base of the apertural face with numerous supplementary rounded 
openings scattered over the central portion of the apertural face, 
often with slightly raised borders. Length, 2 ; breadth, 1.25 ; thick- 
ness, 0.85 mm. 

Holotype.—U.S.'^M. No. 73815 (Cushman Coll. No. 15280), from 
Upper Cretaceous, from pit at Lizard Springs near Guayaguayare, 
fcoutheastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

RemMrhs.— This is fairly common in the Lizard Springs Creta- 
ceous, and is especially marked by the thin outer wall and the distinct 



14 PEOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

markings of the cancellated interior, which show distinctly from the 
outside. 

Family TEXTULARIIDAE 

Subfamily Spiroplectammininae 
Genus SPIROPLECTAMMINA Cushman, 1927 

SPIROPLECTAMMINA DENTATA (Alth) 

Plate 3, Figures 7 a, 6 

Tewtularia dentata Axth, Haidiiiger's Naturw. Abh., vol. 3, p. 262, pi. 13, fig. 
13, 1850. 

The figured specimen shows fairly well the characters of this 
species described by Alth from the Upper Cretaceous of Europe. 
The chambers are low and broad, with the outer margins often 
ending in a distinct point. In some respects this species is closely 
allied to S. anceps (Reuss). 

SPIROPLECTAMMINA ANCEPS (Reuss) var. 

Plate 3, Figxibes 8 a, h 

In the Trinidad Cretaceous, specimens occur that are clearly and 
closely allied to Reuss's species. Two forms occur, one in which 
the sutures are distinct but not depressed or raised, and the other, 
figured herein, in which the sutures themselves are slightly thick- 
ened. They somewhat resemble such forms as Textularia tnexicana 
Cushman, known from the Tertiary of this general region and now 
living in the Gulf of Mexico, and also the form described by W. 
Berry as Teictularia ripleyensis. This Trinidad form differs from 
either of these, but material was not sufficient to warrant its being 
described as a distinct variety. In some respects it resembles the 
form described as " Bolimna velascoensis " from the Upper Creta- 
ceous, Velasco shale of Mexico.^ 

SPIROPLECTAMMINA EXCOLATA (Cushman) 

Plate 3, Figures 9, 10 

Textularia excoMta Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 585, 
pi. 15, figs. 9 a, &, 1926.— White, Journ. Pal., vol. 3, p. 30, pi. 4, figs. 1 a, &, 
1929. 

Test as broad as long, the sides flattened or somewhat convex; 
periphery, of early portion at least, acute; chambers few, the sides 
somewhat concave ; sutures distinct on account of the thickening of 
the peripheral edge, the surface below being somewhat concave ; wall 
smoothly finished. 



'•' Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 586, pi. 16, figs. 1 a, h, 1926. 



AST. 14 FOEAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 15 

This species, originally described from the Velasco shale of Mexico 
and later recorded by White from the same formation, occurs in the 
Upper Cretaceous of Trinidad, where it is fairly common in the mate- 
rial from Lizard Springs. A rather typical specimen is figured 
(pi. 3, fig. 9), as well as an extreme form (pi. 3, fig. 10), in which the 
excavations of the chambers are carried to an unusual degree. This 
particular specimen also shows the spiral early chambers to good 
advantage. 

Subfamily Textulariinae 

Genus TEXTULARIA Defrance, 1824 

TEXTULARIA CONCINNA Renss 

Plate 4, Figttres 1, 2 

Textularia concinna Reuss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 2, p. 109, pi. 24, fig. 54, 
1845-46. — CusHMAN and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab, Foram. Res., vol. 4, 
p. 91, pi. 13, fig. 1, 1928, 

Two forms occur in the Cretaceous of Trinidad that are here re- 
ferred to Reuss's species. They occur together at the same locality, 
but one of these is much larger than the other. The angles of the 
chambers, however, are similar, and one may represent the micro- 
spheric and the other the megalospheric form of the same species. 
The smaller specimens are very typical of this species described by 
Reuss from Europe. 

Family VERNEUILINIDAE 

Genus VERNEUILINA d'Orbigny, 1840 

VERNEUILINA POLYSTROPHA (Reuss) 

Plate 4, Figures 3 o, 6 

BuUmina polystropha Reuss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 2, p. 109, pi. 24, fig. 53, 
1845-46.— Alth, Haidinger's Naturw. Abh., vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 265, pi. 13, fig. 
19, 1850. 

Verneuilina polt/stropha H. B. Bkady, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 5, vol. 1, p. 436, 
pi. 20, figs. 9 a-o (?), 1878. 

Test elongate, slightly tapering, triserial, rounded in end view; 
chambers inflated, distinct, slightly longer than broad; sutures dis- 
tinct, depressed ; wall arenaceous, rather smoothly finished ; aperture 
rounded at the inner margin of the last-formed chamber. Length, 
0.45; breadth, 0.15 mm. 

This species was described by Reuss from the Cretaceous of Ger- 
many. It occurs in the Cretaceous of America, but the Recent mate- 
rial usually referred to it is probably not the same. 



IQ PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Genus TRITAXIA Reuss, 1860 

TRITAXIA PYRAMIDATA Reuss 

Plate 4, Figures 4 a, b 

Tritaxia pyramidata Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, pp. 32, 88, pi. 

1, fig. 9, 1862 (1863) ; Palaeontographica, vol. 20, pt. 2, p. 123, 1872-75 
(1874). — Berthelin, Mem. Soc. G^ol. France, ser. 3, vol. 1, p. 25, pi. 1, 
figs. 4 a-G, 1880.— Chapman, Jouru. Roy. Micr. Soc, p. 2, pi. 11, figs. 2 a, b, 
1892. — Fkanke, Abh. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, vol. 6, p. 18, pi. 

2, figs. 1 a-c, 1925; Abh. Preuss. Geol. Landes., new ser., vol. Ill, p. 138, 
pi. 12. figs. 18 a-c, 1928. 

This is a common species in the European Cretaceous and occurs 
both in the Trinidad collections and also in those of the general 
Coastal Plain region of the United States. It differs from Tritaxia 
ti'icaHnata in the much greater increase in diameter toward the aper- 
tural end, that of typical T. tricarlnata being of generally uniform 
width throughout. The test is triserial throughout, and the aperture 
becomes rounded and terminal, usually protuberant, and with a 
slight lip. 

Genus GAUDRYINA d'Orbigny, 1839 

GAUDRYINA FILIFORMIS Berthclin 

Pi ATE 4, Figure 5 

Gaudryina fiUformis Bebthelin, M6m. Soc. Geol. France, s6r. 3, vol. 1, p. 25, 
pi. 1 (24), figs. Sa-d, 1880. — Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. CuShman Lab. 
Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 92, pi. 13, fig. 2, 1928. 

In the Lizard Springs material, typical slender specimens of this 
species occur. The small, very elongate, slender test and the con- 
siderable length of the early triserial stage will distinguish it. It 
is widely distributed in the Cretaceous of various parts of the world. 

GAUDRYINA RUGOSA d'Orbigny 

Plate 4, Figures 6 o. b 

Gaudryina rugosa d'Orrigny, M4m. Soc. G§ol. France, s6r. 1, vol. 4, p. 44, pi. 4, 

figs. 20, 21, 1840.— Reuss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 38, pi. 12, figs. 

15, 24, 1845-46 ; in Geinitz, Gruudr. A^ersteiu., p. 667, pi. 24, fig. 69, 1845-46 ; 

Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 18, p. 244, pi. 5, fig. 61, 1856.— Fr^vnke, Abh. 

geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, vol. 6, p. 14, pi. 1, fig. 19, 1925; Abh. 

Preuss. Geol. Landes., new ser., vol. Ill, p. 141, pi. 13, fig. 2, 1928. 
Textularia agglutinans W. Berry (not d'Orbigny), in Berry and Kelley, Proc. 

U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 76, art. 19, p. 3, pi. 2, fig. 1, 1929. 

Test elongate, tapering, greatest breadth toward the apertural 
end, periphery broadly rounded, early triserial portion usually much 
reduced, but the change to the biserial stage very abrupt; chambers 
numerous, usually distinct in the biserial portion, indistinct in the 
triserial portion, very .slightly inflated in the later development: 



AET. 14 FOEAMINIFEEA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 17 

sutures becoming more distinct in the later portion, straight, yerj 
slightly oblique; wall rather coarsely arenaceous but usually fairly 
smoothly finished; aperture in the ordinary specimens, narrow, at 
the inner margin of the chamber with distinct lobular projections at 
the sides, in very long specimens the aperture tending to be some- 
what higher. Length, 0.5-1 mm. 

This is a very common species in the Cretaceous in Europe and 
America and probably in Australia. There is considerable variation 
in the microspheric and megalospheric forms, the former reaching a 
much greater size. 

GAUDRYINA RETUSA Cushman 

Plate 4, Figukes 7-10 

Gaudryina retusa Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 588, pi. 

16, figs. 10 a, b, 1926. — Cushman and Jaevis, Coutr. Cusbmau Lab. Foram. 

Res., vol. 4, p. 92, pi. 13, figs. 3, 4, 1928.— White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 313, 

pi. 42, figs. 8, 9, 1928. 
Vernetiilina sp. (?) Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 587, 

pi. 16, figs. 12rt, 6, 1926. 
Vemeuilina rotunda White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 310, pi. 42, figs. 5 a, h, 1928. 

Test fairly large, stout, nearly circular in transverse section, com- 
posed of few chambers, early ones triserial, later ones biserial ; cham- 
bers distinct, somewhat inflated ; sutures distinct, in the later portion 
slightly depressed; wall arenaceous but rather smoothly finished; 
aperture comparatively small, low. 

White described a small form as Vemeuilina rotunda. He also 
records Gaudinjina retusa from the Upper Cretaceous of Mexico, and 
the range of his V. rotunda is included in his table in the range of 
G. retusa. It is very probable that the Vemeuilina is only the young 
stage, perhaps of the microsplieric form of G. retusa. The early 
triserial stages of Gaudryhia and Clavulina have often been described 
as species of Veimeuilina in the literature. 

GAUDRYINA INDENTATA Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 4, Figube 11 

Oaudryina indentata Cushman and Jaevis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., 
vol. 4, p. 92, pi. 13, fig. 7, 1928. 

Test somewhat elongate, tapering from the subacute initial end, 
the sides of the adult nearly parallel, circular in transverse section ; 
chambers numerous, early ones triserial, adult biserial, the middle 
portion of each chamber indented and the sutures raised in rounded 
ridges ; wall arenaceous but smoothly finished ; aperture small, semi- 
circular, at the base of the inner margin of the last-formed chamber. 
Length, 0.6; diameter, 0.4 mm. 

70827—32 2 



1§ PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

This species is peculiar in having depressed chambers. The same 
form occurs in the Upper Cretaceous of the Velasco shale of Mexico. 

GAUDRYINA OXYCONA Reuss 

Plate 5, Figures 1, 2 

Oaudryina oxycona Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, p. 229, pi. 12, figs. 
3 a-c, 1860; vol. 46, p. 33, 1862 (1863).— Franke, Abh. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. 
Greifswald, vol. 6, p. 15, pi. 1, figs. 20 a, b, 1925.— Cushman and Church, 
Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, no. 16, p. 501, pi. 36, figs. 3, 4, 
1929. 

Test elongate, conical, tapering, nearly circular in transverse sec- 
tion; very early chambers triserial, later ones biserial; sutures dis- 
tinct, slightly depressed, nearly at right angles with the periphery ; 
wall finely arenaceous, very smoothly finished; aperture elongate, 
low, at the inner median margin of the chamber in a decided depres- 
sion. Length, 0.55-1.25; breadth, 0.3-0.75 mm. 

This is a widely distributed and well-characterized species. It is 
known from the California Cretaceous and occurs also in the Velasco 
shale of Mexico and in the Cretaceous of the Gulf Coastal region of 
the United States. 

GAUDRYINA LAEVIGATA Franke var. PYRAMIDATA Cushman 

Plate 5, Figure 3 

Oaudryina laevigata Fbankb var. pyramidata Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. 
Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 587, pi. 16, figs. 8a, b, 1926. — Cushman and Jarvis, 
Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 92, pi. 13, fig. 6, 1928.— White, 
Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 313, pi. 42, fig. 7, 1928. 

Test differing from the typical in the stouter form, the early por- 
tion more pyramidal than the type ; the periphery, instead of rounded 
and convex, slightly concave. 

This variety is a common one in the Cretaceous of America and 
is already described from the Velasco shale of Mexico and from this 
Trinidad material. It occurs widely distributed in the Upper Cre- 
taceous of the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United States. 

Genus CLAVULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

CLAVULINA TRILATERA Cnshman 

Plate 5, Figueb 5 

Clavulina trilatera Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 588, 
pi. 17, fig. 2, 1926 ; Journ. Pal., vol. 1, p. 149, pi. 28, fig. 1, 1927.— Cushman 
and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 93, pi. 13, fig. 8, 
1928. 



ART. 14 FOKAMINIFERA PEOM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 19 

Test large, elongate, sides parallel for most of their length, slightly 
(.'ontracted at each end, entire test triangular in transverse section, 
the periphery rounded, the sides concave; chambers numerous, the 
early ones triserial, later ones forming the larger part of the test, 
uniserial; sutures very slightly if at all depressed, somewhat indis- 
tinct; wall coarsely arenaceous but very smoothly finished; aperture 
terminal, circular, with a very slight neck. 

This sjDecies is apparently very abundant in the Gulf Coastal Cre- 
taceous of the United States. The original figures show only the 
megalospheric form, which has nearly parallel sides and compara- 
tively few chambers. The microspheric form is much larger and 
increases rapidly in diameter toward the apertural end, but usually 
occurs with the megalospheric form. The surface is usually smoothly 
finished, and quite different from the following species. It was 
originally described from the Upper Cretaceous, Velasco shale of 
Mexico and is common in the Cretaceous of Texas, Arkansas, and 
Tennessee but rare in this deeper-water material from Trinidad. 

CLAVULINA ASPERA Cushman 

Plate 5, Figueb 4 

Clavulina trilatera Cushman var. aspera Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. 
Geol., vol. 10, p. 589, pi. 17, fig. 3, 1926. — Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. 
Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 93, pi. 13, fig. 5, 1928. — White, Journ. 
Pal., vol. 2, p. 315, pi. 42, fig. 14, 1928. 

This species was originally described as a variety of Clavulina tri- 
latera. A further study of these forms from Mexico, Trinidad, and 
the general Gulf Coastal region of the United States seems to show 
that the two are distinct species. G. aspera always seems to have a 
rough surface, and in the typical form the sides are nearly parallel, 
although they may be somewhat more flaring in the microspheric 
form. Such specimens are rare in Trinidad, but the following variety 
is much more common. 

CLAVULINA ASPERA Cushman WHITEI, new variety 

Plate 5, Figures 6-8 

Clavulina trilatera White (not Cushman), Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 315, pi. 42, 
fig. 13, 1928. 

Description. — Differs from the typical in the shape of the test, 
which in the megalospheric form has the triangular portion confined 
to the early portion of the test after which a series of rounded cham- 
bers of nearly uniform size is developed, in the microspheric form, 
with the triangular form continued throughout or becoming quad- 
rangular in section, test increasing gradually in diameter to the 
apertural end; wall roughened. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80 

Holotype of vofnety.—lJ.^.'^M. No. 73816 (Cushman Coll. No. 
15306), from Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs, near 
Guayaguayare, southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Remarks. — This variety is very common in the Trinidad material 
but is not well developed in the Upper Cretaceous of the United 
States, although it does occur in Mexico. 

CLAVULINA CHITINOSA, new species 

Plate 5, Figubes 9-11 

Desofiption. — Test elongate, slender, the early triserial portion 
often being of slightly greater diameter than the later uniserial por- 
tion ; chambers numerous, fairly distinct ; sutures distinct, depressed, 
especially in the last-formed part of the uniserial portion; wall 
almost entirely chitinous, clear, and translucent, very smooth; aper- 
ture terminal, with a slight neck and lij). Length, up to 1 ; diameter, 
up to 0.3 mm. 

^oZ(?^2//;e.— U.S.N.M. No. 73817 (Cushman Coll. No. 15315), from 
Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs, near Guayaguayare, 
southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Remarks. — This is a peculiar form evidently representing deep- 
water conditions, where the wall of the test becomes almost entirely 
pure chitin. As a result of this type of wall, specimens are usually 
much distorted, but the figures will give the general appearance of 
the species. 

Family SILICINIDAE 
Genus RZEHAKINA Cushman, 1927 

RZEHAKINA EPIGONA (Rzehak) var. LATA Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 6, Figures 1 a, h 

Rzehakina epigona (Rzehak) var. lata Cushman and .Tarvis, Coutr. Cushman 
Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 93, pi. 13, figs. 11 a, I, 1928. 

Test differing from the typical in the broader, nearly circular form 
and the much more prominent appearance of the last coil, foirming 
almost a rounded carina about the periphery. This is the commonest 
form in the collection. Some young specimens show the early coils 
making a flattened test before the lateral thickenings are added. 

This variety is more rounded and much larger than the form found 
in the Velasco shale of Mexico. In addition to the Lizard Springs 
locality, it is abundant in the Hobson clay from San Fernando. 
Trinidad. 



ART. 14 FORAMINIFERA FEOM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 21 

Family TROCHAMMINIDAE 

Subfamily Trochammininae 

Genus TROCHAMMINA Parker and Jones, 1860 

TROCHAMMINA GLOBIGERINIFORMIS (Parker and Jones) 

Plate 6, Figures 2-5 

Lituola glotigeriniforniis Parkeb and Jones, Phil. Trans., vol. 155, p. 407, pi. 15, 

figs. 46, 47, pi. 17, fig.s. 9&-98 ?, 1865. 
Eaplophragmium glohigerinifornie Caepenter. The microscope, ed. 6, p. 561, 

figs. 320 a, & (in text), 1881. 
Trochammlna gloiigeriniformis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bnll. 71, pt. 1, p. 124, 

figs. 193-195 (in text), 1910. — Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. 

Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 95, pi. 13, figs. 12 a, b, 1928. 

There are numerous excellent specimens of this species in the col- 
lection from Trinidad. Many specimens are crushed, but a number 
of them are in their original form like the figured one. These crushed 
forms are common both at Lizard Springs and in the Hobson clay 
from San Fernando, Trinidad. The remarks already made under 
Eaplophragmoides coronata may be applicable to this species as well. 

TROCHAMMINA TRINITATENSIS Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 6, Figures 6 a-c 

Trochammina trinitatensis Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. 
Res., vol. 4, p. 95, pi. 13, figs. 13 a-c, 1928. 

Test nearly circular in dorsal view, biconvex from the periphery, 
trochoid, somewhat keeled, slightly umbilicate on the ventral side; 
chambers numerous, 12 or more in the final whorl, not very distinct 
except for the slight collapse of the wall ; central portion of the dorsal 
side showing the spiral suture slightly depressed ; the sutures of the 
ventral side nearly radial, slightly curved, depressed ; wall arenaceous 
with numerous angular fragments and much cement; aperture elon- 
gate, ventral, at the base of the chamber. Diameter, 0.4; thickness, 
0.2 mm. 

This is a striking species, appearing at first glance something like 
an Anomalina but ha^dng an arenaceous test, which is easily collapsed. 

Family LAGENIDAE 

Subfamily Nodosariinae 

Genus ROBULUS Montfort, 1808 

There are numerous species of the Lagenidae in the Cretaceous of 
Trinidad, nearly all of which have already been described from the 
Cretaceous of Europe. An examination of the literature shows how 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

later authors have deviated from the type of the species until the 
later determinations show little relationship to the original. For 
this reason, in many cases, only the first reference is given in the 
synonymy. 

ROBULUS WILLIAMSONI (Reuss) 

Plate 6, Fiqtjees 7 a, & 

Cristellaria vnlUamsoni Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44, pt. 6, p. 327, pi. 
6, figs. 4 0, 6, 1861 (1862). — Cushman and Church, Proc. California Acad. 
Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, no. 16, p. 503, pi. 36, figs. 13, 14, 1929. 

The specimen figured here is very close to the typical form figured 
and described by Reuss from the Cretaceous of Germany. It has a 
distinct keel, few chambers, depressed and slightly curved sutures, 
and a smooth surface. The apertural face is distinctly concave with 
raised edges. 

ROBULUS OLIGOSTEGIA (Reass) 

Plate 6, Figukes 8, 9 

Cristellaria oligostegia Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, p. 213, pi. 8, 
fig. 8, 1860; vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 93, pi. 13, figs. 2 a, i, 1862 (1863). 

This is a very thick species with a few tumid chambers, the later 
ones showing a slight tendency to uncoil. The aperture is slightly 
protuberant. 

ROBULUS STERNALIS (Berthelin) 

Plate 6, Figukes 11 a, b 

Cristellaria sternalis Berthelin, Mem. Soc. G§ol. France, s6r. 3, vol. 1, p. 51, 
pi. 3 (26), figs. 2 a, b, 1880. 

This species may be distinguished from R. wilUamsoni by the dis- 
tinctly umbonate character of the test. The angle of the sutures is 
very different in the two species, as are also the shape and form of the 
chambers. 

ROBULUS TRINITATENSIS. new species 
Plate 6, Figures 10 a, h 

Description. — Test close coiled, compressed, periphery slightly 
keeled ; chambers fairly distinct, 6 to 8 in number in the adult, not 
inflated ; sutures fairly distinct, strongly curved, continuing into the 
umbilical region, strongly limbate, but not raised ; wall ornamented 
by a series of obliquely curved costae, toward the periphery grad- 
ually becoming nearly parallel to the outer edge of the test, and con- 
tinuous over the chambers; aperture at the peripheral angle, with a 
supplementary elongate opening in the median line of the ventral 
face. Length, 0.5; breadth, 0.4; diameter, 0.2 mm. 



ABT. 14 FORAMINIFEEA PKOM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN" AND JARVIS 23 

Holotype.—U.S.'^M. No. 73818 (Cushman Coll. No. 15316), from 
Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs near Guayaguayare, 
southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Remarks. — This is a very interesting and unique species with its 
peculiar ornamentation, the heavy costae of the surface forming a 
continuous spiral independent of the individual chambers. 

ROBULUS SUBALATUS (Reuss) 

Plate 7, Figures 1, 2 

CristeUaria subalata Reuss, Denksclir. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 7, pt. 1, p. 68, 
pi. 25, fig. 13, 1854 ; Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 76, pi. 8, fig. 
10, pi. 9, fig. 1, 1862 (1863). 

The figured specimens may be referred to this species described by 
Keuss from the Cretaceous of Europe. Plate 7, Figure 2, shows the 
more typical form in which the sutures are somewhat raised above 
the general surface of the test. Otherwise the general form and 
shape of the chambers are similar, and both specimens are marked 
by a very broad thin keel. Length, 1.25; breadth, 0.9; thickness, 
0.5 mm. 

ROBULUS MACRODISCUS (Renss) 

Plate 7, Figures 3 a, b 

CristeUaria macrodlsca Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wieu, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 78, pi. 

9, figs. 5 a, &, 1862 (1863).— Berthelin, M6m. Soc. Geol. France, s6r. 3, 

vol. 5, p. 48, pi. 3, figs. 6-11, 1880. 
Lenticulina macrodisca AVhite, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 198, pi. 28, fig. 7, 1928. 

Close coiled specimens, with a very large prominent umbo and an 
acute periphery, which is occasionally slightly keeled, occur in the 
Cretaceous of Trinidad and may be referred to Reuss's species. They 
are distinctly of the Rohulus type, with a very prominent supple- 
mentary apertural slit as shown in the figure herein. The measure- 
ments of the figured specimen are: Length, 1.2; breadth, 1.1; thick- 
ness, 0.55 mm. 

ROBULUS DISCREPANS (Renss) 

Plate 7, Figures 4 a, 6 

Roiulina discrepans Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 78, pi. 9, 
figs. 7 a, b, 1862 (1863). 

Forms similar to that figured here are referred to Reuss's species 
described by him from the Upper Cretaceous of Europe. Similar 
ones occur in the Trinidad material. A comparison of our figured 
specimen with the type given by Reuss will show the very great 
similarity in the two. The chambers are not inflated, but gradually 
increase in size as added. The periphery is subacute, and the aper- 
tural face somewhat concave. The sutures are flush with the surface 



24 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

and are strongly curved, continuing nearly to the periphery on the 
inner margin. There is a supplementary slit in the median line of 
the apertural face, placing this species in the genus Rohulus^ as was 
indicated by Eeuss, who placed it in Robulina. 

Genus LENTICULINA Lamarck, 1804 

LENTICULINA NAVICULA (d'Orbiffny) 

Plate 7, Figures 5 a, & 

Cristellai'ia namcula d'Orbigny, Mem. Soc. Gr§ol. France, s6r. 1, vol. 4, p. 27, 
pi. 2, figs. 19, 20, 1840.— Reuss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 35, pi. 12, 
fig. 27, 1845^6. 

D'Orbigny described this species from the Cretaceous chalks of the 
Paris Basin, and Eeuss and others have recorded it from the Creta- 
ceous of central Europe. Our specimens from Trinidad seem to 
agree very well with those of Europe and may be identified with 
d'Orbigny's species. The chambers are distinct but not inflated, 
the periphery subacute, the sutures flush with the surface but strongly 
curved, and the apertural face convex without any supplementary 
slit, so that this species may be included in Lamarck's genus. There 
is a tendency in the later chambers toward uncoiling. The measure- 
ments of the figured specimen are as follows : Length, 0.9 ; breadth, 
0.55 ; thickness, 0.4 mm. 

This species is also widely distributed in the Coastal Plain region 
of the United States in the Upper Cretaceous. 

LENTICULINA NUDA (Reuss) 
Plate 7, Figures 6 a, b 

Cristellaria nudu Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44, pt. 1, p. 328, pi. 6, 

figs. 1-3, 1861 (1862). 
Lenticulma nuda Cushman and Jakvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 

4, p. 96, pi. 14, fig. 2, 1928. 

This species, described by Reuss from the Cretaceous of Europe 
and recorded by various authors from the same region, is already 
noted by us from Trinidad. There is no supplementary aperture so 
far as our material shows. The species is somewhat similar to the 
preceding, but the apertural face is more concave and the periphery 
more distinctly keeled. There is a distinct tendency to uncoiling, 
and the chambers are lower. Our figured specimen has the following 
measurements: Length, 0.8; breadth, 0.4; thickness, 0.28 mm. 

Genus PLANULARIA Defrance, 1824 

PLANULARIA ADVENA, new species 

Plate 8, Figubes 1, 2 

Description. — Test large, much compressed, periphery acute and 
slightly keeled ; chambers distinct, low and broad, uniformly increas- 



ABT. 14 FOEAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JAKVIS 25 

iiig in breadth as added but with the height remaining nearly the 
same throughout, the later ones becoming much elongate; sutures 
limbate, in the early portion raised and somewhat irregularly beaded, 
later becoming entirely so, and in the last-formed portion even slightly 
depressed; wall, except for the umbilicus, which is beaded, and the 
raised sutures, smooth; aperture at the peripheral angle, radiate. 
Length, 5; breadth, 3; thickness, in the umbonal region, 0.9, at the 
middle of the last-formed chamber, 0.35 mm. 

Holotype.—\5.^.'^M. No. 73824 (Cushman Coll. No. 15317), from 
Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs near Guayaguayare, 
southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Remarks. — This is a large and striking species with a distinctive 
ornamentation. The greatest breadth is formed early in the develop- 
ment of the test in the umbonal region, after which it becomes 
complanate and much thinner. 

Genus MARGINULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

MARGINULINA GRATA (Reuss) 

Plate 7, Figxjbes 7 a, b ; Plate 8, Figures 3 a, 6 

Cristellaria grata Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 70, pi. 7, figs. 

14 a, b, 1862 (1863).— Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, 

p. 598, pi. 19, figs. 1 a, b, 1926. 
Lenticulina grata Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., 

vol. 4, p. 96, pi. 14, fig. 3, 1928. 

Test elongate, compressed, periphery rounded; chambers distinct, 
the early ones coiled, later ones uncoiling, of rather uniform shape 
increasing slightly in size and height as added; sutures distinct, 
limbate, flush with the surface, gently curved; wall smooth; aperture 
radiate, at the peripheral margin. Length, 1.1-1.2; breadth, 0.3-0.4; 
thickness, 0.2-0.25 mm. 

This is a common Upper Cretaceous species known from numerous 
localities in Europe and widely distributed in America. 

MARGINULINA MULTISEPTATA (Reuss) 

Plate 8, Figures 4 a, 6 

Cristellaria multiseptata Reuss, Haidinger's Natnrw. Abh., vol. 4, pt. 1, p. 33, 
pi. 2, fig. 9, 1851; Deukscln-. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 25, p. 147, pi. 3, figs. 
14, 15, 1865. 

Test longer than broad, periphery subacute, later portion uncoiling ; 
chambers fairly distinct, very slightly if at all inflated; sutures 
distinct, flush with the surface, slightly curved; wall smooth; aper- 
ture radiate, at the peripheral margin. Length, 1.2-1.4; breadth, 
0.6-0.75 ; thickness, 0.35-0.4 mm. 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

The figured specimen is an unusual one, showing a great irregu- 
larity in the overlapping of the chambers, which produces an unusual 
arrangement of the sutures from the exterior. 

MARGINULINA SCHLOENBACHI (Renss) 

Plate 8, Figures 5 a, & 

Cristellaria schloenbacM Reiuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 65, 
pi. 6, figs. 14, 15, 1862 (1863). 

Test elongate, much compressed, curved, periphery rounded ; cham- 
bers distinct, elongate, those of the later portion uncoiling and 
becoming higher and less broad ; sutures distinctly curved especially 
toward the periphery, limbate, flush with the surface; wall smooth; 
aperture terminal, radiate. Length, 1.25-1.4; breadth, 0.35-0.4; 
thickness, 0.2-0.25 mm. 

This species was originally described by Reuss from the Cretaceous 
of Europe, and seems to be a variable one. It has been recorded by 
numerous authors both from the Tertiary and as living in Recent 
seas. 

MARGINULINA MODESTA Rensa 

Plate 8, Figures 6 a, b 

MarginuUna modesta Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, p. 207, pi. 7, 
fig. 5, I860.— Franke, Verb. Nat. Hist. Ver., vol. 59, p. 275, 1912 (1913).— 
CuSHMAN and Church, Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, no. 16, 
p. 506, pi. 87, figs. 8-10, 1929. 

Test elongate, very little if at all compressed ; the early chambers 
slightly coiled, later ones uncoiled and somewhat inflated, nearly 
circular in transverse section; sutures distinct, slightly depressed; 
wall smooth; aperture radiate, subterminal, somewhat toward the 
peripheral margin. Length, 1-1.2; thickness, 0.45-0.5 mm. 

This is a common species in the Cretaceous of various parts of the 
world and has already been recorded from the Cretaceous of Cali- 
fornia, and it occurs in the Cretaceous of Trinidad and in the Gulf 
Coastal Plain region of the United States. 

MARGINULINA BULLATA Renss 

Plate 8, Figures 7, 8 

MarginuUna Mllata Reuss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 29, pi. 13, figs. 
34-38, 1845-46; in Geinitz, Grundr. Verstein.. p. 656, pi. 24, fig. 16, 1845-46.— 
Franke, Abh. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, vol. 6, p. 55, pi. 4, fig. 25, 
1925; Abh. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 76, pi. 6, fig. 28, 1928.— 
CusHMAN and Jakvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 96, 
pi. 14, figs. 7, 8, 1928.— Cushman and Church, Proc. California Acad. Sci., 
ser. 4, vol. 18, p. 507, pi. 38, figs. 4-6, 1929. 



ART. 14 FORAMIISriFEKA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 27 

Test composed of few chambers, the earlier ones close coiled, the 
last two or three uncoiled and globular, all chambers strongly inflated; 
sutures distinct, slightly depressed; wall smooth throughout; aper- 
ture in the adult terminal, radiate. Length of adult specimens, 0.75 
mm. or more. 

This is a widely distributed species in the Upper Cretaceous of 
Europe and America. The megalospheric form has fewer chambers 
and the early portion often consists largely of the globular prolocu- 
lum ; in the microspheric form the coiling is evident and the increase 
of the earlier chambers less rapid. 

MARGINULINA HUMILIS (Renss) 

Plate 8, Figxtrb 9 

Cristellaria humilis Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 65, pi. 6, 
figs. 16, 17, 1862 (1863).— CuSHMAN, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, 
p. 601, pi. 19, fig. 8, 1926. 

Marginulina humilis Cushman and Church, Proc. Callforula Acad. Sci., ser. 4, 
vol. 18, p. 505, pi. 37, figs. 3-5, 1929. 

Test elongate, subcylindrical, slightly compressed; chambers dis- 
tinct, the later ones only slightly inflated, of nearly uniform shape, 
but increasing slightly in height as added, on account of the fact that 
the later chambers are less involute; sutures distinct, very slightly 
depressed between the later chambers ; wall smooth ; aperture radiate 
and peripheral. Length, 1.2-1.5 ; diameter, 0.4-0.45 mm. 

This is a very common species in the Cretaceous, occurring in Eu- 
rope and America already known from the Velasco shale of Mexico 
and from the Cretaceous of California. It occurs also in the Gulf 
Coastal Plain Cretaceous of the United States. 

MARGINULINA JONESI Reuss 

Plate 9, Figures 1 a, b 

MnrginuUna jonesi Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 61, pi. 5, 
figs. 19 a, b, 1862 ( 1863 ) .— Bekthelin, Mem. Soc. G^ol. France, ser. 3, vol. 1, 
p. 34, 1880.— Chapman, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc, vol. 50, p. 709, 1894; Journ. 
Roy. Micr. Soc, p. 164, pi. 4, fig. 24, 1894.— Shehlock, Geol. Mag., vol. 1, 
p. 259, pi. 18, fig. 15, 1914.— Neavekson. Geol. Mag., 1921, p. 462.— Cushman 
and Church, Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, p. 507, pi. 38, 
figs. 7-9, 1929. 

Test elongate, early portion compressed and chambers close 
coiled, later becoming uncoiled; periphery acute and keeled in the 
early portion ; later chambers nearly circular in section ; sutures more 
or less obscured but the ornamentation of the surface, which consists 
of elongate costae continuing throughout the length of the test, un- 
broken at the sutures, terminal face smooth; aperture in the adult 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

terminal, radiate, with a slight neck. Length, 0.9-1; breadth, 
0.35-0.6; thickness, 0.25-0.5 mm. 

This species, which is common in the Cretaceous of Europe, has 
only been recorded in America from the Cretaceous of California. 
Our specimens from Trinidad are somewhat more inflated, especially 
in the later chambers, but the general characters of the species are 
fairly constant. 

MARGINULINA DECORATA (Reuss) 

Plate 9, Fiqtjkes 2 a, h 

Cristellaria deoorata Reuss, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., vol. 7, p. 209, pi. 8^ 
fig. 16 ; pi. 9, figs. 1, 2, 1855. 

Test elongate, compressed, the periphery lobulate; early chambers 
coiled, later ones uncoiled and becoming narrower as they are added ; 
sutures distinct, limbate, raised, the earlier ones broken into a series 
of beadlike projections, later ones nearly entire ; aperture somewhat 
produced, at the peripheral angle. Length, 1.5-1.65; breadth, 0.6- 
0.8; thickness, 0.5-0.6 mm. 

This is a somewhat variable species, but the figured specimens 
seem to be close enough to Reuss's original types to be included under 
his species. 

MARGINULINA TRILOBATA d'Orbigny 

Plate 9, Figures 3, 4 

Marginulina triloMta d'Orbigny, M^m. Soc. G6ol. France, s^r. 1, vol. 4, p. 16, 
pi. 1, figs. 16, 17, 1840. 

Test elongate, the sides nearly parallel, periphery rounded ; cham- 
bers distinct, rather uniform in size and shape; sutures distinct, lim- 
bate ; the central portion at each side raised and thickened ; wall, ex- 
cept for the sutural projections, smooth; aperture radiate, at the 
peripheral margin. Length, up to 3.5; breadth, 0.7-0.8; thickness, 
0.4-0.45 mm. 

The specimen figured is a megalospheric one and does not show the 
early coiled chambers, which are much more apparent in micro- 
spheric specimens. The raised sutures are somewhat variable in the 
degree of thickening, but this character is usually present in consider- 
able degree. The types of this species were described by d'Orbigny 
from the Cretaceous chalks of the Paris Basin, and it is rather widely 
distributed in the chalky phase of the Upper Cretaceous of Europe 
and America. 



ABT. 14 FOBAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 29 

Genus DENTALINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

DENTALINA MEGAPOLITANA Reuss 

Plate 9, Figuee 5 

Dentalina meijapolitana Rsniss, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., vol. 7, p. 267, pi. 8, 

fig. 10, 1855. 
Nodosaria megapolitana Feanke, Abh. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, vol. 

6, p. 33, pi. 3, fig. 8, 1925. — Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 

10, p. 595, pi. 18, fig. 16, 1926. 

Test large, fairly stout, tapering, slightly fusiform, greatest 
breadth developed before the last-formed chamber in the adult; 
chambers numerous, not inflated, distinct, of uniform shape, gradu- 
ally increasing in size as added, the later ones often slightly decreas- 
ing; sutures distinct, not depressed, slightly oblique; wall smooth; 
aperture radiate, slightly protuberant at the inner angle of the ter- 
minal face of the last-formed chamber. Length, up to 2; breadth, 
up to 0.3 mm. 

The figured specimen, while not typical, nevertheless may be 
included in this species of Reuss. The specimen is an incomplete one, 
and the species is found in the Trinidad Cretaceous. It has already 
been recorded from the Upper Cretaceous of Mexico in the Velasco 
shale and is common in Cretaceous deposits of the general Gulf 
Coastal Plain region of the United States. 

DENTALINA FILIFORMIS Reuss (?) 
Plate 9, Figukes 6, 7 

The figured specimens show the early stages as well as some of the 
later chambers of a slender, slightly curved form which has been 
referred by Franke ^ to Reuss's species. This form is fairly com- 
mon in the American Cretaceous of the general Gulf Coastal Plain, 
as well as of Trinidad. 

DENTALINA CATENULA Renss 

Plate 9, Figukes 8 o, & 

Dentalina catenula Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol 40, p. 185, pi. 3, fig. 6, 
1860. 

Test compressed, of a few chambers, slightly arcuate, rounded in 
transverse section; chambers distinct, inflated, subglobular; sutures 
depressed, distinct ; wall smooth ; aperture small, radiate, at the end 
of a distinct protuberance, at the peripheral margin of the chamber. 
Length, 0.6-0.75 ; diameter, 0.2 mm. 

The chambers in this species are very much inflated and subglobu- 
lar, and usually only a few of them make up the test. The aperture 
is especially protuberant. 



'Abh. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 9, pi. 2, figs. 19 a, I, 1928. 



30 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

DENTALINA LEGUMEN (Reuss) 

Plate 9, Fiqxjbe 9 

Nodosaria legumen Reuss, Versteiu. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 28, pi. 13, figs. 23, 
24, 1845^6; in Geinitz, Palaeontograpliica, vol. 20, pt, 2, p. 88, pi. 20, fig. 
22, 1874.— Fkankb, Abh. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, vol. 6, p. 32, pi. 3, 
fig. 6, 1925. 
Dentalina legumen Reuss, Haidinger's Naturw. Abh., vol. 4, pt, 1, p. 26, pi. 
1, fig, 14, 1851 ; Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, p. 187, pi. 3, fig. 5, I860.— 
Franke, Abh. Preuss. Geol. Landes., new ser., vol. Ill, p. 27, pi, 2, fig, 23, 
1928. 
Test elongate, slender, tapering, slightly curved; chambers distinct, 
inflated, increasing rather rapidly in size as added, apertural end 
much extended with an elongate neck, initial chamber rounded or 
with a single short spine; sutures distinct, depressed, oblique; wall 
smooth; aperture radiate at the end of an elongate neck. Length, 
0.75-0.9 ; breadth, 0.1-0.2 mm. 

This common European Cretaceous species occurs in Trinidad and 
in the various portions of the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United 
States. 

DENTALINA CONFLUENS Reuss 

Plate 9, Fiqubes 10-12 

Dentalina confluens Rextss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44. pt. 1. p. 335, pi. 7, 
fig. 5, 1861 (1862). 

Test elongate, slightlj'^ tapering, the early portion often somewhat 
compressed; later chambers becoming inflated and distinct; sutures 
depressed, especially in the later portion; wall ornamented by numer- 
ous rather coarse longitudinal costae, those of the early portion par- 
ticularly, continuous over adjacent chambers and often somewhat 
oblique, later ones often broken at the sutures ; aperture at the end of 
a distinct neck, radiate. Length, 2-2.8 ; diameter, 0.5-0.6 mm. 

Two distinct forms are shown in the figures. The more elongate 
form with the somewhat twisted costae at the base is much more like 
the original figure of Reuss, but the other form occurs with this, 
and it seems that the two should be included together as variants of 
one species. 

DENTALINA ANNULATA (Reuss) 
Plate 10, Figueb 1 

Nodosaria annulatn Reuss, Geogu. Skizze Bohmen, vol. 2, pt. 1, p. 210, 1844; 

Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 27, pi. 8, figs. 4, 67 ; pi. 13, fig, 21, 1845-46 ; 

in Geinitz, Palaeontographica, vol, 20, pt. 2, p. 85, pi. 20, figs. 19, 20, 1874. 
Dentalina annulata Reuss, in Alth, Haidinger's Naturw. Abh., vol. 3, pt. 2, 

p. 269, pi. 13, fig. 29, 1850 ; vol. 4, pt. 1, p. 26, pi. 1, fig. 13, 1851.— Feanke, 

Abh. Prouss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 34, pi. 2, figs. 34, 35, 1928. 
Dentalina cf. adolphina Cushman and Jaevis (not d'Orbigny), Contr. Cushman 

Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 97, pi, 14, fig. 6, 1928. 



ABT. 14 FOEAMIlSriFERA FEOM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JAEVIS 31 

Test much elongated, slender, tapering, greatest width toward the 
apertural end; chambers distinct, inflated, subglobular, increasing 
rather uniformly in size, the early ones somewhat less inflated; 
sutures distinct, depressed, more so between the later chambers ; wall 
smooth; aperture radiate, terminal. Length, 0.8-1.25; diameter, 
0.15-0.25 mm. 

This species we have already recorded from Trinidad as Dentalina 
cf. adolphina. It seems to fit rather well the species described by 
Reuss from the Cretaceous of Europe and should be placed under 
his species. 

DENTALINA sp. (?) 

Plate 9, Figure 13 

Tlie peculiar broken specimen figured is given simply that the 
record of it may be available for future workers on the Cretaceous 
of this area. It has very thick limbate sutures as one of its main 
characters. 

DENTALINA sp. (?) 

Plate 10, Figure 3 

The broken specimen figured has very coarse costae, which project 
somewhat at the base of each chamber and are in the later chambers 
projected as short spines. No complete specimens were found. 

DENTALINA LORNELA.NA d'Orbigny 

Plate 10, Figure 2 

Dentalina lorneiana d'Orbigky, Mem. Soc. G6ol. France, s6r. 1, vol. 4, p. 14, 
pi. 1, figs. 8, 9, 1840.— Feanke, Abh. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 28, 
pi. 2, fig. 29, 1928. 

Test elongate, slightly arcuate; chambers increasing gradually in 
length as added until the final chamber is often twice as long aS 
broad; sutures distinct, slightly depressed in the later portion; wall 
smooth ; aperture terminal, radiate, very slightly projecting. Length, 
1.6; diameter, 0.2 mm. 

This species was originally described by d'Orbigny from the Cre- 
taceous chalk of the Paris Basin, and it has been very widely recorded 
from Europe and elsewhere. It is a common species in Trinidad and 
in the Upper Cretaceous of the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United 
States. 

Genus NODOSARIA Lamarck, 1816 

NODOSARIA CONCINNA Rcuss 

Plate 10, Figure 4 

Nodosaria ooncmna Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, p. 178, pi. 1, fig. 3, 
1860. — CusHMAN and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 97, 
pi. 14, figs. 5, 11, 1928. 



32 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Test elongate, composed of a few much inflated, subglobular cham- 
bers, becoming slightly longer than broad in the later chambers, the 
base often with a slight spine; sutures strongly depressed; wall 
smooth ; aperture terminal, radiate, very slightly projecting. Length, 
1 ; maximum breadth, 0.35 mm. 

This species has been widely recorded from the Cretaceous of 
Europe, occurs in the Cretaceous of Trinidad, and is probably widely 
distributed in America. 

NODOSARIA LIMBATA d'Orbigny 

Plate! 10, Figure 5 

Nodosaria Umbata d'Orbigny, M6m. Soc. G6ol. France, ser. 1, vol. 4, p. 12, pi. 
1, fig. 1, 1840. 

Test composed of a few inflated chambers, slightly separated from 
one another by distinct but very short connections; chambers some- 
what pyriform; sutures distinct, somewhat depressed; wall smooth; 
aperture terminal, radiate, drawn out to a subacute point. 

We have already referred to this form as Nodosaria concinna 
Reuss.'' A copy of this same specimen is given here, and it seems to 
fit d'Orbigny's species better than that of Reuss. 

NODOSARIA LIMBATA d'Orbigny var. TUMIDATA new variety 

Plate 10, Figxtbes 6 a, h 

Description. — ^Variety differing from the typical in the shape of 
the chambers, which are somewhat conical, the greatest breadth being 
nearly at the base of the basal portion, very strongly truncated as 
shown in the figure. 

Eolotype of variety.— \J.^.'^M. No. 73819 (Cushman Coll. No. 
15321), from Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs near 
Guayaguayare, southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Remarks. — This is evidently closely related to d'Orbigny's species, 
as there are intermediate forms present. A similar intermediate 
form between this variety and the typical is figured from the Velasco 
shale.^ 

NODOSARIA LIMBATA d'Orbigny var. BASIOBNATA new variety 

Plate 10, Figubes 7, 8 

Description. — Variety differing from the typical in the ornamen- 
tation of the surface, which consists of numerous subnodose projec- 
tions on the swollen portion of each chamber. 

' Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, pi. 14, fig. 11, 1928. 

« Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 597, pi. 18, fig. 6, 1926. 



AET. 14 FORAMINIFEEA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 33 

Holotype of vaWei^y.— U.S.N.M. No. 73820 (Cushman Coll. No. 
15319), from Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs near 
Giiaj^aguayare, southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Remarks. — This variety is very distinctly marked and has the 
greatest width of the chamber progressively becoming nearer the 
base as chambers are added, but less distinctly so than in the 
preceding variety. 

NODOSARIA MONILE t. Hagenow 

Plate 10, Figuee 9 

Nodosana monile v. Hagenow, Neues Jabrb. fiir Min., 1842, p. 568.— Reuss, 
Verstein. Bobm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 27, pi. 8, fig. 7, 1845^6.— Fbankb, Abh. 
Preuss. Geol. Landes.. v<»l. Ill, p. 31, pi. 2, figs. 27 o, b, 192S. 

Test elongate, very slightly tapering; chambers very distinct, 
inflated, subglobular throughout; sutures distinct, depressed espe- 
cially toward the later-formed portion; wall smooth; aperture ter- 
minal, radiate, not projecting. Length, 1.5; diameter, 0.25 mm. 

This species is very close to that recorded as Nodosai'ia nuda.^ 
That species, however, has the chambers becoming elongate in the 
adult, while in N . monile the chambers are subglobular throughout 
and show little tendency to lengthen. Our specimens are very close 
indeed to those figured by Franke from Germany in the above 
leference. 

NODOSARIA ORTHOPLEURA Reuss 

Plate 10, Figxjre 10 

Nodosaria orthopleura Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 89, 
pi. 12, figs. 5 a, J), 1862 (1863). 

Test very elongate, slightly tapering at each end, for most of its 
length with the sides parallel or nearly so ; chambers numerous, not 
inflated; sutures fairly distinct, slightly limbate; wall ornamented 
by a few distinct elevated costae running from the base to the aper- 
tural end; aperture terminal, radiate. 

The broken fragment shown here represents a portion of a large 
specimen of this species which must have measured, when complete, 
8 or 10 mm. in length. 

NODOSARIA PAUPERCULA Renss 

Plate 10, Figuees 14, 15 

Nodosaria paupercula Rejuss, Versteiu. Bobm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 26, pi. 12, fig. 12, 
1845^6. 

The two specimens figured are referred to the above species of 
Reuss, which he described from the Cretaceous of Germany. These 

■Cushman and Church, Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, p. 510, pi. 39, flgs. 
4-6, 1929. 

70827—32 3 



34 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

may not represent a single species, but they are characterized by the 
subglobular chambers and the numerous costae, which are continuous 
from one chamber to another. 

NODOSARIA AFFINIS Reuss 

Plate 10, Figure 13 

Nodosaria affinis Reuss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 26, pi. 13, fig. 16, 
1845-46; in Geinitz, Palaeontogi'aphica, vol. 20, pt. 2, p. 83, pi. 20, fig. 12, 
1874. — Fbanke, Abli. geol. pal. Inst. Uuiv. Greifswald, vol. 6, p. 37, pi. 3, 
fig. 25, 1925.— Beery and Ketj.ey, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 76, art. 19, 
p. 6, pi. 1, fig. 8, 1929. 

Nodomria proxima Beery and Kelley (not Silvestri), Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 76, art. 19, p. 7, pi. 1, fig. 13, 1929. 

Test elongate, of variable shape in the microspheric and megalo- 
spheric forms, the former with many chambers and tapering, the 
greatest width near the apertural end, the latter with the chambers 
of nearly uniform diameter throughout ; chambers distinct, inflated, 
especially toward the apertural end, initial end usually with a stout 
spine; sutures distinct, depressed, often somewhat limbate; wall 
ornamented by numerous (usually 13 to 15) longitudinal costae, 
continuous over the adjacent chambers, usually sharp and platelike; 
aperture radiate, terminal, with a slight projection of the apertural 
face. Length, up to 2 mm. or more; diameter, normally about 0.3 
mm., but in extreme megalospheric forms may be as much as 0.75 mm. 

This species, described from the Upper Cretaceous of Europe, is 
very common indeed in the Upper Cretaceous of the Gulf Coastal 
Plain of the United States, and apparently our specimen figured here, 
although incomplete, probably belongs in the same species. There 
is a great degree of variation in the relative size and number of cham- 
bers in the material from the Gulf Coastal Plain, although the orna- 
mentation remains fairly constant. 

NODOSARIA cf. MARCKI Reuss 

Plate 10, Figube 12 

Nodosaria cf. marcki Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushinan Lab. Foram. Res., 
vol. 4, p. 97, pi. 14, fig. 4, 1928. 

The specimen figured is the same as that given in the above refer- 
ence. It is very close to a figure given by Franke from the Creta- 
ceous of Germany. ^° Very similar specimens occur also in the Ve- 
lasco shale of Mexico. 



i»Abh. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, vol. 6, pi. .", fig. 22 a, 1925. 



ART. 14 FORAMINIFEEA FROM TEINIDAD CUSHMAK AND JARVIS 35 

NODOSARIA BREVITESTA Franke 

Plate 10, Figtjbb 11 

Kodosaria hrevifesta Franke, Abh. i^eol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswakl, vol. 6, 
p. 42, pi. 3, fis. 37, 1925. — Cushman and Jarvis, Coiitr. Cusliman Lab. 
Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 97, pi. 13, fig. 10, 1928. 

Franke figures from the Cretaceous of Germany a specimen which 
seems close to our figured one from Trinidad. It is a short, stout 
form with a very few remote costae continuous over the sutures. 
No further material has been available to check the earlier notes 
on this species. 

NODOSARIA VELASCOENSIS Cushman 

Plate 11, Figures 1-4 

Nodo.^aria fontannesi (Berthelin var. vclascocrisis Cushman, Bull. Amer. 

Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 594, pi. 18 fig, 12, 1926. 
Xodosaria velascoensis Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res„ 

vol. 4, p. 97, pi. 13, figs. 15, 16, 1928. 

Test elongate, subcylindrical, very slightly tapering, greatest width 
developed by the last-formed chamber, consisting of numerous cham- 
bers increasing in height as added, the last ones somewhat longer 
than broad, circular in transverse section; sutures only slightly de- 
pressed, ornamentation consisting of very fine longitudinal costae 
which in the early portion may be continuous, but over most of the 
test are restricted to the areas over the sutures. Length, up to 2.5; 
breadth, 0.3-0.4 mm. 

This form was originally described from the Velasco shale of Mex- 
ico, where it was fairly common. It is also common in the Trinidad 
material and shows a considerable degree of variation, especially in 
the ornamentation of the test. The costae are usually somewhat spi- 
rally arranged, especially in the early portion, and in later chambers 
are often restricted to the area immediately adjoining the sutures. 

NODOSARIA ASPERA Reusg 

Plate 11, Figure 5 

Nodosaria aspera Rexjss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 26, pi. 13, figs. 14, 
15, 1845-46. 

Test somewhat elongate, tapering toward the initial end, greatest 
breadth at the last-formed chamber; chambers increasing rather 
uniformly as added, slightly involute, subglobular; sutures distinct, 
but only slightly depressed ; wall ornamented with small, closely set 
spines covering the entire surface; aperture with a long, cylindrical 
neck projecting well out beyond the outline of the test. Length, 
up to 1.6; breadth, 0.5-0.55 mm. 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

The figured form agrees very closely with the species described 
by Eeiiss from the Cretaceous of Europe. It is not common in the 
Trinidad material, but specimens are well preserved. 

NODOSARIA sp. (?) 

Plate 11, FiatrBE 6 

The figure shows the last two chambers of a species with a dis- 
tinctive type of ornamentation in which there are prominent con- 
tinuous costae and other smaller ones between. When more material 
is available this can probably be referred to one of Reuss's species 
already described from Europe, but until such material is available 
it is not desired to give it a definite specific name. 

Genus PSEUDOGLANDULINA Cushman, 1929 

PSEUDOGLANDULINA CYLINDRACEA (Keuss) 

Plate 11, Figures 7, 8 

GlanduUna cyiindracea Retjss, Haidinger's. Niiturw. Abh., vol, 4, pt. 1, p. 23, 

pi. 1, fig. 5, 1851 ; Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wleu, vol. 40, p. 190, pi. 4, fig. 1, 1860 ; 

vol. 44, pt. 1, p. 307, 1861 (1862) ; Palaeontographica, vol. 20, pt. 2, p. 89, 

1872-1875 (1874). — Eggek, Abh. kon. bay. Akad. Wiss. Miinehen, CI. II, vol. 

21, p. 84, pi. 5, figs. 19, 20, 1899. — Cushman and Church, Proc. California 

Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, p. 511, pi. 39, figs. 8, 9, 1929. 
Nodosaria cyiindracea Reuss, Verstein. Bobm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 25, pi. 13, figs. 1, 

2, 1845-46. 
Nodosaria (GlandicJina) cyiindracea Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., 

vol. 10, p. 594, pi. 18, fig. 1, 1926. 

Test composed of a few subcylindrical chambers which are dis- 
tinctly involute, the final chamber often being nearly twice as long 
as broad; sutures distinct, very slightly depressed, slightly oblique; 
wall smooth; aperture terminal, radiate, slightly projecting. 
Length, up to 3 ; breadth, 0.6 mm. 

This species has already been recorded from the Upper Cretaceous 
of California and from the Velasco shale of Mexico. It is common 
in many parts of Europe and occurs widely distributed in the Upper 
Cretaceous of the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United States. 

PSEUDOGLANDULINA PARALLELA (Marsson) 

Plate 11, Figure 9 

Olandulina paraUela Marsson, Mitth. Nat. Ver. Neu-Vorpommern. Riigen, 
vol. 10, p. 124, pi. 1, figs. 4 o, b, 1878. 

The figured specimen may be referred to Marsson's species de- 
scribed from the chalk of the Island of Kiigen. A similar form is 
figured by Franke " and referred to this same species. Such forms 
are common in the American Cretaceous and are widely distributed. 

" Abh. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. 111. pi. 4. fig. 16. 1928. 



ART. 14 FORiVMINIFEEA FKOM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 37 

PSEUDOGLANDULINA BISTEGIA (Olszewski) (?) 

Plate 11, Figures 10-12 

CristellaHa''bistegia Olszewski, Sprawozd. kom. fizyogr. Akad. nmiej. Kra- 
kow-ie, vol. 9, p. 115, pi. 1, fig. g (error for 9), 1875. 

The figured specimens show a peculiar form that may be referred 
to the above species with some question. Some of the specimens have 
a very decidedly roughened proloculum, the second chamber being 
smooth. The aperture in all of these specimens is somewhat broken, 
and its character can not be fully determined. 

PSEUDOGLANDULINA sp. (?) 

Plate 11, Fioubb 13 

The single specimen figured here evidently represents an orna- 
mented species of this genus, but more material is necessary to give 
it a specific determination. 

Genus FLABELLINA d'Orbigny, 1839 

FLABELLINA RETICULATA Reuss 

Plate 11, Figure 15 

FlaJyeUina reticulata Reuss, Haidinger's Naturw. Abh., vol. 4, pt. 1, p. 30, pi. 1, 
fig. 22, 1851; Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44, pt. 1, p. 326, 1861 (1862).— 
Olszewski, Sprawozd. kom. fiz.vogr. Akad. umlej. Krakowie, vol. 9, p. 110, 
1875. — Egger, Abli. kon. bay. Akad. Wiss. Miincben, CI. II, vol. 21, p. 107, 
pl. 13, figs. 5-7, 1899. — Franke, Abh. g;^ol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, a ol. 
6, p. 64, pl. 5, fig. 14, 1925 ; Abh. Preuss. Gaol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 93, pl. S, 
fig. 19, 1928.— White. Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 204, pl. 28, fig. 15, 1928.— Gush- 
man, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 6, p. 32, pl. 4, figs. 18, 19, 
1930. 

Frondicularia reticulata Bagg. U. S. Geol. Survey Bull. 88, p. 50, pl. 3, fig. 
0, 1898. — Wexlek, Geol. Survey New Jersey, Paleontology, vol. 4, p. 230, 
pl. 2, fig. 30, 1907.— Plum MER, Univ. Texas Bull. 2044, pp. 39, 172, pl. 2, 
fig. 5, 1927. 

Flahellina favosa Beissel, Abh. Kon. Preuss. geol. Landes., vol. 3, p. 49, pl. 19, 
figs. 25-28, pl. 26, fig. 28, 1891. 

Frondicularia of. interpunctata Cushman (not von der Marck), Bull. Amer. 
Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, no. 6, p. 598, pl. 20, fig. 6, 1926. 

Test much compressed, sides nearly or quite flat, outline of test 
variable, periphery truncate; early portion coiled, later chambers 
extending back on both sides; chambers distinct; sutures distinct, 
raised somewhat, the surface of the test between covered by a raised 
network of octagonal meshes with the long axis at right angles to 
the sutures; aperture slightly produced. 

This is a widely distributed species in Europe and America and 
is abundant in the Navarro formation of Texas and equivalent forma- 
tions of Arkansas and Tennessee. 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

FLABELLINA SEMIRETICULATA Cnshman and Jarvis 

Plate 11, FiGtTBE 14 

Flabellina semireticvlata Cushman and Jakvis, Contr. Cushmau Lab. Foram. 
Res., vol. 4, p. 98, pi. 13, fig. 14, 1928. 

Test rhomboid in front view, much compressed, apertural end 
extended ; chambers and sutures obscured by the surface ornamenta- 
tion, which consists of a more or less irregular reticulation, the sides 
of the polygonal areas raised, thin and platelike. Length, 0.6; 
breadth, 0.35; thickness, 0.08 mm. 

This form was described by us as a new species in the above 
reference. It is to be suspected that it may be only a form of the 
preceding species, but more material is necessary to determine this 
point definitely. 

FLABELLINA INTERPUNCTATA von der Marck 
Plate 12, Figxjke 1 

Flabellina interpunctata von der Makck, Verb. nat. Ver. preuss. Rheiul., vol. 
15, p. 53, pi. 1, fig. 5, 1858.— Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, p. 216, 
pi. 9, fig. 1, 1860. — Heron-Allen and Eaeland, Joura. Roy. Mici'. Soc, p. 422, 
pi. 8, fig. 5, 1910.— Feanke, Bronn. Verb. Nat. Hist. Ver., vol. 59, p. 277, 
1912 (1913).— Chapman, Bull. Geol. Surv., Western Australia, No, 72, 
p. 34, pi. 10, fig. 91, 1917.— Frankb, Abb. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, 
vol. 6, p. 64, pi. 5, fig. 13, 1925 ; Jabrb. preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. 48, p. 678, 
1927 ; Abb. preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 92, pi. 8, fig. 17, 1928.— White, 
Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 203, 1928. — Cushman, Contr. Cusbman Lab. Foram. 
Res., vol. 6, p. 30, pi. 4, figs. 16, 17, 1930. 

Flabellina rugosa Beissel (not d'Orbigny), Abb. Kon. Preuss. geol. Landes., 
vol. 3, p. 47, pi. 9, figs. 20-24, 1891. 

Frondlcularia projecta Carsby, Univ. Texas Bull. 2612, p. 41, pi. 6, tig. 5, 1926. 

Frond icitl aria baudouiniana Cushman (not d'Orbigny), Contr. Cusbman Lab. 
Foram. Res., vol. 2, p. 21, pi. 3, fig. 5, 1926; Journ. Pal., vol. 1, p. 155, 
pi. 24, fig. 13, 1927. 

Test sagittate to rhomboid in outline, much compressed, sides 
nearly flat, periphery truncate; early chambers coiled, later ones 
extending back on both sides; sutures raised and sharp, later cham- 
bers with a loop or series of loops at the apical end of the chamber ; 
wall between the raised sutures with a series of small papillae; 
apertural end slightly projecting. 

This is a very characteristic species with its raised, clear-cut 
sutures and the papillate wall. The peculiar looplike extensions in 
the median line in the adult are also characteristic even if the 
papillae are covered. 

The species is very widely distributed and is naturally subject to 
considerable variation. The main characters, however, remain con- 
stant, and its vertical range is considerable. 



ART. 14 FORAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN" AND JARVIS 39 

FLABELLINA ELLIPTICA (Nilsson) 

Plate 12, Figure 2 

Planularia elliptica Nilsson, Petr. Suec. form, cret., p. 11, pi. 9, figs. 21, 22, 1827. 
Flobellina elliptica Fbic, Stud. Geb. Bohm. Kreide., vol. 2, p. 149, fig. 152 (in 

text), 1877.— Feanke, Abh. Preuss. Geol. Laudes., vol. Ill, p. 91, pi. 8, 

figs. 14, 15, 1928. 

Test somewhat rhomboid in outline, the early portion distinctly 
coiled; sutures distinct, slightly limbate, but hardly if at all de- 
pressed; wall very smooth. Length, 4; breadth, 3.25 mm. 

The very broad, large, smooth form figured here may be referred 
to the above species, although the early figures are not very definite. 
A similar form occurs in the Cretaceous of the Gulf Coastal Plain 
of the United States. 

Genus FRONDICULARIA Defrance, 1824 

FRONDICULARIA ELONGATA White (?) 

Plate 12, Figuke 3 

Frondicularia arcMaciana Cushman (not d'Orbigny), Contr. Cushmau Lab. 

Foram. Res., vol. 2, p. 21, pi. 3, fig. 4, 1926. 
Frondicularia .sp. (?) Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 598, 

pi. 20, fig. 2, 1926. 
Frondicularia elongata White, Jouru. Pal., vol. 2. y. 205, pi. 29, fig. 3, 1928. — 

Cushman and Jar\t;s, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 98, pi. 14, 

fig. 1, 1928. 

This species described from the Upper Cretaceous of Mexico is 
also found in the Trinidad collection. The figure given by White 
shows the costae only between the sutures, and the description reads 
" with longitudinal ribs crossing the interspaces " as if they were 
independent on the different chambers. His figure also seems to 
clearly indicate that the costae are independent of one another on 
different chambers, as will be seen especially on the left side of the 
specimen that the different series are not at all aligned. If the 
figure and description are accurate, it would seem that F. elongata 
is a synonym of F. decheni Reuss from the Cretaceous of Germany, 
and that our species figured here from Trinidad and from Mexico 
is another species. 

The above notes are from our earlier paper. No further material 
has been found that will help to solve the problem of the identity 
of this species. 

FRONDICULARIA CORDAI Reuss 

Plate 12, Figure 4 

Frondicularia cordai Reuss, Verstein. Bohra. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 31, pi. 8, figs. 
26-28, pi. 13, fig. 41, 1845-46 ; pt. 2, p. 108, pi. 24, fig. 38, 1845-46.— Cush- 
man, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 6, p. 34, pi. 5, fig. 17, 1930. 



40 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

There is a single fragment here that may be referred to Reuss's 
species. The surface is very finely costate. The species is known 
from the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United States. 

PRONDICULARIA GRACILIS Franke (?) 

Plate 12, Figubb 5 

Frondicularia august a Rexjss (not Nilsson), Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, 

p. 196, pi. 4, fig. 5, 1860. 
Frondicularia archiaclana d'Obbigny var. striffillata B.\gg (not F. strigillata 

Reuss), U. S. Geol. Survey Bull. 88, p. 47, pi. 3, fig. 5, 1898. 
Frondicularia gracilis Franke, Abh. geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, vol. 6, 

p. 50, pi. 4, fig. 9, 1925. — CtrsHMAN, Conti'. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 

6, p. 37, pi. 5, fig. 16, 1930. 

The single fragment figured here is more finely ornamented than 
is typical of Franke's species, but until further material is obtained 
it is referred here. 

Subfamily Lageninae 

Genus LAGENA Walker and Jacob, 1798 

LAGENA ORBIGNYANA (Scguenza) 

Plate 12, Figure 6 

Very similar specimens of that figured here were found in the 
Velasco shale material in Mexico and referred to Seguenza's species. 
The central body of the test is smooth in distinction from the 
following variety. 

LAGENA ORBIGNYANA (Seguenza) var. 

Plate 12, Figures 7 o, b 

This form, with the body of the test covered with longitudinal 
costae, seems to be identical with a similar form already recorded ^- 
from the Velasco shale of Mexico. 

Family POLYMORPHINIDAE 
Genus GUTTULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

GUTTULINA ADHAERENS (Olszewski) 

Plate 32, Figures 8 a, & 

Polinnorphina adhacrens Olszewski, Sprawodz. kom. flzyogr. Akad. umiej. 

Krakowie, vol. 9, p. 119, pi. 1, fig. 11, 1875. 
Outiulina adluierens Cushman and Ozawa, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 77, art. 

6, p. 36, pi. 1, figs. 9 a-c; pi. 6, figs. 7 », 6, 1930. 



"Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Pctr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 593, pi. 17, fig. 13, 1926. 



ABT. 14 FOEAMINIFERA FROM TEINIDAD--CUSHMAN AND JAEVIS 41 

The figured specimen may be referred to this Cretaceous species, 
which is variable in the form of the chambers. One side is decidedly 
flattened, giving the test the appearance of having been attached. 

Genus PSEUDOPOLYMORPHINA Cushman and Ozawa, 1928 

PSEUDOPOLYMORPHINA OZAWANA, new species 

Plate 12, Figures 9 a, h 

Description. — Test elongate, very much compressed; early cham- 
bers somewhat thicker than the later ones, which are definitely 
biserial; sutures raised and subnodose; wall between the sutures 
smooth; aperture terminal, radiate. Length, 2.5; breadth, 1; 
thickness, 0.5 mm. 

HoIotyjJe.—U.^.'^M. No. 73821 (Cushman Coll. No. 15324), from 
Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs, near Guayaguayare, 
southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Beiimrhs. — This is a peculiar highly ornamented species of the 
genus and very distinct from any other Imown Cretaceous form. It 
is named for the late Prof. Yoshiaki Ozawa, who has contributed so 
much to the knowledge of this family. 

Genus RAMULINA Rupert Jones, 1875 

RAMULINA sp. (?) 

Plate 12, Figubes 10, 11 

The two spinose forms figured here may be referred to the genus 
Ramulina, but without further material it seems rather useless to 
give this a definite specific name. 

Family NONIONIDAE 
Genus NONION Montfort, 1808 

NONION CRETACEUM, new species 

Plate 12, Figures 12 a, & 

Description. — Test closely coiled, compressed, very slightly um- 
bilicate, periphery subacute ; chambers distinct, eight making up the 
adult coil, of uniform shape increasing very slightly in size as added; 
sutures distinct, limbate, very slightly curved ; wall smooth, the cen- 
Iral umbilical region covered with a layer of clear shell material, 
in which are tubular spaces connecting with the umbilici, represented 
by lighter spaces in the clear material ; aperture narrow, at the base 
of the last- formed cliamber. Diameter, 0.65 ; thickness, 0.25 mm. 



42 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Holotype.—V. S. N. M. No. 73822 (Cushman Coll. No. 15327) from 
Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs near Guayaguayare, 
southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

Remarks. — This is a very peculiar species of the genus, and unlike 
any other described form. It has very limbate sutures and a pe- 
culiar arrangement of the umbilical region, with its thickening of 
clear shell material pierced by irregularly curved tubular openings. 

Family CAMERINIDAE 

Genus OPERCULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

OPERCULINA CATENULA, new species 

Plate 12, Figxjbes 13 o, & 

Description. — Test broadly complanate, periphery rounded, great- 
est thickness in the umbonal region; chambers distinct, about 15 in 
the last-formed coil, of rather uniform shape and increasing some- 
what in length as added ; sutures distinct, limbate, raised, ornamented 
by numerous beadlike protuberances which are slightly elongate in 
the line of the suture, sutures ending in the umbonal region in a 
distinct boss which itself is somewhat beaded; wall between the 
sutures smooth. Diameter, 2.25; thickness, 0.6 mm. 

Holotype.—IJ.^.'^.M. No. 73823 (Cushman Coll. No. 15325), from 
Upper Cretaceous of pit at Lizard Springs near Guayaguayare, 
southeastern Trinidad, British West Indies. 

This is one of the few species of this genus known from the Upper 
Cretaceous, and it seems to be a very distinctive one as developed in 
this Upper Cretaceous of Trinidad. 

Family HETEROHELICIDAE 
Genus GUMBELINA Egger, 1899 

GtJMBELINA sp. (?) 

Plate 13, Figures la,!) 

There are a few very poorly preserved specimens of Gunibelina, 
which it seems unwise definitely to place under a specific name. The 
surface is not usually well preserved, and it may possibly be that 
they are reworked specimens from some older Cretaceous source. 

Genus BOLIVINOIDES Cushman, 1927 

BOLIVINOIDES DECORATA (Jones) var. DELICATULA Cushman 

Plate 13, Figure 2 

BoUvina decorata Cushman (not Jones), Bull. Anier. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, 
p. 19, pi. 2, figs. 3 0, b, 1926. 



AET. 14 FORAMINIFEEA FEOM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 43 

BoUvinoides decorata (Jones) var. delicatula Cttshman, Contr. Cusliman Lab. 
Foram. Res., vol. 2, pt. 4, p. 90, pi. 12, fig. 8, 1927 ; Journ. Pal., vol. 1, p. 158, 
pi. 28, fig. 7, 1927. — CusHMAN and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., 
vol. 4, p. 99, pi. 14, fig. 9, 1928. 

This elongate variety, which has already been recorded from the 
Velasco shale of Mexico, occurs in typical form in Trinidad. The 
ornamentation of the surface is shown in the figure, and it is quite 
distinct from typical B. decorata (Jones) as developed in Europe. 

BOLIVINOIDES TRINITATENSIS Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 13, Figuees 3 a, & 

BoUvinoides trinitatensis Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. 
Res., vol. 4, p. 99, pi. 14, figs. 10 a, &, 1928. 

Test generall)^ biserial, broadest near the apertural end, tapering to 
the subacute initial end, whole test thickening rapidly toward the 
apertural end, which is formed of a smooth thickened area ; chambers 
marked by the highly ornate character of the test, consisting of thin 
convex platelike extensions backward from the thickened terminal 
face of the chamber having a deep area below, with trusslike raised 
costae, the areas over the chambers deeply depressed; aperture a 
somewhat elongate opening marking the suture which is otherwise 
obscured by the thickening of the apertural end of the test. Length, 
0.6; breadth, 0.38; thickness, 0.2 mm. 

The figured specimen, which is the holotype, does not show such a 
great development of the platelike extensions and the very deep 
excavations below them as do some of the other specimens from the 
same locality. This is one of the most highly ornamented species of 
the genus and is closely allied to B. velascoensis (Cushman), described 
from the Velasco shale of Mexico. 

Genus SPIROPLECTOIDES Cushman, 1927 

SPIROPLECTOIDES CLOTHO (Grzybowski) 

Plate 13, Figukes 5, 6 

Spiroplecta clotfio Grzybowski, Rozprawy Wydz. mat. przyr., vol. 41, p. 283, 

pi. 7, fig. 18, 1901. 
Spiroplecta annectcns Cushman (not Parker and Jones), Bull. Amer. Assoc. 

Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 584, pi. 15, figs. 4 a, b, 1926. 
Spiroplectokles cJotho Cushman, Journ. Pal., vol. 1, p. 159, pi. 28, fig. 6, 1927. — 

Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 101, pi. 

14, figs. 13, 14, 1928. 

Our specimens from Trinidad are very excellently preserved and 
show especially well the sutures, which are somewhat limbate. The 
two figures show the difference in shape and size of the microspheric 
and megalospheric forms. When seen separately the two miglit 
easily be mistaken for two distinct species. 



44 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Family BULIMINIDAE 
Genus BULIMINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

BULIMINA TRINITATENSIS Cushman and Jarvis 

Plate 13, Fiqxjbbs 4 a, b 

Bulimina trinitatensis Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., 
vol. 4, p. 102, pi. 14, figs. 12 a, 6, 1928. 

Test somewhat longer than broad, rounded in transverse section ; 
chambers distinct with the lower border extended into an overhang- 
ing plate, which is marked on the upper side by an irregular network 
of reticulate areas, the outer angles ending in short spines ; aperture 
elongate, comma-shaped, the apertural face smooth. Length, 0.5; 
diameter, 0.3 mm. 

The ornamentation of this species is very distinctive and will dis- 
tinguish it from any described species of the genus. The same species 
is apparently developed in the Gulf Coastal Plain region of the 
United States, or at least a very similar one occurs there. 

Genus LOXOSTOMUM Ehrenberg, 1854 

LOXOSTOMUM PLAITUM (Carsey) 

Plate 13, Figube 7 

BoUvina plaita Caksey, Univ. Texas Bull. 2612, p. 26, pi. 4, fig. 2, 1926. 
Proroporun plaita Cvsilua's, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 2, pt. 4, 
p. 89, pi. 12, figs. 7 a, J), 1927. 

This species is now widely known from the Cretaceous of the West- 
ern Hemisphere, occurring in its typical form in the Navarro and its 
equivalent in the Gulf Coastal Plain region of the United States. 

Family ELLIPSOIDINIDAE 

Genus PLEUROSTOMELLA Reuss, 1860 
PLEUROSTOMELLA CLAVATA Cushman 

Plate 13, Figures 8 a, b 

Plewostomella clavata Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, no. 6, 
p. 590, pi. 16, fig. 5, 1926 ; Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 3, p. 132, 
pi. 25, fig. 19, 1927.— White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 52, pi. 5, fig. 14, 1928. 

Test somewhat fusiform, nearly circular in transverse section, 
greatest diameter toward the apertural end, periphery very slightly, 
if at all, lobulate, composed of a few chambers; the sutures distinct 
but not depressed; wall smooth, finely perforate; aperture at the 



ABT. 14 FOEAMINIFEEA FROM TEINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JAKVIS 45 

base of the last-formed chamber, very large, arched. Length, 0.65-1 ; 
diameter, 0.25-0.45 mm. 

This species is now Imown from the Velasco shale of Mexico, from 
which it was originally described, from the Upper Cretaceoiis of 
Trinidad, and from the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United States. 

Genus ELLIPSOPLEUROSTOMELLA A. Silvestri, 1903 

ELLIPSOPLEUROSTOMELLA CURTA Cushman 

Plate 13, Figures 9, 10 

EUipsopleurGStomella ciirta Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, 
p. 590, pi. 16, figs. 6 a, b, 1926. — Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. 
Foram. Res., vol. 4, p. 102, pi. 14, figs. 18, 19, 1928. 

The somewhat irregular specimens shown are possibly both forms 
of this species, but one of them has developed a chamber with a ter- 
minal aperture, and it may belong elsewhere. 

Genus ELLIPSONODOSARIA A. Silvestri, 1900 

ELLIPSONODOSARIA SUBNODOSA (Guppy) 

Plate 13, Figures 11-13 

ElUpsoidina subnodosa Guppy, Proc. Zool. Soc. Londou, 1S94, p. 650, pi. 42, 

fig-. 12. 
Etlipsonodosaria siibnodosa Nuttall, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soe., vol. 84, p. 95, 

pi. 6, fig. 20, 192S. — Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. 

Res., vol. 4, p. 102, pi. 14, figs. 15, 16, 1928. 

The two forms given may represent the microspheric and megalo- 
spheric forms of the same species. The adult chambers are very simi- 
lar in all the specimens. 

Genus ELLIPSOGLANDULINA A. Silvestri, 1900 

ELLIPSOGLANDULINA EXPONENS (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 13, Figures 14-16 

ElUpsoidina exponens H. B. Brady, in Jukes-Brown and Harrison, Quart. 

Journ. Geol. Soc, vol. 48, p. 198, 1892. — Guppy, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 

1894, p. 650, pi. 41, fig. 13. 
EUipsofflanduUna exponens A. Silvestri, Atti Pont. Accad. N. Lincei, vol. 54, 

pp. 103-109, 1901.— Nuttall, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc, vol. 84, p. 95, pi. 6, 

fig. 17, 1928. — Cushman and Jarvis, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res^ 

vol. 4, p. 103, pi. 14, fig. 17, 1928. 

The various specimens given may represent forms of a single 
species. Some of them are evidently megalospheric, while othera 
represent the microspheric form. 



46 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Family ROTALIIDAE 
Genus VALVULINERIA Cushman, 1926 

VALVULINERIA ALLOMORPHINOIDES (Rents) 

Plate 14, Figures 2a-c 

ValvuUna allomorpliinoides Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 40, p. 223, pi. 

11, figs. 6 a-c, 1860. 
DisGorMna allomorpliinoides Feankb, Abb, geol. pal. Inst. Univ. Greifswald, 

vol. 6, p. 91, pi. 8, figs. 11 0, b, 1928 ; Abb. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, 

p. 189, pi. 18, figs. 7 a, h, 1928. 
Discorhis allomorpliinoides Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, 

p. 606, pi. 20, figs. 18, 19; pi. 21, fig. 5, 1926. 

Test biconvex, slightly longer than broad, oval, periphery rounded; 
chambers distinct, on the dorsal side with the earlier whorls visible, 
ventrally involute, usually five in the last-formed whorl; sutures 
distinct, dorsally slightly curved, not depressed, ventrally slightly 
curved, slightly depressed; wall smooth; aperture narrow, below an 
overhanging fiat, platelike lip. 

The figured specimen, while somewhat more open in its coiling 
than is usual in this species, may possibly be included in its range 
of variation. 

Genus GYROIDINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

GYROIDINA DEPRESSA (Alth) 

Plate 14, Figures 1 a-c 

Rotalina depressa Alth, Haidiuger's Natunv. Abb., vol. 3, p. 266, pi. 13, fig. 21, 

1850. 
&yroidina depressa, Cushman and Church, Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, 

vol. 18, p. 515, pi. 41, figs, 4-6, 1929. 
Rotalia cretacea Carsey, Univ. Texas Bull. 2612, p. 48, pi. 5, figs. 7 a, b, 1926. 
Rotalia becoarii (Linnaeus) var. ripleyensis W. Berry, in Berry and Kelley, 

Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 76, art. 19, p. 15, pi. 3, figs. 10-12, 1929. 

Test much compressed, trochoid, biconvex, the dorsal side often 
nearly flat, periphery rounded, umbilicus often open; chambers nu- 
merous, 10 to 12 in the last-formed whorl, distinct; sutures distinct, 
on the dorsal side nearly flush with the surface, slightly limbate, 
curved, ventrally slightly curved, nearly radial, slightly depressed; 
wall smooth ; aperture on the ventral side between the periphery and 
the umbilicus, low. Diameter, 0.25-0.45 ; height, 0.1-0.2 mm. 

This is one of the common species of the Upper Cretaceous and is 
very widely distributed in Europe and America. It has had various 
names. 



ART. 14 FORAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JAEVIS 47 

GYROIDINA NITIDA (Reuss) 

Plate 14, Figures 2a-c 

Rotalina nltida Reuss, Geogu. Skizze Bohmen, vol. 2, pt. 1, p. 214, 1844; 
Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 35, pi. 8, fig. 52 ; pi. 12, figs. S, 20, 184.5--16. 
Qyroidina sparksi White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 297, pi. 40, fig. 8, 1928. 

Our specimens may be referred to this somewhat variable species 
of Reuss. The figures show the general characters, but there are in- 
termediate forms that tend toward the following species. 

GYROIDINA GLOBOSA (v. Hagenow) 

Plate 14, Figures 3, 4 

Nonionina glohosa v. Hagenow, Neues Jahrb. fur Min., 1842, p. 574. 

Rotalia gJobdsa Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44, pt. 1, p. 330, pi. 7, figs. 

2 a, &, 1861 (1862). 
Qyroidina naranjocnsis White, Jouin. Pal., vol. 2, p. 296, pi. 40, fig. 5, 1928. 

In its typical form this species has a very broadly rounded periph- 
ery, and the ventral side is deep. Intermediate forms seem to be 
present between this and the preceding species. The form is widely 
distributed in the Upper Cretaceous. 

Genus EPONIDES Montfort, 1808 

EPONIDES HAIDINGERII (d'Orbigny) 

Plate 14, Figures 5 a~o 

Rotalina haidingerii d'Orbigny, Foram. Foss. Bass. Tert. Vienne, p. 154, pi. 8, 
figs. 7-9, 1846. 

Test nearly circular in outline, in side view with a fairly high 
spire, dorsal side very convex, ventral side flattened or sometimes 
somewhat concave, periphery rounded; chambers in several whorls, 
about six or seven in the adult whorl, distinct, slightly inflated on 
the ventral side; sutures on the dorsal side slightly limbate, oblique, 
flush with the surface, on the ventral side slightly depressed, nearly 
radiate; wall smooth, distinctly perforate; aperture ventral between 
the umbilicus and the periphery, with a slight lip. Diameter, 0.5-0.8 ; 
height, 0.3-0.35 mm. 

The Trinidad specimens are very close to d'Orbigny's species from 
the Vienna Basin and seem to be identical with it. Similar specimens 
occur in the Upper Cretaceous of the Gulf Coastal Plain of the 
United States. 



48 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Family CASSIDULINIDAE 
Subfamily Ceratobulimininae 

Genus PULVINULINELLA Cushman, 1926 

PULVINULINELLA VELASCOENSIS (Cushman) 

PLATE! 14, Figures 6 o-c 

TruncatuUna velascoensis Cushman, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 1, 
pt. 1, p. 20, pi. 3, fig. 2, 1925; Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 606, 
pi. 21, fig. 8, 1926. 

Rotalia velascoensis White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 290, pi. 39, figs. 5 a-c, 1928. 

Test nearly bilaterally symmetrical' with a very thin, broad keel; 
chambers all visible from the dorsal side, only those in the last- 
formed coil from the ventral side, about 10 chambers in the last- 
formed coil, fewer in the earlier ones; chambers distinct, especially 
from the ventral side ; sutures on the dorsal side raised and confluent, 
on the ventral side slightly depressed, curved; wall smooth on the 
ventral side, the dorsal side with an excavated area over each cliam- 
ber ; aperture elongate, narrow, on the ventral side of the last-formed 
chamber nearly in the axis of coiling. Diameter, up to 1.2 ; height^ 
0.4 mm. 

This is a common sj^ecies in the Velasco formation of Mexico and 
occurs in typical form in the Cretaceous of Trinidad. The position 
of the aperture places this species in the genus Pulvinulinella. 

PULVINULINELLA ALATA (Marsscn) 
Plate 15, Figures 1, 2 

Discorbinn alata Marsson, Mitth. Nat. Ver. Neu-Vorpommeni Riigen, vol. 10, 

p. 165, pi. 4, figs. 33 a^d, 1878. 
PulvimcUna alata Franke, Abb. Preuss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 185, pi. 17, 

figs. 8 ff-c, 1928. 
Gyroidina fiorealis White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2. p. 298, pi. 40, figs. 3 a-c, 1928. 

Test plano-convex, the ventral side very strongly convex, dorsal 
side flattened or even slightly concave except in the center, which is 
slightly raised, periphery strongly keeled and developing a flat carina, 
which is often broken; chambers usually about six or seven in the 
last-formed Avhorl, distinct, inflated on the ventral side, but very 
slightly, if at all, on the dorsal side; sutures distinct, those of the ven- 
tral side sigmoidally curved and very slightly depressed, those of the 
dorsal side strongly oblique, distinctly limbate ; wall smooth, but dis- 
tinctly perforate; aperture ventral close to and parallel with the 
peripheral margin. Diameter, 0.9-1 ; height, 0.5 mm. 

This species was originally described by Marsson from the Upper 
Cretaceous of the Island of Riigen. It has also been recorded from 



.4RT. 14 FORAMINIFEFvA FEOM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JAEVIS 49 

the Cretaceous of Germany by Franke and is apparently the same as 
the species recorded by White from the Velasco shale of Mexico. 
The figured specimens from the Upper Cretaceous of Trinidad show 
•well the general characters of the species. 

Family CHILOSTOMELLIDAE 

Subfamily Allomorphininae 

Genus ALLOMORPHINA Reuss, 1850 

ALLOMORPHINA TROCHOmES (Reuss) 

Plate 15, Figures 3 a-c 

Olobigerina trochoides Reuss, Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 36, pi. 12, 
fig. 22, 1845-46; Haidinger's Naturv/. Abh., vol. 4, pt. 1, p. 37, pi. 3, 
tig. 5, 1851. 

YalviiUna trochoides Fkanke, Abh. Preiiss. Geol. Landes., vol. Ill, p. 162, 
pi. 15, figs. 2 a-c, 1928. 

Test triserial, consisting of a conical early portion and an inflated 
later portion made up of the last three chambers in the adult; cham- 
bers of the early portion rather indistinct, last three greatly inflated 
and subglobular; sutures of the last portion distinct and depressed, 
early ones obscure; wall smooth; aperture an elongate slit at the base 
of the last-formed chamber. Length, 0.35; diameter, 0.3-0.35 mm. 

This is a very peculiar little sj^ecies, but it has a very wide dis- 
tribution in the Upper Cretaceous of Europe and America. Reuss 
placed it as a Glodigerhm, but it evidently does not belong in that 
genus. Franke has placed it in ValvuUtm, but it seems to have a 
calcareous, perforate test. The triserial character of the test and 
the type of the aperture seem to show that this species should be 
placed as a primitive species of Allomoi'phina with a very high 
spire. 

Subfamily Allomorphinellinae 

Genus PULLENIA Parker and Jones, 1862 

PULLENIA QUINQUELOBA (Reuss) 

Plate 15, Figures 4 a, b 

Nonionlna guinqueloba Reuss, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., vol. 3, p. 71, pi. 5, 

fig. 31, 1851. 
Pullcnia quinqucloba H. B. Brady, Rep. Voy. CJMllenger, Zoology, vol. 9, p. 617, 

pi. 84, figs. 14, 15, 1884. — Cushman and Church, Proc. California Acad, 

Sci., ser. 4, vol. 18, p. 517, pi. 41, figs. 10, 11, 1929. 

Test planispiral in the adult, completely involute, compressed, pe- 
riphery rounded; chambers typically five in the last-formed coil, 
increasing gradually in size as added, only slightly inflated; sutures 



'to to' 

70827—32^—4 



50 PEOCEEDINQS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

distinct, very slightly depressed, radial ; wall smooth ; aperture at the 
base of the apertural face of the chamber, either an elongate slit or 
a somewhat constricted opening with a slight lip. Diameter, 0.35- 
0.45 ; thickness, 0.2-0.25 mm. 

This species has been recorded from Cretaceous to Recent, and 
there may be more than one species in the series, although there is 
some variation in all the series studied. The figured specimen shows 
well the common Cretaceous form, which is widely distributed in 
Europe and America. 

PULLENIA CORYELLI White 

Plate 15, Figuees 5 a, 6 

Pullenia sphaeroides Cushman (not d'Orbigny), Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., 

vol. 10, p. 605, pi. 21, figs. 2 a, h, 1926. 
Pullenia coryelU White, Journ. Pal., vol. 3, p. 56, pi. 5, fig. 22, 1929. 

Test subspherical, periphery very broadly rounded, slightly umbil- 
icate ; chambers distinct but not inflated, six or seven in the final coil ; 
sutures distinct, very slightly if at all depressed ; wall smooth ; aper- 
ture an elongate curved slit, at the base of the apertural face. Diam- 
eter, up to 0.5 mm. 

This seems to be a widely distributed form in the American Cre- 
taceous, it being recorded from the Velasco shale of Mexico and also 
occurring in Trinidad. 

Family GLOBIGERINIDAE 

Subfamily Globigerininae 

Genus GLOBIGERINELLA Cushman, 1927 

GLOBIGERINELLA sp. (?) 
Plate 15, Figupes 6 «, & 

Rare specimens of this genus occur in the Trinidad Cretaceous, but 
specimens are not in sufficient numbers and completeness to give full 
characters for specific determination. 

Family GLOBOROTALIIDAE 
Genus GLOBOTRUNCANA Cushman, 1927 

GLOBOTRUNCANA ARCA (Cushman) 

Plate 15, Figures 7 a-o 

PulvinuUna area Cushman, Contr. Cushman Lab. Foram. Res., vol. 2, p. 23, 
pi. 3, figs. 1 a-c, 1926. 

Olobotruncana area Cushman, Contr. Cushman Lnb. Foi-am. Res., vol. 3, p. 91, 
pi. 19, fig. 11, 1927; Journ. Pal., vol. 1, p. 169, pi. 28, fig. 28, 1927.— Moreman, 
Journ. Pal., vol. 1, p. 100, pi. 16, figs. 16, 17, 1927.— Cushman and Church, 
Proc. Calif oraia Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 8, p. 518, pi. 41, figs. 1-3, 1929. 

Gloligerirw rosetta Carsey, Univ. Texas Bull. 2612, p. 44, pi. 5, figs. 3 c-c, 192a 



ART. 14 FOBAMINIPERA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 51 

This is one of the common species of the Upper Cretaceous of 
Mexico, Trinidad, and the Gulf Coastal Plain of the United States. 

GLOBOROTALIA VELASCOENSIS (Cushman) 

Plate 15, Figures 8 a-c 

PulvinuUna velascoensis Cushman, Contr. Cushman Lab. Forani. Res., vol. 1. 

pt. 1, p. 19, pi. 3, figs. 5 c-c, 1925. 
Glotorotalia velascoensis Cushman, Jourc. Pal., vol. 1, pt. 2, p. 169, pi. 27, figs. 

7-9, 1927.— White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 281, pi. 38, figs. 2 a-o, 1928. 

This is a somewhat variable species with a fairly long range in the 
Velasco shale of Mexico. There is a considerable variation in the de- 
gree of the projection about the umbilical region of the ventral side 
and the convexity of the dorsal surface and the amount of projec- 
tion of the periphery. The figured specimen is from the Cretaceous 
of Lizard Springs. 

Family ANOMALINIDAE 

Subfamily Anomalininae 

Genus ANOMALINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

ANOMALINA AMMONOmES (Rcnss) 

Plate 16, Figxjres 1 a-c 

Rosalina amnionoides Reuss, Geogn. Skizze Bohmen, vol. 2, pt. 1, p. 214, 1844 ; 
Verstein. Bohm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 36, pi. 8, fig. 53, pi. 13, fig. 66, 1845-46; 
Haidinger's Naturw. Abh., vol. 4, pt. 1, p. 36, pi. 3, fig. 2, 1851. 

The early references to this species are given above. Originally 
described from the Cretaceous of Europe, it has been used by many 
authors to include a wide variety of forms from Cretaceous to Recent, 
many of which have little in common with the types. The accom- 
panying figures illustrate a Trinidad species, which seems very close 
to Reuss's species and to which we are applying his name. 

ANOMALINA POLYRRAPHES (Reuss) 

PLATE 16, Figures 2 a-c 

Rotalina polyrraphes Reuss, Verstein. Bobm. Kreide, pt. 1, p. 35, pi. 12, fig. 18, 

1845-46 ; Haidinger's Naturw. Abb., vol. 4, pt. 1, p. 35, pi. 3, fig. 1, 1851. 
Cibicides risseri White, Journ. Pal., vol. 2, p. 298, pi. 40, figs. 10 a-c, 1928. 

The figures represent a species from Trinidad that also occurs in 
the Velasco shale of Mexico and in the Gulf Coastal Plain region of 
the United States. It seems to be identical with the species described 
by Reuss from the Cretaceous of Europe. There is a slight tendency 
toward becoming evolute, but this is apparently never carried to the 
point where the species can be placed in the genus Planulina. Our 



52 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

figured specimen is slightly irregular in the last three chambers, but 
usually these are very uniform in size and shape, the periphery 
broadly rounded and the sutures distinct and somewhat limbate. 

ANOMALINA RUBIGINOSA Cushman 

Plate 10, Figxjres 3-5 

Anomalina ruhiginosa Cushman, Bull. Amer. Assoc. Petr. Geol., vol. 10, p. 607, 

pi, 21, figs. 6 a-c, 1926. 
PlanuUna rubk/inosa White, Journ. Pal., vol 2, p. 303, pi. 41, figs. 6 o-c, 1928. 

Test close coiled, the dorsal side slightly convex, ventral side some- 
what concave, periphery broadly rounded, 9 or 10 chambers in the 
last-formed coil, rather indistinct, as are also the sutures, more dis- 
tinct in the last few chambers, dorsal side with the wall very coarsely 
punctate, ventral side, especially in the earlier portion, with very 
large depressed areas of an irregular form, giving a peculiar ap- 
pearance to that portion of the test ; aperture along the ventral margin 
of the last-formed chamber. Diameter, 0.5-0.8; height, 0.3-0.4 mm. 

This is a common and well-marked species in the Velasco shale of 
Mexico and occurs in typical form in the Trinidad material. Some 
of the young stages are also shown here. So far as our material 
from both areas shows the species does not become sufficiently evolute 
to warrant placing it in the genus Planulina. 

Genus PLANULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

PLANULINA CONSTRICTA (v. Hagenow) 

Plate 16, Figures 6 a~c 

Rotalia constricfa v. Hagenow, Neues Jalirb. fiir Min., 1842, p. 571. — Reuss 
Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44, pt. 1, p. 329, pi. 6, fig. 7, 1861 (1862). 

The accompanying figures are of a specimen typical of a Trinidad 
species that seems identical with that of von Hagenow as figured by 
Reuss. It is much compressed, has numerous chambers, and in the 
adult becomes somewhat evolute on both sides. The dorsal side has 
a thickened umbonal region with a thickened ring about it outside a 
deep groove. 

Similar forms occur widely distributed in the American Cretaceous. 
It rather remotely resembles Planulina faylorensis (Carsey), but that 
is a more evolute form and keeled, with numerous differences. 

PLANULINA SCHLOENBACHI (Reuss) 

Plate 16, Figures 7 a^c 

Rotalia schloen-bachi Reuss, Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 46, pt. 1, p. 84, pi. 10, 
figs. 5 a-c, 1862 (1863). 

Test much compressed, evolute, periphery subacute, both sides some- 
what umbonate; chambers distinct, numerous, of uniform shape, 



ART. 14 FOEAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AKD JARVIS 53 

gradually increasing in size as added ; sutures distinct, curved, limbate, 
and raised; wall of the chambers smooth, coarsely perforate, umbo 
very coarsely pitted ; aperture peripheral and extending over onto the 
dorsal side. Length, 0.8 ; breadth, 0.7 ; thickness, 0.3 mm. 

This species with its strongly raised sutures and coarsely pitted 
umbos seems to be identical with that described by Keuss from the 
Cretaceous of Europe in the reference given above. It is a very 
distinctive form. 

PLANULINA sp. (?) 

Plate 16, Figubes 8 Or-o 

The specimen figured seems to have characters in common with that 
described by Reuss ^^ from Europe as " Rotalia involida^'' and witli 
" Rotalia mortoni " ^* from the Cretaceous of New Jersey, but more 
material is needed for determining the full characters of this form. 

" Sitz. Akad. Wiss. Wien, vol. 44, pt. 1, p. 313, pi. 2, figs. 4 a, I, 1861 (1862). 
" Idem, p, 337, pi. 8, figs. 1 a^c. 



EXPLANATION OF PLATES 

Plate 1 

Figures 1, 2. Rhabdammina discreta H. B. Brady, X 40. 
3. Saccammitia rhumhleri (Fianke) (?), X 40. 
4-6. Pelosina compJanata Franke, X 35. Figures 4 and 6, composed 
largely of cement and with smooth surface. Figure 5, specimen 
with a roughened surface of angular fragments. 
7, 8. nijperammina elongata H. B. Brady, X 40. 
9. Hypcrammina (?) sp. (?), X 35. 
10-12. Saccorhiza ramosa (H. B. Brady), X 35. Broken fragments show- 
ing characteri-stic curvature of the test and roughened surface. 

13. Reophax sp. (?), X 40. 

14. Hormosina globtiUfcra H. B. Brady, X 35. 

15-17. Nodellum velascoensis (Cushman), X 40. Figures 15, 16, much 
distorted. Figure 17, more normal form. Figures 15, 17. megalo- 
spheric. Figure 16, microspheric. 

Platej 2 

Figure 1. Ammodiscus glabratus Cushman and Jarvis, X 35. 

2, 3. Ammodisotis pennyi Cushman and Jarvi-s, X 35. Figure 2, side view 
of megalospheric form. Figure 3, vertical section of another speci- 
men. 
4, 5. Ammodiscoides turbinatus Cushman, X 30. Figure 4, adult specimen 
from dorsal side. Figures 5 a, &, young specimen : a, Dorsal side ; 
6, ventral side, showing the conical stage in the young. 
6,7. Glomospira gordialis (Jones and Parker), X 40. 
8-10. Olomospira charoides (Jones and Parker) var. corona Cushman and 
Jarvis, X 60. 
11 fl, 6. Lituotuha Utuiformis (H. B, Brady), X 35. a, 6, opposite sides. 

12. Ammolagetia clavata (Jones and Parker), X 30. Megalospheric speci- 
men attached to Ammodiscus pennyi. 
13-15. Eaplopliragmoides coronata (H.B.Brady), X 30. Specimens more or 
less distorted, showing the peculiar forms assumed by this species. 

Plate 3 

Figure 1. Eaplopliragmoides excavata Cushman and Waters, X 80. 

2a, 6. Eaplopliragmoides eggeri Cushman, x 30. a, Side view; h, periph- 
eral view. 
3. Cribrostomoides trinitatensis Cushman and Jarvis, X60. Apertural 
view of holotype specimen. 
4,5. AmmobacuUtes coprolithiforme (Schwager), X 40. Side views of 

specimens showing different stages in development. 
6 a, h. Cyclammiim elegans, news species, X 25. a. Side view; b, peripheral 

view. 
7a, 6. Spiroplectammina dentata (Alth), X 30. a. Front view; b, apertural 
view. 

55 



56 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80> 

Figures 8, a, &. Spiroplectmtimina anceps (Reuss) var., X 40. a. Front view; b. 
apertural view. 
9,10. Spiroplectamminu excolata (Cushman). Figure 9, X 60; front view 
of partially developed specimen. Figure 10, X 40; very highly 
developed specimen, a, Front view ; 6, apertural view. 

Plate 4 

Figures 1,2. Textularia concmna Reuss. Figure 1, X 40. Figures 2 a, J>, 
X 30. a. Front view; &, apertural view. 
3a, 6. Verneuilma polystropha (Reuss), X 60. a, Front view; &, aper- 
tural view. 
4 a, 6. Tritaxia pyramidata Reuss, X 25. a, Front view ; ft, apertural 
view. 
5. Gaudryina filiformis Bertlielin, X 80. 
6 a, 6. Gaudryina rugosa d'Orbigny, X 30. a, Front view ; 6, apertural 

view. 
7-10. Gmulru'ma retusa Cushman, X 40. Figure 8 a, Front view; &, 
apertural view. Figure 10, early Verneuiline stage. 
11. Gaudryina indentata Cushman and Jarvis, X 35. Holotype. 

Plate 5 

Figures 1, 2. Gaudryina- oxycona Reuss. Figure 1, X 40. Figure 2, X 35. 
a, a. Front views ; ft, &, apertural views. 

3. Gaudryina laevigata Franke var. pyramidata Cushman, X 35. 

4. Clavulina uspera Cushman, X 30. 

5. Clavulina trilatera Cushman, X 30. 

G-8. Clavulina aspera Cushman, whitei, new variety, X 30. Figure 6, 
holotype ; a, side view ; &, apertural view. Figures 7, 8, micro- 
spheric specimens with angular later portions ; a, a, side views ; 
6, &, apertural views. 
9-11. Clavulina chitinosa, new species, X 40. Figure 9, holotype. All 
specimens somewhat distorted by pressure. 

Plate 6 

Figures 1 a, h. Rzehakina epigona (Rzehak) var. lata Cushman and Jarvis, 
X 30. a, Side view ; h, apertural view. 
2-5. Trochammina glohigerlniformis (Parker and Jones), X 30. 
Figure 2 a, dorsal view ; V, side view. Figure 3, side view. 
Figure 4, ventral view of a much distorted and compressed 
specimen. Figure 5, dorsal view. 

6 Or-c. Trochaimnina trinitatensis Cushman and Jarvis, X 40. 

0, Dorsal view ; h, ventral view ; e, peripheral view. 

7 a, b. Robulus williamsoni (Reuss), X 40. a, Side view; 6, apertural 

view, 
8, 9. Rohulus oligostegia (Ruess), X 40. Figure 9 a, side view; 
6, apertural view. 
10 a, 6. Roinlus trinitatensis, new species, X 55. a, Side view ; 

b, apertural view. • 
11 0, b. Robulus stemalis (Berthelin), X 40. a, Side view; b, aper- 
tural view. 



AUT. 14 FOEAMIXIFERA FROM TRINIDAD CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 57 

Plate 7 

FiGur.ES 1, 2. Eodiiliis sulalatus (Reiiss), X 35. Figure 2 a, side view; b, 
apertural view. 

3 a, &. Robulus macrodisGus (Reuss), X 40. a, Side view; h, apertural 

view. 

4 a, h. Rohidus discrepans (Reuss), X 40. a, Side view; 6, apertural 

view. 

5 a, b. Lenticulinu navicula (d'Orbigny), X 40. a, Side view; h, aper- 

tural view. 

6 a, b. LenticuUna nuda (Reuss), X 60. a, Side view ; b, apertural view. 

7 a, b. Atawginnllnu grata (Reuss), X 60. a, Side view; b, peripheral 

view. 

Plate 8 

Figures 1, 2. PJanularia advena, new species, X 15. Figure 1, holotype; a, 
side view ; b, apertural view. 

3 a, b. MarginuJlna grata (Reuss), X 40. a, Side view; b, peripheral 

view. 

4 a, b. Marginulina tnultiseptata (Reuss), X 40. a, Side view; 6, pe- 

ripheral view. 

5 a. b. Margiiinlina achloenbacM (Reuss), X 40. c, Side view; 6, pe- 

ripheral view. 

6 a, b. Marginulina modesta Reuss, X 25. a, Side view; h, peripheral 

view. 
7, 8. MarginuJina bullata Reuss. Figure 7, X 40. Figure 8, X 60. 
Figure 7 a, side view; b, apertural view. 
9. MarginuJina humilis (Reuss), X 30. 

Plate 9 

FiGUKEs 1 (/, b. Marginulina jonesi Reuss, X 40. a, Side view; b, peripheral 
view. 
2 a, b. Marginulina decorata (Reuss), X 25. a, Side view; b, periph- 
eral view. 
3. 4. MnrginuUna trilobata d'Orbigny. Figure 3, X 25. Figure 4, 
X 20. Figure 3 a, side view ; b, peripheral view. Figure 4 a, 
side view ; b, peripheral view. 
5. Dentalina megapolitana Reuss, X 20. 
6, 7. Dentalina filiformis Reuss (?), X 20. Figure 6, later chambers. 

Figure 7, earlier chambers including the proloculum. 
8 a, b. Dentalina catenula Reuss, X 60. a, Side view; b, apertural 
view. 
9. Dentalina legumen (Reuss), X 40. 
10-12. Dentalina conflucns Reu.ss, X 20. 
13. Dentalina sp.(?), X 20. 

Plate 10 

I-^iGURE 1. Dentalina annulata (Reuss), X 60. 

2. Dentalina lorneiana d'Orbigny, X 30. 

3. Dentalina sp.(?), X 25. 

4. Nodosaria coneinna Reuss, X 40. 



58 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Figure 5. Nodosaria Um'oata d'Orbigny, X 60. 

6 a, b. Nodosaria limbata cVOrbiguy tumidata, new variety, X 20. a, Side 

view; b, apertural view. 
7, 8. Nodosaria limbata d'Orbigny basiomata, new variety, X 20. Figure 
8, holotype. 
9. Nodosaria monile v. Hagenow, X 20. 

10. Nodosaria orthopleura Reuss, X 20. 

11. Nodosaria brevitesta Franke, X 60. 

12. Nodosaria cf. marcki Reuss, X 60. 

13. Nodosaria afflnis Reuss, X 20. 

14, 15. Nodosaria paupercula Reuss, X 20. 

Plate 11 

Figures 1-4. Nodosaria velascoensis Cusliman. Figures 1, 2, X 60. Figures 3, 
4, X 30. Figures 1, 2, portions possibly of the same specimen. 

5. Nodosaria aspera Reuss, x 30. 

6. Nodosaria sp. (?), X 20. 

7,8. Pseudoglandulina cylindracea (Reuss). Figure 7, X 30. Figure 
8, X 20. 
9. Pseudoglandulina paraUcla (Marsson), X 40. 
10-12. Pseudoglandulina bistegia (Olszewski) (?). Figures 10, 11, X 25. 
Figure 12, X 40. Figure 10 a, side view; b, apertural view. 
Figures 10 and 11 are of a peculiar form in which the prolocu- 
lum is peculiarly rugose. 

13. Pseudoglandulina sp. (?), X 40. 

14. Flabellina semireticulata Cushman and Jarvis, X 50. 

15. Flabellina reticulata Reuss, X 50. 

Plate 12 

Figure 1. Flabellina interpunctata von der Marck, X 40. 

2. Flabellina elliptica (Nilsson), X 15. 

3. Frondicularia elong at a White (?), X 40. 

4. Frondicularia cordai Reuss, X 30. Apertural half of a broken speci- 

men. 

5. Frondicularia gracilis Franke (?), X 20. Apertural half of a broken 

specimen, 

6. Lagena orbignyana (Seguenza), X 40. 

7 a, b. Lagena orbignyana (Seguenza) var., X 40. a, Side view; b, aper- 

tural view. 

8 a, b. Guttulina adhaerens (Olszewski), X 40. a, Side view, 6, apertural 

view. 

9 a, b. Pseudopolymorphina ozawana, new species, X 20. a, Front view; 

6, apertural view. 
10, 11. Ramulina sp. (?), X 30 

12 o, b. Nonion cretaceum, new species, X 40. c. Side view ; 6, peripheral 

view. 

13 a, b. Operculina catenula, new species, X 25. o, Side view ; 6, peripheral 

view. 



ART. 14 FOEAMINIPERA FROM TRINIDAD — CUSHMAN AND JARVIS 59 

Plate 13 

FiGUKEsla, &. Giimhelina sp. (?), X 40. a. Front view; b, side view. 

2. DoUvinoides decor at a (Jones) var. deUcatula Cusliman, X 75, 

3 a, b. Bolimnoides trinitatensis Cusliman and Jarvis, X 75. a, Front 

view; b, apertural view. 

4 a, h. Bulimina trinitatensis Cushman and Jarvis, X 75. a, Front view ; 

b, apertural view. 

5,6. Spiroplectoides clotho (Grzybowski), X 75. Figure 5, micro- 
spheric form. Figure 6, megalospheric form. 
7. Loxostomum plaitiim (Carsey), X 55. 
8a, 6v Pleurostomella clavuta Cusliman, X 40. a. Front view; &, aper- 
tural view. 
9, 10. ElUpsopleurostomclla cnrta Cushman, X 40. Figure 10 a, side 
view ; b, apertural view. 
11-13. EUipsoHOdosaria subnodosa (Guppy). Figure 11, X 20. Figures 
12, 13, X 40. Figures 11, 13, microspheric forms. Figure 12, 
megalospheric form. 
14r-16. ElHpsoylanduUna exponens (H. B. Brady), X 50. a, a, Side 

views; b, b, apertural views. 
17 a-c. Valvulineria allomorphinoides (Reuss), X 40. a, Dorsal view; &, 
ventral view; c, peripheral view. 

Plate 14 

FiGUBEsl a-c. Gyroidina depressa (Alth), X 55. a. Dorsal view; &, ventral 
view ; c, peripheral view. 
2 a-c. Gyroidina nitida (Reuss) , X 40. a, Dorsal view ; &, ventral view ; 

c, peripheral view. 

3,4. Gyroidina globosa (v. Hagenow). Figure 3, X 55. Figure 4, 
X 40, a, a, Dorsal views ; b, b, ventral views ; c, c, periplieral 
views. ^ 

5 a-c. Eponides haidingerii (d'Orbigny), X 40. a, Doi-sal view; &, ven- 

tral view; o, peripheral view. 
6 0-0. Pulv'inulinella velascocnsis (Cushman), X 40, a, Dorsal view; 
b, ventral view ; c, peripheral view. 

Plate 15 

Figures 1, 2. PulvinuUnella alata (Marsson), X 40. Figure 1 a, dorsal view; 
b, ventral view ; c, peripheral view. 

3 c-c. Allomorphina trochoid cs (Reuss), X 75. o, Dorsal view; b, ven- 

tral view ; o, peripheral view. 

4 a, &. PuUenia quinqueloba (Reuss), X 40. o. Side view; b, apertural 

view, 

5 a, b. PuUenia coryelU White, X 40. a. Side view; b, apertural view. 

6 a, &, Globigerinella sp. (?), X 55. o. Side view; b, apertural view. 

7 Or-c. Globotruncana area (Cushman), X 40. c. Dorsal view; b, ventral 

view ; c, peripheral view. 

8 Or-e. Globorotalia velascocnsis (Cushman), X 70. a, Dorsal view; 

b, ventral view; c, peripheral view. 



QQ PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 : art. 14 

Plate 16 

Figures 1 Or-c. AnoniaUna ammonoides (Reuss), X 40. a, Dorsal view; b, ven- 
tral view ; c, peripheral view. 
2 a-c. Anomalina polyrraphes (Reuss), X 40. a, Dorsal view; b, ven- 
tral view ; c, peripheral view. 
3-5. Anomalina ruhiginosa Oushman, X 40. Figures 3, 4, young 
stages showiug variation. Figure 5, adult, a, a, a. Dor-sal 
views; 6, b, &, ventral views; c, c, c, peripheral views. 

6 a-c. Planulina constricta (v. Hagenow), X 40. a, Dorsal view; 

J), ventral view ; c, peripheral view. 

7 a-c. PlaimUna schloenhachi (Reuss), X 40. a, Dorsal view; b, ven- 

tral view ; c, peripheral view. 

8 a-c. Planulina sp. (?), X 40. a, Dorsal view; b, ventral view; 

c, peripheral view. 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTINS OFFICE: I9J2 



U. S NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80, ART 14 PL 1 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

For FXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 55, 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80, ART. 14 PL. 2 




CRETACEOUS FORAMINIFERA FROM TRINIDAD 
For explanation of plate see page 55 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL 80. ART. 14 PL. 3 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 
For explanation of plate see pages 55. 56 



U. S. NATIONAL. MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80. ART 14 PL 4 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

FCR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 56. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80. ART 14 PL. 5 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 56. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80, ART 14 PL. 6 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

FOR FVPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 5f5. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS VOL. 80. ART 14 PL. 7 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

For explanation of plate see page 57 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 14 PL. 8 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 57 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL.. 80. ART. 14 PL. 9 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

FOR EXPLAN/>TION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 57 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 14 PL. 10 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

For explanation of plate see pages 57. 58. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80, ART. 14 PL. 11 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 58 



U. S. NATIONAL- MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART 14 PL. 12 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

For explanation of plate see page 58 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80. ART 14 PL. 13 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 59, 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 14 Pl_. 14 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

For explanation of plate see page 59. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 14 PL. 15 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

For explanation of plate see page 59. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80. ART. 14 PL 16 




Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

For explanation of plate see page 60. 



THE COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY 



By Charles Branch Wilson 
Department of Science, State Normal School, Westfield, Mass. 



INTRODUCTION 

SOUECH OF MATEBIAL 

In 1915-16 and 1920-21 the United States Bureau of Fisheries 
conducted a biological and hydrographic survey of Chesapeake Bay. 
During the latter period the survey was under the immediate direc- 
tion of Dr. K. P. Cowles, of Johns Hopkins University, and the 
copepods then collected by him were separated from the rest of 
the plankton and turned over to the author for identification and 
study.^ 

The material included about one thousand two hundred 2-ounce 
bottles, with some of larger capacity up to 16 ounces. In sorting 
and identifying this large quantity of material the author was very 
ably assisted during the summer of 1923 by his son, John E. Wilson, 
who separated and counted the species in the various hauls and 
computed most of the percentages in the accompanying lists. The 
author identified the species and is entirely responsible for the text of 
the report. 

COMPABISON WITH OTHEB STUDIES 

Among the numerous plankton studies that have appeared in 
recent years, especially those more immediately concerned with the 
free-swimming copepods, there are practically none whose subject 
material was derived from a source like Chesapeake Bay. The cope- 
pod fauna of many bays and gulfs has been studied, at times with 
considerable intensity, as in the case of the Gulf of Naples, Liver- 
pool Bay, and the Bay of St. Andrews in Europe, and the Gulf of 
Maine and Narragansett Bay on the North American coast. Such 
gulfs and bays, however, are little more than partially restricted 
bodies of salt water, and not enough fresh water enters them to exert 
an appreciable influence. 

^ The results of the study as a whole have been published by the Bureau of Fisheries 
as follows : Cowles, R. P., A Fiological Study of the Offshore Waters of Chesapeake Bay, 
Bull. Bur. Fisheries 46 (Fisheries Doc. 1091), pp. 277-381, 16 flgs., 1930. 

No. 2916.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum. Vol. 80, Art. 15. 

79858—32 1 1 



2 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 8a 

Excellent work has been done by Thomas Scott upon the Firth of 
Forth and by Giesbrecht on the Kieler Foehrde. But even these^ 
while subject to vigorous tidal fluctuations, do not receive a suf- 
ficient influx of fresh water to modify sensibly their salinity and 
temperature. The rivers entering them are few and comparatively 
small, and the volume of water that they contribute is absorbed and 
neutralized almost immediately. 

PKCULIAE CONDITIONS OF CHESAPEIAKE BAY 

Chesapeake Bay differs from all that have been mentioned and 
from most other bays in the world in several particulars, which 
become of vital importance when considering its plankton. 

Size. — Chesapeake Bay extends almost exactly north and south 
and in length covers 2%° of latitude, or approximately 200 miles. 
Its width varies from a few miles near the upper end to 30 miles or 
more near the mouth of the Potomac River. 

Depth. — Chesapeake Bay, according to geologists, is a submerged 
river mouth; that is, all the rivers of eastern Virginia and inner 
Maryland formerly united in a common trunk river which flowed 
across the present coastal plain and a part of what is now the conti- 
nental shelf. During the subsequent depression of the Atlantic coast 
the lower valleys of this river system were submerged to form Chesa- 
peake Bay. Hence it is comparatively shallow over the greater por- 
tion of its area, from 10 to 20 meters deep. At only four localities 
did the depth exceed 30 meters, and at only four others did it fall 
below 10 meters. Notwithstanding its great size, therefore, it be- 
comes quite susceptible to the influx of fresh water by reason of its 
shallowness. 

Tributaries. — Six large rivers flow into the bay, one at the extreme 
upper end, the others along the western shore. These include three 
of the longest rivers east of the Alleghenies — the Susquehanna, the 
Potomac, and the James. The other three, the Patuxent, the Rap- 
pahannock, and the York, are shorter. Among the small rivers may 
be mentioned the Patapsco and the Gunpowder, entering the bay 
from the west, and the Elk, the Chester, the Choptank, the Nanti- 
coke, the Wicomico, and the Pocomoke from the east. In addition 
to these are a multitude of tiny rivers, streams, creeks, and runs, all 
of which contribute to increase the quantity of fresh water poured 
into the bay. The combined result is a volume amply sufficient to 
modify materially the water of the bay, and to transform it into 
an ever-changing mixture of salt and fresh water. 

Salinity. — Since fresh water is lighter than salt water, it has a 
tendency to remain near the surface, while the heavier salt water stays 
near the bottom. There are thus produced remarkable differences in 



RT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY — WILSON 



2 




7£*iO 7E* T/iO 

Figure 1. — Chesapeake Bay biological and hj'- 
(Irographic stations, 1915-16 and 1920-21. 
Map from Fisheries Document 1091, repro- 
duced by courtesy of the Bureau of Fisheries.. 



1: PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

salinity between the surface and the bottom, even where the water 
IS very shallow. In water from 15 to 20 meters deep it is not at 
all unusual to find the salinity at the bottom from two to two and a 
half times as great as at the surface. At Station U (fig. 1), oppo- 
site the mouth of the Patapsco River, where the water is only 11 
meters deep, the salinity at the bottom is occasionally four times that 
at the surface. 

Temperature. — In temperature just the reverse is true: There is 
m equalization instead of a differentiation. On August 21, 1920, 
the difference in temperature between the surface water and the 
bottom water of the outside ocean at a depth of 20 fathoms was 
more than 16° C. At the deepest station (G) in the mouth of the 
bay on the following day the difference was 11.5°, but at Station B, 
20 miles up the bay, it was only 2^^°. At practically every station 
tn the bay except the three at the very mouth the difference between 
fche surface and bottom temperatures was less than 2° and often 
less than 1°. Even at Station R, where the water was 47.5 meters 
deep, considerably more than 20 fathoms, there was a difference of 
Jess than 1^°. But at the same time large areas of very shallow 
water along shore may be heated during summer to a comparatively 
high temperature compared with the deeper water. 

Also, during spring the quantity of fresh water poured into the 
bay is greatly increased, while during the late summer and early 
fall it is considerably diminished. Hence the resultant combinations 
vary greatly with the seasons. The changes produced by all this 
intermingling of tide and seasons, temperature and salinity are 
iimch the same as those in the old-fashioned kaleidoscope. Each 
(!ombination is different from all the others, and there are never 
any exact repetitions. 

NErrS EMPLOYKD 

In collecting the material four kinds of nets were used, called, 
respectively, " stramin net " and Nos. 6, 18, and 20. The stramin net 
liad the coarsest and No. 20 the finest mesh. Each net was usuallv 
rowed for 10 minutes and then emptied. Sometimes two or three 
nets of different mesh were towed successively at the same station 
with contrasting results. The vertical net was a large tow net of 
medium mesh, lowered to the bottom and then immediately drawn 
to the surface. Its contents, of course, included material from every 
stratum of depth, with no possibility of determining the level from 
<vhich any given specimen was obtained. The bottom net was one 
of medium mesh, fastened to a beam trawl frame and towed along 
f^he bottom for 10 minutes. Most of its contents would be bottom 
material, but as the net was nonclosing copepods could get into 
it while it was being lowered and raised. 



AHT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY — WILSON h 

DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES 

The distribution of the copepods in the bay may be considered 
with reference to their geographical location, the depth and salinity 
of the water, the time of day, the state of the tide and the kind o1 
bottom, and the time of year when they are present in greatest abun- 
dance. It will be found convenient to discuss these different points 
of view under separate headings. 

GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION 

Species universally distributed. — The following 10 species (set; 
Table 1) may be designated as universally distributed in the bay 
Acartia clausii, A. longiremis, Centropages hamatus, C. typicub, 
Harpacticus gracilis^ Oithona hrevicomis, O. siinilis^ Paraccdanui- 
parvUrS, Psevdocalanus elongatus^ and Pseudodiaptomus coronatus. 

The two species of Acartia were prasent in practically every haul, 
and numerically constituted nearly two-thirds of the entire collec- 
tion. The two species of Centropages were absent from compar^- 
tiveiy few hauls, chiefly at the inner end of the bay. The Harpacticuf'. 
species was found in every part of the bay and at 23 of the 31 sta- 
tions, but only in limited numbers. Oithona hrevicornis was nearly 
as universal as the Acartia, occurring at every station except U, but 
nearly always in much smaller numbers; 0. similis was present at alJ 
the stations except four, but in even smaller numbers than brevicomiti 
The three remaining species were found at most of the stations, but 
seldom did they constitute more than 1 or 2 per cent of the total 
Microthalestris littoralis was also widely distributed throughout tht 
bay but in such small numbers and at so few (13) of the station? 
that it can hardly be classed as universal. 

Inner-hay species. — Table 1 also shows 10 species that may bt 
designated as belonging to the inner portion of the bay. The divi- 
sion between the inner and outer portions falls naturally at the Mary- 
land-Virginia State line at the mouth of the Potomac River. Thesf^ 
species are Canuella elongata, new species, Gletodes longicaudatun, 
Dactylopusia hrevicornis, Ectinosoma normani, Eurytemora ani-erf,' 
cana, E. hirundoides, Harpacticus littoralis, Metacy clops graeili\, 
Rohertsonia chesapeakensis, new species, and Tachidius littoralis. 

The new species of Canuella was obtained at Stations W and Z 
near the extreme inner end of the bay. The Cletodes species was con- 
fined to Station R, off Barren Island, just above the mouth of the 
Patuxent River. Dactylopusia and Ectinosoma also occurred at sin- 
gle stations, the former at N' and the latter at Y. The two speciej-; 
of Eurytemora were found very sparingly in the outer bay, but quitt 
abunJantly in the inner bay. Harpacticus littoralis was confined U 
Stations R', S, and T. Metojcy clops gracilis appeared in a single hau i 



6 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



Si 

fa, 
e 

OS 



00 

fs, 

o 
s 



IS 

o 
o 

as 

e 

6Q 



1^ 



Station 


N 


H 


p: 


















> 






> 


























> 






> > 


i» 


H^ 






















^: 
























^^ 




> 


^ 1 «« 




















^^ 
























^ 






CO 


^ 


w w 
















w 


CO 


























^ 




> > 


> 


H W 




















> 


























^ 




^> 


P 1 fc) CO 




















; 


























; 




; ] 


H 1 WW 




















>^ 
























> 




^^ 


CO 














> 




> > 

is- 
























CO 




^ i 


« 


W W 




















>^ 
























CO 




^^ 


tf 


W « 




















> ^<^ 
































Of 


H W 




















^<! 
























^ 






^ 


Pm 1 W W 






M 












^^ 
























t 






> 


o 


W W 




















^^ 
























> 






\ 


^^ 1 «w 




















fs^ 




















^ 


^ 






^ 


^5 1 W W 




















^ts 
































> 


S 


W « 




















i* i 
































^ 


^ 


W W 




















CQ^ 


































iJ 


03 CC 

> > 




















> > 


































M 


W W 




















































^ 


>-» 


P^ K 








^ 










I 


































M 


W W 








^ 










CO 
























EQ 








M 


W W 








^ 










^^ 


































W 


W W 








^ 










^^ 
































^ 




w w ^ 


















^^ 
























'^ 








o 


w w 








M 


< 






^^ 
















^ 






^ 




^^Ei 


f=. 


w « ^ 






^ 










CO 














<; 






^ 










w 


« w 








^ 










M CO 














^ 














^ CO 


fi 


w w 




















^^ 














1 


















D 


w w 












< 






°2 s 




<i 








<i 


















n 








^ 










^^ 














<j 








CQ 








<{ 


W H 








^ 










^^ 


















^ 




^ 








t 


3 

j 
1 
1 

3 


9« 

'5 

a 

c 
■< 


cr 

e 

a. 

1- 

'E 
c 


0. 


0« 

y 

C 

1 

<s 

u a 
c 

o 


1-1 

0! 
t 
"a 

E 
o 

« 


a, 
u 

X 

a 

o 

n 


er 

1 

: 
c 
a 


1 

g 
1 

"S 

J3 

M 

3 

C 

n 
■* 


CO 

d 

c 

) V 

3 

"3 
U 


> 03 

*^ 

a 

03 
1 

r 

03 


OS 

(S 

a 
c 
» 

"3 

3 

g 


> 

bi 

§ 
o 

is 
a 
a> 
U 


V 

Z 
■ o 

o 

O 


OT 

o 

"5 

§ 

2 

a 

a) 

O 


to 

V 

«. 

'E 

en 

S 
» 

5 


O 
u 

a 
E 
S 

> 

5 


g 

a 
» 

w 

3 

u 

>■ 

o 
O 


C 

= 
3 

o 


3 
« 

3 

2 

O 

o 


04 

en 

CC 

u 

CO 

2 

o 

O 


M 

r- 

.9 

C 

s 

§ 

» > 

o 
O 


w 

3 
■♦-J 

CC 

3 

p 
o 

o 


ea 
0! 

c 

g 

a 

1 

. > 

u 

o 

O 


v: 

*c 

6: 

£ 
C 

s 

c 

1 

o 


.2 

'c 

"5 


CO 

c 

k- 
c 
c 

c 
cr 

* c: 
tr 

c 

p 


a 
§ 

u 

03 

s 

O 

V] 

O 

c 
c 


c 

o; 

E 

c 
C 
o: 
E 

? 

c 
c 

tl 


03 

c 

'S 

> 

13 

0! 

♦J 

J3 
u 

3 


CO 

u 

£ 

03 

03 
O 

a 
> 

= 


1 
o 

•a 

a 

3 
03 
i 

s 



AKT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 



^< 



^^ 



^^ 



<J cc 



1 " 





n 


s 


t) 






'*-> 


*^ 


u 


o 


<a 


f, 


a 


a 


>M 


i^ 


d 


a 


WW 



en 

- a 
S S > 

So 

CO 00 

o f 



^ .2 



> > 



^ 



> > 



>. tn 



^> 



> 03 
> 



^^ 



^ 



CO 



>^ 






^-^^ 



CO 



> < 



^ CO 






5i n 



*-» ^ o 

C. "^ " 

i? ^ 2 

C3 © X 

W W -J 



c k. « 



© o ^- 

g. "S 

^ C3 ►- 



OS 03 

•as 

> S 

o iG 

a i^ 

_a *^ 



^ 



^ 



^^ 



Q CJ 



02 



^ 



>^ 



^^ 



: is 



> > 



> > 



^ 



>^ 



>fc: 



< < 



CO <; 



<! < 



CO 



<J <1 



^^ 



p:^ 



CO 00 



en 



2-3 -^ 



o o 



II 

03 C3 C5 

a a a 
o o o 
a £) ja 



SSSSSSooo 



iM 03 

a fl 

a o 

|i 

.- a 
O O 



CO 



El 

o. a 






*i 



03 

•a 



^> 



^< 



<;^^ 



p:^ 



u5 c3 w 



_. O en M CC rj -J 



C3 c3 



<u 



o <P 



S ^ q 

13 3 o 
O PU ft. 



§ S 1 

Co 

C3 03 o 

S S O 

a CI § 

O C CO 

fti fti i:^ 



a 



i.. 



3 .S 

a a 

03 O 

« S 

'^ is 

a « 

■s -^ 

A o 

P< « 



3 

a 

bO CO 

o! 03 

a a 



3 2 

O. P. 

03 c3 

CO CO 



CO ^ 

O 3 

»— t to 

S £ 

2 § 

o a 

a <B 



05 



■ C3 

a 



o is c3 

2 S £i 

2 £2 

o o © 

a a -g 

e e e 



t>..S 



si 


4^ 


3 


a 


n 


a> 


03 


£ 


-o 


u 


i 


S 


!^' 


c? 


.-H 


2 




o 




o 


Qi 




,n 


o 


a 


a 








Tl 






Q 


cn 


T3 


a 






03 


<i> 




T3 




t» 


s 


Q. 


w 


fl 


o 


CO 






■*~s 






u 


a 


CO 


3 


ri 


-< 




>. 


R 


3 


o 

J3 


hf 


* 


a 










o 


3 




■o 


® 


n 


ja 


V 


4-> 


ca 


s 



03 

- •« 

^ CO 

■" o 

o a 

O <D 

S "^ 

■^ CQ 
CO >> 

'5 ^ 

s 

CO 



C 
e 

» -s 

. -2 

CO S 
43 03 

a ■« 

o 

I s 
§ s 
a £ 

cu -^ 

■" 3 

, ° 5i 
I S 3 

|5<! 

La a 
' ^ s 

■ ^ ■s 

^ s § 
: 9 S. 

3 ca 

-o £ 
n <s> 

03 5 

>> £? 

=5 .a 

a CO 

< a 

. cfl 

£ o 

03 © 



si © 



a -o 
® 2 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

at Station Z, the new species of Rohertsoriia in a single haul at Sta- 
tion T, and Tachidius littoralis in single hauls at Stations L' and W. 

Outer-hay species. — In contrast with the littoral species just 
enunrierated, 16 others may be regarded as belonging to the outer 
portion of the bay. These are Alteutha depressa^ Calcmus fm- 
marchictcs, Cori/cella carinata, Gorycaeus elongatus, C. venustus^ 
Gryptopontius gracilis, Diosaccus tenuicomis, Ha/rpacticus chelifer^ 
Ldbidocera wollastoni^ Microsettella norvegica^ Oithona spinirost'riSy 
Oncaea minuta, Pontella meadii, Temora longicomis, T. turhinata, 
and Tishe furcata. 

Eight of these species were confined to single hauls at different 
stations, two appeared at two stations each, and three at four sta- 
tions each. Of the remaining species, Gdlanus occurred fairly abund- 
antly in the wider portion of the bay below the mouth of the Potomac 
River. The first species of Temora was found at the three stations 
in the mouth of the bay and also at Station Y near the extreme 
inner end of the bay. The other species, Temora turhinata^ was 
most abundant at the mouth of the bay and only went up as far as 
the mouth of the Rappahannock River. 

The parasitic species, Bomolochus e?ninens, was found in the adult 
stage only at Station P in the inner bay, but development stages were 
very common at nearly every station in the outer bay. The geo- 
graphic location of these parasites, however, is determined by the 
distribution of their hosts rather than by any locality where they 
happen to be captured swimming freely in the tow. 

Oceanic species. — A fourth division would include such species as 
were not found at any of the stations within the limits of the bay, 
but were present more or less abundantly in the outside ocean. 
There are 19 such species, and they will be found discussed on 
page 16 under the trip to the 100-fathom line. 

SALINITY DISTKIBUnON 

The salinity records made during the investigation vary all the 
way from 31.74 per cent on the bottom at Station G in the mouth 
of the bay down to 4.75 on the surface at Station U, the innermost 
station opposite the mouth of the Patapsco River. If we recall, in 
connection with this remarkable range in salinity, what has already 
been said with regard to the kaleidoscopic changes produced by the 
tides and the seasons, certain deductions naturally follow : 

1. The 10 species universally distributed, especially the two 
Acartias and Earpacticus gracilis., must be able to accommodate 
themselves to great and fairly rapid changes in salinity. The three 
species mentioned were taken in surface hauls at Stations G and U, 
and the two Acartias also appeared in the bottom hauls. The depth 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 9 

at Station U was only 11 meters, but the bottom salinity was about 
three times that at the surface. If these species migrate daily up 
and down as they are known to do elsewhere, the change in salinity 
must be more or less abrupt in so short a distance. 

2. The 10 copepods found exclusively or most abundantly in the 
inner bay may be regarded as brackish-water species, since they were 
found in water with an average salinity of 15 per cent or less. They 
also are probably able to accommodate themselves to rapid changes 
in salinity, especially to those involving reduction. 

3. The 16 species found exclusively in the outer bay may be re- 
garded as salt-water forms. They were found in water with a salin- 
ity ranging between 20 and 30 per cent, and the changes are not so 
great as for the other two groups. 

4. The 14 species confined to single areas in the bay will be con- 
sidered separately, since salinity may have been one of the factors 
determining their distribution. Table 2 gives the complete statis- 
tics with reference to these species and will serve for the other 
aspects of distribution as well as for that of salinity. 

The Cletodes species has been recorded from various European 
localities, all of which were considerably farther north. No record 
of the salinity of the water in which the specimens were found has 
been given, but judging from the localities it seems probable that it 
was higher than that here recorded. The single species of each of 
the genera Corycdeus^ Corycella^ Diogaccus, Harpacticus^ and Oitho- 
na, together with the new species of Pontella, were all taken in water 
of normally high salinity, between 25 and 30 per cent. Giesbrecht 
described four species of Cryptopontius from the Bay of Naples, 
and Sars reported one of them from the south coast of Norway. 
They were all bottom forms, but nothing was said about the salinity 
of the water in which they were found. The new species here 
recorded comes also from the bottom at one of the deepest stations 
near the mouth of the bay, where the salinity is fairly high. 
Ectinoso7na normani was first recorded from the Firth of Forth in 
Scotland and afterwards from Vadso, Finmark, and the upper part 
of the Christiania Fiord in Norway, from a depth of 6 fathoms on a 
muddy bottom. The present specimens came from near the inner 
end of the bay, at about twice the depth (20 meters) on a muddy 
bottom where the salinity was low. The Lahidocera species has 
been reported by Giesbrecht from the Atlantic Ocean between lati- 
tude 36° and 55° N. The mouth of the bay where the present speci- 
mens were obtained is on the parallel of latitude 37° N., and the 
salinity is but little less than that of the open ocean. Metacyclops 
is a fresh-water copepod, found in lakes and rivers all over the world. 
Here it was obtained just below the mouth of the Patapsco Kiver, 
79858—32 2 



10 



PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



sag 

O O © O 3 

fQ fQ > PQ M 



S s? «« 9 

^ CJ Cl ^ 



•—7 —■, i,\J '-\J VU WSJ 
■♦-J *-? *fcH «fc* S-H «l-l 



o) a» a> S S « 
cj u ti y y cj 

Q P « 



CJ _ _ 

cC p3 c3 



fflcococoraCQPQco 



'3 



09 



v. 2 

aj I— t 



03 

OS CO ^ CO 

. Cj CO »o 

o . . ■ 

— CO »o o 

C5 rt (N 



(OOCOMO'^OOO 












:i 



00 

o 

C3 

00 

o 

00 

o 
o 

u 



o 

a, 



05 

S 

a 






a 

o 

-4-> 

o 



-a 

a 



a <s a a 

03 H c3 rt 
va 00 w v3 



X3 

a 

03 






73 > 13 TS 

3 CO O 3 

a ^ s a 



c8 



1373X3T3T3'0't3'0'0'0'OT3'013 
333333D3S3d330 



> > 

C3 S3 

»0 CD CO O 00 00 *0 



»o >o lO 05 eo 



a 

Eh 



O 0» 05 <-; C> 00 o 



++++++++++++ 



-- '=^ -^ - -" + + 



■a 
^ oooooqaXJOXiooo 

00000„X30X!000 
«tf\ co\ «\ i-N ».^v ^H f-N «\ f-K F^\ mN etf\ 



■« ® 
o -- 

2 3 



a 



aaaaaaaaaaaaaa 

cio.P.cs 03 0,0.0,03' 03' 0,0,0,01 



»o •'I* o 00 



M< >o ■* ci 



000000^00000— 'O 

C^ C^J <M (M C^ C-l (M (M C^ C^ C^ (N 53 C-4 



as 
P 



-i< 10 r>- -^ r^ 



»j O CI o o — 

<u « a> i» 0) « B 
QO O fi Q Q ^ 



3 o ® o u4 

< O P O ,^; 



o 



03 
CO 



rtoo<i^t^><C)ONOoH^ 



1) 

a 

QQ 



"o 3 

3 03 

03 bC 

tie o 

3 *» 

I i 

° b 

.£ o 



;3 b .^' .- 
a 
01 



r^ S ~ 



3 0, 
§S 



g. " 



p p 



a 
o 

•3 "' 

(B -3 

■a o 
" I 

3 05 

as 



.2 w 

C3 to 
&.§ 

So 



JI1 

c 

o 



3 « 



§0 



o 



O) 



o .2 

« &H 



AKT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 1 1 

where the salinity was very low. It was probably swept down by the 
current from the river into the bay. The new species of Rohertsonia 
was captured in the upper central portion of the bay in water that 
had a depth of 9 meters over a muddy bottom, where the salinity 
was only 11.5. The type species of the genus has been reported by 
Brady and Scott from various localities around the British Isles, and 
by Sars from the upper part of the Christiania Fiord, but no data 
were given on salinity. 

In general, therefore, eight of these species confined to single 
stations compare favorably with those from other regions in depth, 
salinity, and kind of bottom. In the case of five of the other species 
the salinity is presumably lower than that of the water from which 
they have previously been recorded. The remaining species, the 
fresh-water form, has been explained above. 

SEASONAL DISTRIBUTION 

In Table 1 the seasonal distribution is given for all the species 
obtained in the bay, the letters denoting the seasons of the year when 
the species was obtained in greatest abundance at the respective sta- 
tions. In determining abundance, consideration must be given to 
both the percentage of the catch and the total number of specimens 
obtained. Five per cent of a catch totaling 10,000 specimens is 
manifestly a larger number than 80 per cent of a catch totaling 
500 specimens, although at first it may appear much smaller. It is 
freely admitted that the seasonal abundance of any species at a 
given station may be largely modified by accidental or exceptional 
conditions, but when the records of all the stations at which the 
species was obtained are compared the information becomes fairly 
reliable. The more universally the species is distributed throughout 
the bay the more trustworthy become the inferences as to its seasonal 
distribution. 

The two species of Acartia seem to have been equally distributed 
throughout the year. The total number of specimens was greatly 
increased during March and slightly during August. Two hauls, 
each totaling 100,000 specimens, and two of 25,000 each, were made 
during March, and these are the four highest totals obtained during 
the entire survey. These large hauls are the result, however, of the 
breeding season, which immediately preceded them, and in spite of 
the fact that they are made up almost entirely of the two Acartia 
species the latter are not to be regarded as spring copepods only. 
They were present everywhere in the bay throughout the entire year 
and always in large numbers. Williams reported A. clausii as most 
abundant in Narragansett Bay during January and February, and 
Fish listed it as one of the winter species at Woods Hole. These 



12 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

four largest hauls were obtained in bottom nets near the inner end 
of the bay where the salinity was quite low. 

The two species of Centropages were manifestly winter forms, 
since they were entirely lacking at many of the stations during the 
summer, and often early in autumn and late in spring. They ap- 
peared during the autumn, were present practically throughout 
the bay during the entire winter, and remained into the spring. 
O, haniatus continued into the summer in the outer bay, and at three 
stations there it was even recorded as most abundant during the 
summer. G. typicu^ was found by Fish to be a summer form at 
Woods Hole and liamatus a winter form. Williams also found the 
latter species at Narragansett Bay during January and February. 

Harpacticus gracilis was also a winter form in the outer bay, but 
m. the inner bay it continued into the spring, and some of the spring 
hauls yielded more specimens than those of the winter. 

Ldbidocera aestiva was an autumn copepod, appearing in the inner 
bay only during October, except a few stragglers obtained in Decem- 
ber. In the outer bay it was more abundant in winter but was oc- 
lasionally found in summer. It was also obtained August 21, 1921, 
at depths of 40 and 67 fathoms in the outside ocean. It was given by 
Wheeler as common at Woods Hole during July and early in August. 
Fish included it in his list of Woods Hole species as " a southern 
)ceanic form blown in by winds from the Gulf Stream during warm 
weather." 

Oithona hrevicomis was fairly well distributed throughout the 
year, but it may be called a summer form in the outer bay and a 
ispring form in the inner bay. In the outer bay it also occurred 
ibundantly during the autumn and winter, but in the inner bay it 
was often exclusively a spring form and was not found at all at 
other seasons of the year at many of the stations. The two largest 
hauls of this species totaled 2,000 specimens each and were made one 
;at Station C in October and the other at Station F in December. 
Station F is one of the three in the mouth of the bay, and Station C 
s only a short distance inside. 

In contrast with the preceding species, Oithona similis was a 
pronounced winter form in both portions of the bay, being confined 
at many stations exclusively to that season. It was occasionally 
found also during the summer and autumn, but every large haul was 
made during the winter. This species was found in small numbers 
by Wheeler at Woods Hole in July and by Williams at Wickford, 
R. I., in the summer. Fish listed both species of Oithona as summer 
forms for the Woods Hole region. 

Paracalanus was most abundant in autumn in the outer bay, 
appearing late in summer and lasting into the winter. In the inner 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON ] ?> 

bay it was more of a winter species and was found only during tbt. 
winter at the stations of the extreme inner end of the bay. Tht 
largest number of specimens in any one haul was 1,500, obtained lu 
October at Station H. The number of specimens of this species 
diminished steadily in going up the bay and toward the inner end 
were reduced so low as to be unworthy of a percentage mark, onl;^ 
one or two being found in some winter hauls. It was common botii 
at the surface and probably near the bottom in the outside ocean 
during August. 

Pseudocalanus was more of a winter species in the outer bay and 
a spring species in the inner bay. Its seasonal distribution, how- 
ever, was not well defined anywhere, and it was apparently likely U^ 
appear in small numbers during any month of the year and in •aw. 
part of the bay. 

PseudodiaptoTivas was a decidedly winter form throughout the ba.7/. 
It was nowhere very abundant, but proved to be the exact reverse, 
of Paracalanus^ its numbers increasing in going up the bay and 
reaching their maximum at Station Z, with Station V a close sec- 
ond. In the outer bay its numbers were reduced below a percentage 
value at several stations. This species was reported as a summer 
form in Narragansett Bay by Williams and in the Woods Hole 
region by Fish. Fish stated, however, that it was not a true sunj- 
mer species, but served as a connecting link between the summei 
and winter copepods. Sharpe reported it from Sheepshead Bay 
N. Y., in September. In Chesapeake Bay it seemed to appear iii 
summer in small numbers, continued through the autumn, reached 
its maximum early in winter, and then lasted into early spring at :; 
few stations. 

The species thus far considered are the 10 that Avere universalh 
distributed. Of the others Galanus -ftninarchicus appeared only \v. 
the outer bay and during the winter. It was found, however, ii: 
goodly numbers in the outside ocean during August. 

Ectinosoma curticoi^ne was a winter species, especially in the inner 
bay, where it was much more abundant than in the outer bay. Eury- 
temora atnericana was found only in winter, except at the extreme' 
inner end of the bay, where it appeared in March at Stations W 
and Z. The second species, hirundoides, was obtained chiefly during- 
winter in the outer bay and during spring in the inner bay. Th< 
number of specimens taken increased decidedly in going up the 
bay. Both species of this genus were obtained by Williams in Nar- 
ragansett Bay, but he did not give the seasonal distribution. Sharpen 
found hirundoides at Woods Hole in July, while Fish listed it as ik 
winter form continuing into the spring. 

Microthalestris appeared during every season of the year in the 
outer bay but was confined to winter and spring in the inner bay. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

Oncaea minuta proved to be a summer form, appearing only once 
during the autumn. It was also obtained in summer, both at the 
surface and at the bottom, on the 100-fathom line in the outside 
ocean. Teuiora turhinata was entirely confined to autumn and winter, 
and with a single exception was found only in the inner bay. 

Among species restricted to a few localities Alteutha depressa, 
Cletodes longicaudatus^ Corycella carinata, Gryptopontius gracilis^ 
Dactylopusia hrevicornis^ Diosaccus tenuicornis, Ectinosoma nor- 
mani, Harpacticus chelifer^ MicroseteUa norvegica, Oithona spiniros- 
tris, and Temora longicornis were obtained only in winter. Canda- 
cia, Rohertsonia, and Tisbe appeared in spring, Ganuella and Hemi- 
cyclops late in spring and summer, Corycaeus elongatus, Temora dis- 
<audata, and Metacyclops in autumn, Corycaeus venustus three times 
in autumn and once in winter, Harpacticus littoralis once in autumn 
and twice in winter, Labidocera wollastoni and Pontella pennata 
once in summer, Pontella raeadii once in winter and three times in 
summer, and Taehidius once in autumn and once in winter. 

Fish has listed Alteutha and Dactylopusia as summer species and 
MicroseteUa and Tishe as winter species in the Woods Hole region. 
The new species of Pontella is also found there very commonly in 
summer and early in autumn. 

To summarize, there were 3 species taken only in the spring, 3 only 
in the summer, 4 only in the autumn, and 18 almost only in the 
winter. The remainder showed a mixed seasonal distribution, being 
often more abundant at one season in the outer bay and at another 
season in the inner bay. 

BREEDING SEASONS 

Considered as a whole, the copepods showed a well-marked rhythm 
of development, which probably recurs yearly but whose seasonal 
proportions may vary considerably from year to year. There were 
apparently four breeding seasons, which were grouped about the 
months of January, April, July, and October. Each season begins 
toward the last of the month preceding and continues into the 
month following. 

The first evidence of these breeding seasons was found in the 
presence of egg cases upon the adult females. Among the speci- 
mens captured during each of these breeding seasons there were al- 
ways some, and often many, bearing eggs. For the January period 
were found such females of the two species of Acartia, the two 
species of Centropages, Euryteniora hirundoides, Oithmiu hrevi- 
comis and O. similis^ Paracalanus and Pseudocalanus^ and the new 
species of Crypt op ontius. During the April period were found 
egg-bearing females of Ectinosoma curticorne, Microthalestrls, Psevr- 



ABT. 15 COPEPOD CBUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 15 

docalanus, and the new species of Rohertsonia. For the July period 
females of the two Acartia species again appeared bearing eggs, to- 
gether with Oncaea venusta, Oithona brevicornis and O. simUis, 
Microthalestris, Pseudodiaptomus, and the new species of Ganuella. 
During the October period eggs were found upon females of Pseitr 
dodia'ptomus^ Oithona siniilis, Harpacticus gracilis^ Ectinosoma cur- 
ticorne, Lahidocera aestiva, Temora turhinata, and the two species of 
Centropages. 

Other evidence of these four breeding periods was found in the 
large number of development forms, nauplii, metanauplii, and 
Cyclops stages, captured with the adults during the month following 
each period. These development stages in the tow proved that the 
eggs hatched a short time previously. 

The breeding periods caused rhythmic fluctuations in the total 
numbers of specimens captured in the tow. It has already been 
noted that the four largest hauls were made in March. It may now 
be added that all the hauls made during that month had excep- 
tionally high totals of specimens, although the hauls themselves were 
few in number. This may be designated as the first, or spring, 
maximum, and was the result of the January breeding season com- 
bined with certain favorable conditions. Chief among the latter 
may have been the relative scarcity of the fishes and other animals 
that prey upon the copepods. The four largest hauls, those of Sta- 
tions S, T, V, and Z, were made up practically entirely of the two 
Acartia species. The fish that feeds most upon these copepods is 
probably the shad, and as soon as it becomes numerous in the bay 
during spring the copepods probably diminish rapidly. Ten differ- 
ent stations in the bay were visited during March, and the average 
number of specimens obtained at each of them was 36,500. Eight 
of the same stations visited in June yielded an average number of 
specimens of only 1,150, or less than a thirtieth as much. 

Thus the spring maximum was followed by a long decline, which 
was only slightly modified by the April breeding season, and which 
reached its lowest point, the year's minimum, in June. The July 
breeding season brought the number of specimens rapidly up again, 
and it was still further increased during the October breeding period. 
The records give the following statistics: During January, 29 sta- 
tions showed a total of 120,200 specimens, an average of 4,145. 
During March, 10 stations gave a total of 365,200, an average 
of 36,520. Two stations in April gave a total of 5,175, an average of 
2,587. The total of 8 stations in May was 30,150, an average of 3,769. 
In June, 13 stations yielded a total of 14,900, an average of 1,146. 
Twenty-nine stations in July gave a total of 75,400, an average of 
2,600. In August, 97,350 specimens were taken at 29 stations, an 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

average of 3,357. In October, the total of 28 stations was 116,000, 
an average of 4,143. In December, 27 stations yielded a total of 
129,350 specimens, an average of 4,791. 

There were thus four rises and four falls during the year, corre- 
sponding to the four breeding periods, but the rise in March and 
that in the following fall were much greater than the others. The 
lowest minimum was found in June and was probably the result of 
the increased abundance of young fishes and other animals that prey 
upon the copepods. 

No development stages were found at any of the stations near the 
inner end of the bay, but no positive statement can be made with 
reference to the ability of any of the copepods to breed in water of 
low salinity. The records do indicate, however, that water of higher 
salinity is more favorable for breeding purposes, since development 
stages practically disappeared at the mouth of the Potomac River, 
and were not found in any numbers above there except at Station T. 

TRIP TO 100-FATHOM LINE 

Supplementing the survey of the bay, a trip was made to the 
100-fathom line on August 21, 1920, to ascertain which of the species 
found in the bay were also present in the outside ocean and what 
species, common in the outside ocean, did not enter the bay.^ Hauls 
were made with surface and bottom nets at depths of 118, 67, 40, and 
20 fathoms, and on the following day at a depth of 10 fathoms. 

Forty-one species were collected during this trip, an exceptionally 
large number, but all of them except one or two were obtained in 
sufficient numbers to show that they were at least common. Nine- 
teen species, designated in Table 3 by footnote 2, were not found 
inside the bay. The other 22 species were found both in the bay 
and in the ocean, and included every one of the 10 species that were 
universally distributed throughout the bay. 

In contrast with this, 23 species, including all the new forms, 
were present in the bay but were were not found in the ocean. These 
are designated by footnote 3 in Table 1, giving the seasonal dis- 
tribution of the species. 

The species found in greatest numbers in the ocean proved to be 
Centropages typicus. Next to this came Paracalarms parvus and 
then in order Calanus ■jinmajrchicus^ Metridia lucens, Candacia 

2 In lien of the original chart of the stations outside of Chesapeake Bay, which seems no 
longer to be extant, Dr. R. P. Cowlos, in charge of the survey, has furnished the following 
Information regarding their position : 

" Our log shows that Station 8832 was on the 100-fathom curve whore a line, run E. 
5/8 S. from the whistle buoy 'FIR' off Cape Henry, cuts in. Stations 8833, 8834, 8835, 
and 8836 were on the 60, 40, 20, and 10 fathom curves, respectively, where the same line 
menlloned cuts them. I feel quite certain that the line follows the compass course." 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEAN'S OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 17 

Table 3. — Record of trip to the 100-faihom line, August 21-22, 1920 



Time. - 


5.40 p. m. 


7.25 
p. m. 


9.00 


D. m. 


11.25 


6.00 


a. m. 








p. m. 




Tide 


M flood 


H flood 


M flood 


Slack 
flood 


Ebb 


Salinity . 




29.7-34.4 


29.9-33.3 


29.7-33.5 










Depth 


118 fathoms 


67 
fathoms 


43 fathoms 


20 
fathoms 


10 fathoms 






Net I 


Sur- 
face 


Bot- 
tom 


Sur- 
face 


Sur- 
face 

1 


Bot- 
tom 


Bot- 
tom 


Sur- 
face 


Bot- 




tom 


Species Collected 


Pee Cent of Total Specimens 


Acartia clausli 


5 
20 


2 

2 
T. 
35 


5 

3T. 


2 

i 




1 


1 

30 
T. 


5 


Aeartia longiremis 








Amallophora brevicornis 2 










Anomalocera patersoni 2 
















Calanus finmarchicus 
















Calanus helgolandicus 2 








20 
25 
T. 


20 






Candacia armata .-_ 


T. 

T. 
10 
25 

1 


2 


T. 




10 




15 


Centrooaees bradvi 2 








Centropages hamatus 








Centropages typicus 


10 


60 
T. 


80 


50 


45 






Clytemnestra rostrtta 2 






Corycaeus elongatus 


T. 










Corycaeus lubbockii 2 


1 
1 
1 
T. 
1 
1 














Corycaeus robustus ' 


1 














Corycaeus rostratus 2 . 














Corycaeus speciosus 2 



















1 














Corycella carinata 














Euchaeta norvegica 2 


T. 














Harpacticus gracilis 










3 






Labidocera aestiva 






2 
3 


T. 








Macrosetella gracilis 2 














Mecynocera clausii 2 _ . 




3 

25 












Metridia lucens 2 








5 




3 




Oithona brevicornis 




3 


2 


5 


Oithona plumifera 2 




3 

2 




5 






Oithona similis 










5 
2 


5 


55 


Oithona spinirostris . 












Oncaea minuta .. 


1 

2 
25 


3 
3 
2 
T. 














Oncaea venusta 2 


20 

2 








2 
60 


( 


Paracalanus parvus 


6 




15 


15 


Pontella atlantica 2 




Pontella meadii 


T. 

T. 














Pontella pennata, new species 
















Pseudocalanus elongatus 


2 

T. 
T. 
1 








5 






Pseudodiaptomus coronatus 


5 


6 










Rhincalanus nasutus 2 












Sapphirina gemma 2 








T. 








SaDDhirlna sinuicaiida* 














Temora longicornis 


1 












Tisbe furcata 


3 






















1 


Total number of specimens 


5,000 


5,000 


3, 000 5, 000 


2,000 


2,000 500 100 

1 1 



' 30-minute towings. 

2 Found only in the outside ocean. 



3 T.= trace. 



79858—32- 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

armata, and the two species of Acartia, with A. longiremis more 
abundant than A. clausii at the 100-fathom line but less abundant 
nearer the shore. Of these seven species most abundant in the ocean, 
only one, Metridia lucens, was not also found in the bay. 

The other oceanic species require but little comment. Calanus 
helgolandicus was present in considerable numbers in the bottom nets 
hauled from depths of 40 and 20 fathoms. The Corycaeus species 
are minute and appeared only in the surface net at the 100-fathom 
line. Macrosetella gracilis^ Euchaeta norvegica, Mecynocera clausii^ 
Oithona plumifera, and Rhincalanus nasutus are all oceanic forms 
not likely to be found in the bay unless at the mouth. Candada 
m^nata might properly be included with these oceanic species, since 
it was found in the 10, 40, and 100 fathom hauls. The few specimens 
obtained in one of the bottom nets at Station S in the inner bay 
were evidently exceptional. 

The fact that three of the Corycaeus species were found in the 
outer bay suggests that it is not impossible for some or all the other 
three species to appear there in the future. The new species of 
Pontella is evidently a northern form since it has been taken abun- 
dantly in surface tows at Woods Hole, Mass., during the summers 
of 1923 and 1924. Clytemnestra, Euchaeta^ Mecynocera^ Metridia, 
Oithona, Rhincalanus, and Macrosetella are all widely distributed 
and are found in the Pacific as well as in the Atlantic Ocean. 
Oncaea and the two Sapphirina species are not so cosmopolitan, but 
the former genus and Sapphirina gevima have been found on our 
Atlantic coast as far north as Marthas Vineyard. 

Some of these oceanic species have not been reported before from 
our American coasts, and others have not previously been found 
as far south as the mouth of Chesapeake Bay. These will each 
be noted under the remarks given for the separate species in the 
following pages. 

DISCUSSION OF THE SPECIES 

The classification of the Copepoda proposed by Sars appears to 
be the simplest and most rational one thus far advanced. Accord- 
ingly the species are here arranged in the four groups, or suborders — 
Calanoida, Harpacticoida, Cyclopoida, and Caligoida — but since 
this is an account of the species found in a definite locality and not a 
systematic treatise, it seems wise to arrange the species in each group 
alphabetically and to omit family, generic, and specific diagnoses, 
except for new species or for those especially figured. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 19 

Suborder CALANOIDA 

ACARTIA CLAUSII Giesbrecht 

Acartia clausii Giesbeecht, J"'auna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, 

Pelagische Copepoden, p. 507, pis. 30, 42, and 43, 1892. 
Acartia clausi G. O. Sabs, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 150, pi. 101, 1903. 

OccuiTence. — Taken at every station in the bay, in the surface, the 
bottom, and the vertical nets. Most abundant in March after the 
winter breeding season. 

Remarks. — This species is undoubtedly the chief component of the 
copepod famia of the bay. Repeated hauls by every kind of net 
used during the survey yielded no other Acartias except these. The 
proportion of the two Acartia species, however, usually averaged 
about 3 specimens of clausii to 2 of longireniis, A. claitsii, therefore, 
occupies in Chesapeake Bay a position corresponding to that of 
Calanus finmaj'chicus in the Gulf of Maine and elsewhere along the 
northern Atlantic coast. The total numbers of specimens captured 
furnish a good idea of the absolute abundance of these two Acartia 
species in the bay. The great majority of these totals run into the 
thousands, 20 of them are 10,000 or more, and 2 of them were esti- 
mated at 100,000 each. And yet practically none of the nets was 
towed longer than 10 minutes. 

In view of such large numbers, these two species very likely form 
the bulk of the plankton food supply in the bay. This fact neces- 
sarily gives them great economic value, and they should no longer 
be regarded as merely two species of minute crustaceans possessed of 
moderate scientific interest. They may well assume a place of vastly 
higher importance in the life of the bay and take their stand beside 
the shad and the oysters, and the crabs and the terrapin, as one of the 
valuable resources of the bay. 

In a paper by Prof. Arthur Willey, of McGill University, on the 
distribution of free-living Copepoda in Canadian waters ^ it was 
said that the stomach contents of shad, caught at Scotsman Bay, 
Nova Scotia, was a copious chyme made up almost wholly of Acartia 
claitsii. The presence of the shad in such abundance in the bay, 
therefore, may be directly the result of the abundance of food await- 
ing them there. 

Sars said of this species that it seemed to be a more southern 
form than longiremis, and this assumption is fully borne out by a 
comparison of the relative abundance of the two species in the Gulf 
of Maine and in Chesapeake Bay. In the former locality longire^nis 
is much more abundant than clausii, but in the bay the proportion 
is reversed. Farran reported the present species as taken all through 

■Cont. to Biol., vol. 1 (new ser.), no. 16, pp. 305-334, 1923. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

the year on the mackerel-fishing grounds of Ireland, but as becoming 
more numerous in autumn. He also said that longiremis was not 
found there at all, and hence did not share \Yith clausii in furnishing 

food. 

In a continuous collection of plankton from Liverpool to Quebec, 
made by W. A. Herdman in 1897, these two Acartia species were 
taken along the English and American shores but disappeared en- 
tirely in the open ocean. Hence they may be regarded as littoral 
rather than pelagic species, well suited to such a region as Chesa- 
peake Bay. 

ACARTIA LONGIREMIS (Lilljeborg) 

Diaa longiremis Lilljeborg, De Ciustaceis ox ordinibus tribus in Scania 

occurrentibus, p. 181, pi. 24, 1853. 
Acartia longiremis G. O. Sabs, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 149, pis. 99, 

100, 1903. 

Occurrence. — Taken at every station in the bay, in the surface, the 
bottom, and the vertical nets ; most abundant in March. 

Remarks. — Sars, in the reference given above (p. 150), said of 
this species : " It is a true pelagic form, being often met with far 
out at sea, and at the very surface. Not unfrequently, however, it 
is brought by the current close to shore ; and it is even often found 
in tidal pools together with Paracalanus farous and Tetnora longi- 
cornis.''^ Its abundant distribution in Chesapeake Bay shows also 
that it may become essentially a littoral form. Its presence there 
is not dependent upon currents or tide pools ; it is indigenous to the 
bay and forms one of the two chief constituents of the copepod 
plankton. Furthermore, it is just as abundant in the brackish water 
of the inner bay as in the outer bay, the salinity of which is nearly 
as high as that of the ocean. 

This species occupies a position next to A. clausii and shares with 
the latter its economic importance as a component of the plankton 
food supply. Though its proportion to clausii is usually that of the 
2 : 8 ratio already mentioned, it frequently falls to 20, 10, or even 5 
per cent. Usually, however, it maintains a good average, and rarely 
it exceeds the former species in numbers. 

AMALLOPHORA BREVICORNIS G. O. Sars 

Scolecithriw brevicornis G. O. Sars, The Norwegian North Polar Expedition, 

Crustacea, p. 46, pi. 10, 1900. 
Amallophora hrevicornis G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol, 4, p. 53, pi. 

36, 1902. 

Occurrence. — Obtained only in the bottom net at the 100-fathom 
line in the ocean outside the bay. 

Remarks. — A pelagic form not likely to be found in the bay but 
not before reported from American shores. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEAN'S OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 21 

ANOMALOCERA PATERSONI Tcmpleton 

Anonialocera patersoni Templeton, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. 2, p. 35, pi. 5, 
figs. 1-3, 1837. — G. O. Saes, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 139, pis. 92-94, 
1902. 

Occu7Tence. — A few specimens were obtained in the bottom net 
at the 100-fathom line in the outside ocean. 

Remarks. — Wheeler remarked that it appeared at Woods Hole, 
Mass., only after stormy weather and prevailing southwest winds. 
If it could be blown in there from the Gulf Stream, it might be 
carried into Chesapeake Bay from the 100-fathom line. Brady said 
tnat it is generally distributed over the Atlantic Ocean and the 
North Sea, as well as in the Mediterranean, and that it often occurs 
in large numbers. 

CALANUS FIN^LARCHICUS (Gunnerus) 

MonoGuhis finmarchieus GtrNNEBUs, Acta Hafnia, vol. 10, p. 175, figs. 20-23, 

1765. 
Calanus fimnarchicus G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 9, pis. 1-3, 

1901. 

OcGurreThoe. — Confined to the outer bay and found there only 
during winter and mostly at the surface. Apparently abundant in 
the outside ocean during summer. 

Remarks. — This very cosmopolitan and widely known species is 
extremely abundant on our Atlantic coast farther north. In the 
Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Gulf of Maine it constitutes the 
bulk of the plankton. At the latitude of the mouth of Chesapeake 
Bay (37° N.), it does not seem to be so abundant. The fact that 
it was found only in the outer bay and was confined to the winter 
season corroborates the opinion that it is essentially a northern form. 
The latitude of this bay is probably near the southern limit of its 
distribution on our Atlantic coast. 

CALANUS HELGOLANDICUS (Glaus) 

Cetochiltis helgolandicus Ci,aus, Die frei lebenden Copepoden, p. 171, pi. 26, 

figs. 2-9, 1863. 
Calanus helgolandicus G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 11, pi. 4, 

1901, 

Occurrence. — Found in considerable abundance in the bottom net 
from depths of 40 and 20 fathoms in the outside ocean. 

Remarks. — Sars regarded this as more of a southern species than 
G. finTnarchicv^., and suggested that the two have generally been 
confused by various authors. He apparently succeeded in differenti- 
ating the two species, and his decision has been accepted by Scott 
and by Pearson but not by some other authors. Among the latter, 
With devoted a long discussion to the solution of the question 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

whether Sars was right or wrong in separating the species, but he 
finished without coming to any conclusion. The reasons given by 
Sars would seem fully as valid as those for many of the regularly 
accepted species. 

CANDACIA ARMATA (Boeck) 

Candace armata Boeck, Christiania Videnskebeliger Selskabet Forhandlinger, 

p. 39, 1872. 
Candacia armata G. O. Saes, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 135, pi. 91, 1902, 

Occurrence. — Found at Station S in one of the two largest hauls 
made in the bay, with a bottom net on March 29 in water 23 meters 
deep. Fairly common in the outside ocean. 

Remarks. — This copepod was captured both at the surface and in 
the bottom net in the outside ocean. It is rather remarkable that it 
should have been captured but once within the bay and then so far 
above the center. It would seem as if it might be found some time at 
other places, especially in the outer bay. 

CENTROPAGES BRADYI Wheeler 

Oentropages bradyi Wheelee, Bull. U. S. Bur. Fisheries, vol. 19, p. 174, fig. 12. 
1900.— Shabpe, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 38, p. 406, 1911. 

Occurrence. — A few specimens were obtained in the surface net 
over a depth of 118 and 67 fathoms, and in the bottom net towed at 
a depth of 40 fathoms during the trip to the 100-fathom line. It was 
not found anywhere within the limits of the bay. 

Remarks. — The species was established by Wheeler upon numerous 
specimens of both sexes, which he considered identical with the ones 
described by Brady under the name Centropages violaceus (Claus).* 
This identification appears indisputable, and the range of the species 
on our American shores is here extended southward to Chesapeake 
Bay. 

CENTROPAGES HAMATUS (Lilljeborg) 

IchtMiophorha hamata LiLLJEaJOEG, De Crustaceis ex ordinibus tribus in Scania 

occurrentibus, p. 185, pi. 21, figs. 9-12, 1853. 
Centropages hwmatus G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 76, pi. 52, 1902. 

Occurrence. — Universally distributed throughout the bay and 
found at every station except U and Z. Appearing most abundant 
during winter in the outer bay and during spring in the inner bay. 
Taken indiscriminately in surface, bottom, and vertical nets, and 
present also in the outside ocean. 

Remarks. — This species was given by Fish as one of the three typi- 
cal winter forms at Woods Hole, and he added that the development 

♦Report on the Challenger Kxpedition, vol. 8, pt. 23, Copepoda, p. 83, pi. 27, 1883. 



ABT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 23 

stages became so abundant in January and February as to far out- 
number the adults. Probably some of the development stages noted 
during the present survey at various stations in the outer bay during 
winter belonged to this species. Found by Sars both in the Nor- 
wegian fiords and in the open ocean and believed to form an essential 
part of the food of several pelagic fishes, such as the herring and the 
mackerel. In Chesapeake Bay it is probably eaten also by the shad 
during their spring migrations. 

CENTROPAGES TYPICUS Krjiyer 

CenU'opages typicus Kr0yer, Naturh. Tidsskrift, vol. 2 (new ser.), p. 588, p. 
6, figs. 22-26, 1847.— G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 75, pis. 
49-51, 1902. 

Occurrence. — Universally distributed throughout the bay and 
found at nearly every station. It is essentially a winter species but 
is probably present during the entire year. Like C. hamatus it was 
taken in surface, bottom, and vertical nets and was present in large 
numbers in the outside ocean. 

Remarks. — Given by Fish as one of the two pelagic species that 
together form the bulk of the summer copepod fauna at Woods Hole. 
In Chesapeake Bay it is just as typicall}^ a winter form, but is ap- 
parently a summer species in the ocean outside the bay. Found in 
both the open sea and the fiords of the Norwegian coast, often in 
great abundance. Brady said tliat this species and C. hamatus were 
so common in the North Sea and the Atlantic that few gatherings 
were without them. 

EUCHAETA NORVEGICA Boeck 

Euchaeta noi-vegica Boeck, Christiania Videnskebeliger Selskabet Forhand- 
linger, p. 40, 1872. — G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 38; pis. 
24-26, 1902. 

Occurrence. — A few females of this species were taken in the bot- 
tom net on the 100-fathom line in the outside ocean, but it was not 
found anywhere within the bay. 

Remarks. — This is a northern pelagic species and according to 
Bigelow occurs in most horizontal hauls deeper than 100 meters, 
but only sporadically at higher levels. Probably the present record 
is as far south as it has been obtained, and as it is an inhabitant of 
deep water there is little likelihood that it will be found within the 
bay. Sars found it particularly in the great depths of the fiords, 
and probably one condition that keeps it from entering the bay is 
the shallowness of the water. It is also possible that this copepod 
can not accommodate itself as readily as some others to any consid- 
erable change in salinity. 



24 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

EURYTEMORA AMERICANA Williams 

Eurytemora americana Wiluams, Amer. Nat., vol. 40, p. 645, figs. 8-11, 1906. 

Occurrence. — Found at two stations at the mouth of the bay and 
at six stations in the inner bay, but not taken in the outside ocean. 
Not an abundant species and confined to winter and early in spring. 

Remarks. — Not recorded by any author since Williams, 1906. In 
the present survey only a few specimens were obtained at the mouth 
of the bay, but about 150 were taken in each of two hauls with a 
bottom net in the inner bay, in 9 or 10 meters of water over a muddy 
bottom. Two other species of this genus were mentioned by Profes- 
sor Willey as important factors of the stomach contents of shad 
caught in Nova Scotia waters. If the shad there consume the local 
species of Eurytemora.^ there is no reason why they should not do 
the same in Chesapeake Bay. 

EURYTEMORA HIRUNDOIDES (Nordquist) 

Temorella affinis var. hirundoides Nordquist, Die Calanideu Finlands, p. 48, 

pi. 4, figs. 5-11, pi. 5, fig. 5, 1888. 
Eurytemora hirundoides G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 102, pi. 69, 

1902. 

Occur re nee. — ^Widely distributed in the inner bay, but only spar- 
ingly in the outer bay; found most abundant at Station Z in water 
13 meters deep on a muddy bottom. In three hauls made on March 
27, 1921, it formed 25 per cent of the surface net total, 20 per cent 
of the vertical net total, and 15 per cent of the bottom net total 
estimated at 100,000 specimens. 

Remarks. — This is a brackish-water species, which explains why it 
is so much more numerous in the inner bay. Its abundance there 
makes it one of the most important constituents of the plankton. 

LABIDOCERA AESTIVA Wheeler 

Labidocera aestiva Wheeler, Bull. U. S. Bur. Fisheries, vol. 19, p. 178, fig. 16, 
1900. 

Occurrence. — Distributed universally in the outer bay, sparsely in 
the inner bay, captured usually in the bottom net, but taken also at 
the surface. Most abundant in autumn, especially in the inner bay, 
but present also in summer and winter in the outer bay and at the 
surface of the outside ocean during summer. 

Remarks. — This copepod was recorded by both Wheeler and Fish 
as a summer form at Woods Hole, whence its specific name. In Chesa- 
j)eake Bay it is just as distinctly a winter and autumn species. It 
was found in sufficient numbers in the outer bay to constitute an 
important factor of the plankton, but in the inner bay it occurred so 
sparingly that it was seldom credited with a percentage mark. 



ABT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OP CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 25 

LABIDOCERA WOLLASTONI (Lubbock) 

Pontella wollastoni Lubbock, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 2, vol. 20, p. 406, pis. 

10,11, 1857. 
Labidooera wollastoni G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 142, pis. 95., 

96, 1902. 

Occurrence. — Ten specimens of this species, including both sexes, 
were obtained in a surface net at Station G, August 22, 1920. 

Remarks. — The single occurrence and limited number of this 
species make it a rare copepod in the plankton of the bay and of no 
economic value. It has never before, however, been reported from 
our American coast, as all Giesbrecht's specimens came from the 
western Atlantic. Sars considered it " like all the other Pontel- 
lidae, a true pelagic form, occurring more generally in the open 
ocean, close to the surface of the sea " (p. 143). 

MECYNOCERA CLAUSII I. C. Thompson 

Mecynocera clausii Thompson, Jouru. Linnaean Soc. London, voL 20, p. 146. 
pi. 11, figs. 1-4, 1888.— Wheelee, Bull. U. S. Bur. Fisheries, vol. 19, p. 168, 
fig. 5, 1899. 

Occurrence. — About 150 specimens of this species were obtained 
in the bottom net at the 100-fathom line outside the bay. 

Retnarks. — This is another distinctly pelagic copepod and southern 
in its habitat. It is very transparent and colorless and is hence easily 
overlooked unless carefully searched for. The exceptionally long 
first antennae are very buoyant, and, when stretched out at right 
angles to the body axis, they hold the copepod in suspension, some- 
times even after preservation. It is not likely to be found inside 
the limits of the bay. T. Scott ^ reported this copepod from 16 
of the tow-net gatherings, the deepest of which came from a depth 
of 235 fathoms. 

METRmiA LUCENS Boeck 

Metridia lucens Boeck, Christiania Videnskebelige Selskabet Forhandlinger, 
p. 238, 1864.— G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 113, pi. 77, 1902. 

Occurrence. — Taken in large numbers in the bottom net during the 
trip to the 100-fathom line at depths of 40 and 118 fathoms. 

Remarks. — Wheeler secured but a single specimen at Woods Hole 
in summer, but Fish found it a very common form in winter and 
spring. If it comes into the harbor at Woods Hole so freely at that 
season of the year, it would seem possible at least that it may enter 
the outer portion of Chesapeake Bay during the same season. This 
species is luminous and gives off a brilliant blue-green light when 
disturbed. During the spring before the summer plankton has 



"^ Report on Entomostraca from the Gulf of Guinea, collected by John Rattray, B. Si- 
Trans. Linn. Soc. London, ser. 2, vol. 6, pt. 1, Zoology, 161 pp., 15 pis., 1894. 

79858—32—4 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

developed, this copepod is one of the chief causes of marine phosphor- 
escence. It was reported by Farran as forming with Calanus fln- 
fnarchicus the main bulk of the tow on the Irish fishing grounds 
during spring and early summer, and as constituting an important 
factor in the food of the mackerel. 

PARACALANUS PARVUS (Clan«) 

Calanus parvus Claus, Die frel lebenden Copepoden, p. 173, pi. 26, figs. 10-14; 

pi. 27, figs. 1-^, 1863. 
Paracalanus parvus G. O. Sabs, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 17, pis. 8, 9, 1901. 

Occurrence. — Found at every station in the bay except T and U, 
usually in considerable abundance in the outer bay, but gradually 
diminishing in numbers toward the inner end of the bay. Taken 
indiscriminately in surface, bottom, and vertical nets. Most abun- 
dant during autumn in the outer bay and during winter in the inner 
bay, but present everywhere throughout the year. Also found in 
large numbers in every haul but one during the trip to the 100- 
fathom line in the outside ocean. 

Retnarks. — Wheeler's record was the first for our American shores, 
and the present one carries the species as far south as the Chesapeake. 

PONTELLA ATLANTICA (Milne-Edwards) 

Pontia atlantica Milne-Edwards, Histoire naturelle des Crustac6s, vol. 3, 

p. 420, pi. 37, figs. 4-17, 1840. 
Pontella atlantica, Giesbeecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 

19, p. 461, pi. 24, figs. 1, 3, 13, 45, 49, 50; pi. 40, figs. 5, 8, 12, 13, 83, 41, 

42, 1892. 

Occurrence. — A few specimens of this species were taken in the 
bottom net at the 100-fathom line outside the bay. 

Remarks. — This is another pelagic form and is not likely to be 
found within the limits of the bay. Although reported by many 
authors from the Atlantic Ocean, the localities given are all eastern, 
and it has not hitherto been found upon our American shores. It 
is the largest species of the genus and was given the specific name 
magna by Lubbock in 1853, and gigantea by Claus in 1863, both of 
which become synonyms of Milne-Edwards's name, given in 1840. 
Now that it has been found on this side of the Atlantic, this last 
name becomes even more appropriate. In spite of its size it has 
never been found in sufficient numbers to become of economic im- 
portance. 

PONTELLA MEADII Wheeler 

Pontella meadii Wheeler, Bull. U. S. Bur. Fisheries, vol. 19, p. 180, fig. 17, 
1900. 

Occurrence. — Numerous specimens of both sexes were taken in the 
surface and vertical nets at Station F, August 22, 1920, and in the 
bottom net October 21. A few others were obtained at Stations 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 27 

A, O, and Q in surface and bottom nets; it was also present at the 
surface on the 100-fathom line. 

Remarks. — Wheeler obtained only a few specimens in July and 
implied that they had been blown in from the southeast during a 
storm. Fish also recorded it as a summer form from the Gulf 
Stream. Its presence on the 100-fathom line at the latitude of 
Chesapeake Bay indicates that it is a southern form that occasionally 
gets as far north as Woods Hole. It has not thus far been found 
in the Gulf of Maine. It was found only in the outer portion of 
Chesapeake Bay during summer. 

PONTELLA PENNATA, new species 

Plate 1 

General characters. — This species closely resembles P. meadii, but 
the female can be readily distinguished from any other species of the 
genus, as well as from all free-swimming copepods, by the long 
pennon, or streamer, borne upon the last segment of the thorax, by 
the excessively short, 1-segmented abdomen, and by the minute non- 
plumose setae upon the caudal rami. The male is characterized by 
a long fingerlike process armed with spines and borne upon the 
anterior margin of the seventeenth ° segment of the grasping an- 
tenna. 

/Specific characters of female. — Groove between head and first 
thoracic segment distinct; fourth and fifth thoracic segments sepa- 
rated, fourth segment with a rounded projection overlapping the 
fifth segment on the dorsal surface at the midline; fifth segment 
prolonged on each side into a broad and rather blunt point, nearly 
symmetrical. In addition to these usual lateral points this last seg- 
ment has also two chitinous outgrowths. One of these is a thin 
lamella standing on edge along the midline on the dorsal surface 
just behind the projection from the fourth segment. It is crescent- 
shaped with the concave side toward the segment, the anterior point 
extending above the surface nearly to the posterior margin of the 
third segment. The posterior point is shorter but extends backward 
above the surface of the abdomen to the posterior margin of the latter. 
Being thus located on the midline and standing vertically, it is still 
symmetrical. The second outgrowth, however, is completely asym- 
metrical, being attached to the dorsolateral surface of the fifth seg- 
ment, on the right side only and close to the lateral margin. It is also 
a thin lamina, which extends forward above the surface of the fourth 
and third segments nearly to the posterior margin of the second seg- 
ment. It divides opposite the groove between the third and fourth 
segments into two parts. The portion nearest the body is short and 

■ According to Giesbrechf s numbering ; in flg. D it is apparently on the twelfth segment. 



28 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAl. MUSEUM vol.80 

rounded and curves inward toward the midline. The outer portion 
folds abruptly over dorsally and curves backward in a long pennon, or 
streamer, approximately parallel to the body axis, and nearly as long 
as the copepod itself. This streamer tapers gradually to a narrow 
point, and its edges are frayed into jagged teeth and fingerlike 
processes. These chitinous outgrowths make this species unique, 
although they are foreshadowed in a way by the asymmetrical proc- 
esses in other species. 

The antennae and mouth parts are similar to those of other species 
of the genus, with certain variations. Chief among the latter are 
the differences found in the chewing blade of the mandible. The 
drawing of this (pi. 1, G) shows that it is peculiarly powerful and 
armed with a row of formidable teeth. If its structure is any indi- 
cation of habits this species must be very predacious, living upon all 
sorts of smaller creatures in the plankton. Its large size and its 
strong maxillae and maxillipeds enable it to seize and overpower 
these animals, which can then be chewed up by the mandibles. The 
fifth legs are much reduced in size and appear stunted when com- 
pared with those of P. vieadii. The endopods are more than half 
the length of the exopods and end in two stout spines of approxi- 
mately the same length. 

Specific characters of nude. — The male is slightly smaller than the 
female (A and C of Plate 1 are drawn to different scales). Its body 
is relatively thicker and its abdomen much longer, although still be- 
low the average for Pontella males. The lobes at the posterior corners 
of the last thoracic segment are distinctly asymmetrical, the right one 
being considerably longer and more sharply pointed. The abdomen, 
however, is practically symmetrical, but the last two joints are tele- 
scoped into the preceding joint so far as to be almost indistin- 
guishable. 

The right, or grasping, antenna is characterized b}' a long and 
stout fingerlike process projecting from the anterior margin of the 
seventeenth segment. This is armed along its outer margin with a 
row of four stout spines, which will at once distinguish this species 
from meadii, or indeed from any other species of the genus. One or 
two other species have such a process, but it is not armed with spines 
and is attached to a different segment. There is also a long and 
slender seta, or spine, on the fused thirteenth-fourteenth segment, 
similar to that in other species, but longer and hooked at the tip. 

The second antennae and mouth parts are of the usual form; the 
fifth legs are very similar to those of the preceding species, but rela- 
tively much stouter, and the nonchelate ramus is considerably longer 
and armed with extra spines. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CEUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 29 

Color. — Somewhat like meadii^ with a mid-dorsal row of dark 
sjDOts, which are brown rather than black. In formalin specimens, 
the thickened portion of the graspino^ antenna of the male is a 
deep blue, almost purple. No blue or bluish-green markings appear 
anywhere else upon the body or appendages. 

Measv/rements. — Female: Total length, 3 mm. to 3.5 mm.; great- 
est width at posterior margin of head, 1 mm.; length of posterior 
bod}^ 0.125 mm. Male: Total length, 2.85 mm. to 3.25 mm.; great- 
est width at posterior margin of first thoracic segment, 1.1 mm.; 
length of posterior body, 0.5 mm. 

Occurrence. — Several females were taken in a surface net on 
August 22, 1920, and in a bottom net on October 20, both at Station 
C. A few specimens were also captured at the surface on the 100- 
fathom line. 

Types.— U.S. '^.M. No. 58568, male, holotype; No. 63416, female, 
paratype. 

DistHhution. — ^Woods Hole (Fish). 

Remarks. — Though this is probably a pelagic species, it comes into 
Woods Hole in considerable numbers during summer. It was ob- 
tained there in the tow during the summer of 1923, associated with 
meadii. It evidently enters Chesapeake Bay in a similar manner, 
since Station C is at least 20 miles inside the mouth of the bay, and 
there is no reason why it should not be found elsewhere in the outer 
bay. At first sight it might be supposed that the long chitinous 
streamer would hinder the activity of the female as compared with 
that of the male, or even with other copepods not thus burdened. 
But we do not find this to be true ; the movements of the female are 
fully as energetic, and the resultant locomotion is as graceful and 
agile as if the body were without these chitinous outgrowths. It 
is very difficult to think of any way in which such outgrowths could 
be useful or protective to the copepod that bears them. 

PSEUDOCALANUS ELONGATUS (Bosck) 

Clausia elongata Boeck, Christiaiiia Videuskebeliger Selskabet Forhandlinger, 

p. 234, 1864. 
Pseudocalanus elongatus G. O. Saes, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 20, pis. 10, 

11, 1901. 

Occurrence. — Universally distributed, but did not appear at 12 of 
the stations, 7 of which were in the inner bay. Taken oftener at the 
surface, but present sometimes in the bottom and vertical nets. A 
winter form in the outer bay and a spring form in the inner bay; 
present also in the ocean outside the bay. 

Remarks. — Sars's statement that the most southern place where 
this s])ecies has been observed was the northern coast of France, lati- 
tude 48° N., mu^t now be extended to 37° N. Fish found the young 



30 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80» 

of this species so abundant in January and February at Woods 
Hole that they far outnumbered the adults, showing that they breed 
freely there in winter. This species ranks next to Calanus -jinrnwr- 
chiaas in abundance in the Gulf of Maine. It is very much les» 
abundant in Chesapeake Bay, and its percentage mark only rarely 
gets above 5, and is frequently less than 1. This is what would 
naturally be expected of a northern form when found so far south. 
In a plankton series collected continuously across the North Atlantic 
by Herdman, this species was very common around both shores and 
was also taken in mid-ocean. 

PSEUDODIAPTOMUS CORONATUS Williams 
Pl^TE 2 

Pseudodiaptomus coronatus Williams, Amer. Nat, vol. 40, p. 641, figs. 1-7, 
1906.— Shabpe, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 38, p. 412, fig, 4, 1911. 

General characters. — Abdomen of male with four segments, of 
female with three segments; genital segment of female swollen^ 
asymmetrical, and covered with irregular patches of spines. Fifth 
legs of female with four segments and a stout terminal spine; fifth 
legs of male as shown in Plate 2, J. 

Specific characters of female. — Body slender, anterior portion, 
elliptical, two and a half times as long as wide ; head separated from 
first thoracic segment and evenly rounded anteriorly. Posterior 
body quite asymmetrical, the left side more fully developed than the 
right. Genital segment much swollen, with numerous irregular 
patches of spines and bristles and a pair of long pointed flaps 
extending behind the genital orifice. Abdomen of three segments, 
the two basal ones irregular, the terminal one more symmetrical. 
Left caudal ramus considerably longer than the right and curved 
outwards, six and a half times as long as wide ; right ramus straight 
and only five and a half times as long as wide. 

The plumose setae at the tips of the rami are each jointed near 
the center and swollen in front of and behind the joint. The same 
is true of the setae of the swimming legs, as was shown by Williams, 
but neither he nor Sharpe mentioned the jointing in the caudal setae. 

Every female with egg sacks carried a large left sack, containing 
about 25 eggs, and a minute right sack containing only two eggs. 
But Sharpe found one or two females at AVoods Hole with egg sacks- 
about equal in size, and a single female that carried one large sack. 

First antennae 20 to 22 jointed, the jointing so indistinct as to be 
practically invisible in places; when reflexed the first antennae do 
not quite reach the posterior margin of the front body. Second 
antennae with an outer ramus much longer than the inner one and 
3-segmented, the basal segment much shorter than either of the other 
two, the terminal segment ending in three very long plumose setae. 



ABT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 31 

The inner ramus also ends in three long setae, with a tuft of five 
others on the inner margin near the tip of the terminal joint. 

Chewing blade of the mandible broad and stout, with very irregu- 
lar margins ; teeth small, blunt, and all about the same size except the 
one at the inner corner, which is long, slender, sharply pointed, and 
pectinate. Outer ramus of palp 4-segmented, inner ramus 2-seg- 
mented, its terminal joint turned at right angles and ending in eight 
setae, all about the same size and length. First maxillae broadly 
laminate, with flattened and laminate setae; second maxillae 5-seg- 
raented, the setae of the four basal segments mounted on long 
papillae. Maxillipeds with stout basal joints and a 4-segmented 
ramus. First four pairs of swimming legs with 3-jointed rami; 
spines of the exopods with serrated margins; fifth legs uniramose, 
4-segmented, each leg tipped with a pectinated spine much longer 
than the terminal joint. 

Speci-flc characters of male. — Like the female but with the posterior 
body symmetrical ; abdomen with four segments when fully matured, 
in other respects like the young male figured in Plate 2 ; caudal rami 
three to three and a half times as long as wide and without marginal 
hairs. Right fifth leg uniramose, 4-segmented, with a terminal claw 
much like that in the female ; left leg biramose, basipod and exopod 
'S-segmented, endopod with a single bladelike segment, toothed along 
its curved outer margin near the tip and at the center. First segment 
of basipod with fingerlike processes on its inner margin, second 
joint with coarse hairs on its inner margin; exopod tipped with 
three or four small spines. 

Measureinents. — Length : Female, 1.5 mm. ; male, 1.2 mm. 

Occurrence. — Taken at every station in the bay except J, L, and 
XJ ; never in any abundance but often with a percentage of less than 
1. Definitely a winter form but sometimes present at other seasons ; 
usually taken at or near the bottom in the bay but found only at the 
surface in the outside ocean. 

Distribution. — Nova Scotia (Willey) ; Narragansett Bay (Wil- 
liams) ; Sheepshead Bay, N. Y. (Sharpe) ; Woods Hole (Sharpe, 
Fish). 

Remarks. — Williams and Sharpe obtained their specimens in sum- 
mer, except those from Sheepshead Bay, which were taken in Sep- 
tember. Fish said it was not a true summer species at Woods Hole, 
but reached its maximum in fall, when it outnumbered all other 
■copepods. In Chesapeake Bay the maximum seems to be reached 
still later in fall or early in winter, but even then the percentage 
rarely gets above 5, all such instances being near the inner end of 
the bay. The second antennae and mouth parts, with minor details 
of the rest of the body, are figured in Plate 2 to supplement the 
account here given. 



32 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

RHINCALANUS NASUTUS Giesbrccht 

RMncalanus nasutus Giesbbecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol, 
19, p. 154, pi. 3, fig. 6 ; pi. 9, figs. 6, 14 ; pi. 12, figs. &-12, 14, 16, 17 ; pi. 35, 
figs. 46, 47, 49, 1892.— G. O. Sabs. Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 15, pis. 6, 
7, 1901. 

Occurrence. — A few females were taken in the bottom net at the 
100-fathom line outside the bay. 

Remarks. — This is a distinctive pelagic copepod and is not likely to 
be found within the bay. Farran ^ said of this species : "As far as 
concerns its distribution in the greater part of the Atlantic, it may 
be regarded as an inhabitant of the Atlantic current, its distribution 
to the north and east depending on the varying strength of that 
stream." 

TEMORA DISCAUDATA Giesbrecht 

Temora discaudata Giesbbecht, Atti Accademei Lincei, Rome, ser. 4, vol. 5, p. 
814, 1889; Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, p. 328, pi. 17, 
figs. 3, 20, 23 ; pi. 38, figs. 24, 25, 28 ; 1892. 

Occurrence. — A few specimens were obtained in the surface net at 
Station C, October 20, 1920, and in the bottom net at Station F on 
October 21. At neither place did the catch include a sufficient num- 
ber to be worthy of a percentage mark. 

Remarks. — This species has not been hitherto reported from the 
North Atlantic, but is easily recognized by the sharp projections at 
the posterior corners of the fourth thoracic segment, the asymmetri- 
cal furca of the female, and the peculiar fifth legs of the male. It 
did not occur in sufficient abundance to become of any economic im- 
portance as a constituent of the plankton. 

TEMORA LONGICORNIS (Muller) 

Cyclops longicornis O. F. Mxjllek, Entomostraca seu insecta testacea, p. 115, 

1792. 
Temora longicornis G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 4, p. 97, pis. 65, 66, 

1902. 

Occurrence. — Taken in small numbers in bottom and vertical nets 
at Stations E, F, and G at the mouth of the bay, and in the vertical 
net at Station Y. It was also present at the surface in the outside 
ocean. 

Remarks. — Williams found this species all through the year in 
Narragansett Bay, but Fish listed it as one of the three typical 
winter forms at Woods Hole. It apparently occurs only in winter 
in Chesapeake Bay and even then in small numbers. Its presence at 
both ends of the bay indicates that it may be found at times any- 
where in the bay. 

'Bulletin Trimestiiel, pt. 1. p. 6.5, 1910. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 33 

TEMORA TURBINATA (Dana) 

Calanus turhinatns Dana. Wilkes Expedition, Crustacea, vol. 14, p. 1057, 1853. 
Temora turhinata Giesbrecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19. 
p. 329, pi. 17, figs. 14. 17, 18, 21 ; pi. 38. fis,'. 27 ; 1892. 

Occurrence. — Found only ditring: autumn and winter in the outer 
bay at stations near the mouth. Taken at the bottom, at the surface, 
and in the vertical net in consecutive hauls at one station. A single 
surface haul at Station F, December 4. 1920, yielded 1,000 specimens 
of this species. 

Remarks. — This species has not hitherto been reported from our 
American shores. It can be distinguished from longicomis most 
readily by the short anal segment and the details of the fifth legs. 
Although it was not found at all in the inner bay, it was present in 
the outer bay in numbers sufficiently large to give it considerable 
economic importance. In all probability it furnishes an important 
constituent in the food of the shad when they come to the bay in 
their spring migration. 

Suborder HARPACTICOIDA 

ALTEUTHA DEPRESSA Baird 

Altetitha depressa Baird, British Entomostraca, p. 216, pi. 30, figs. 1, 2, 1850.— 
G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 64, pi. 38, 1904. 

Occurrence. — Taken at Station F over a sandy bottom in 16 meters 
of water, at Station G' over a bottom of mixed sand, gravel, and 
mud in 28 meters of water, and also in surface and vertical nets; 
found only during December and January. Not enough specimens 
were obtained in any one haul to equal even 1 per cent of the total. 

Remarks. — This littoral harpactid was found in such small num- 
bers and was so restricted in its distribution at the very mouth of the 
bay that it must be re'garded as a straggler from the outside ocean. 

CANUELLA ELONGATA. new species 

Plate 3, A-H 

Geiteral characters. — Body of nearly the same width throughout, 
slightly narrowed posteriorly, with deep grooves between the seg- 
ments. Abdomen with three segments ; caudal rami twice the length 
of the last segment, inclined at an angle of 45° with the body axis, 
each tipped with four setae. 

Specific characters of female. — Head small and a little wider than 
the first segment, from which it is distinctly separated. Lateral 
areas slightly and rather squarely expanded; rostral plate broad 
and rounded at the tip. First thoracic segment well defined, but 
much shorter than the others, succeeding segments about the same 
length and width. Genital segment slightly narrower than the fifth 



34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

segment, a little longer than wide, with a transverse dorsal suture 
nearly at the center. The two basal segments of the abdomen nearly 
the same length and width, the terminal segment about as wide as 
the others but much shorter. Caudal rami tapered so that the tips 
are about half the width of the bases. Of the four terminal setae 
on each ramus the two outside ones are short, the two between them 
longer, the inner of these two twice as long as the outer. Both the 
upper and the under surfaces of these rami are covered with short 
hairs. 

The first antennae are stout, 5-segmented, and armed with coarsely 
plumose setae. The exopod of the second antennae is as long as the 
endopod and 7-segmented, and both rami are armed with stout 
setae. The chewing blade of the mandible is stout and widened con- 
siderably at the tip, which is armed with five coarse and rather blunt 
teeth on the inner side, and a bunch of four or five slender and very 
sharp ones at the outer corner. Maxillae and maxilliped similar to 
those in other species of the genus, with minor differences. 

First legs shorter than the other pairs ; spines on the exopod long, 
stout, and pectinate; endopod much longer than the exopod but 
not so wide; spine just inside the base of the endopod nearly as long 
as the two basal joints of the latter and smooth. Fourth legs slender, 
the endopod much longer than the exopod, with small and com- 
paratively weak spines at the inner distal corners of the first two 
joints; no spine on the outer margin of the terminal joint of the 
exopod and no seta on the inner margin of the second joint. Fifth 
leg a minute lamina, tipped with four tiny setae. Egg sacs large 
and elongate-oval in form. 

Color (preserved material). — A light brownish yellow. 

Measurements. — Total length, including furcal rami, 1.65 mm.; 
width of head, 0.3 mm. 

Occurrence. — Seven females, two of which carried egg sacs, were 
obtained in the bottom net at Station W on June 3, 1921, drawn 
from a depth of 13 meters over a muddy bottom. The male is un- 
known. 

Types.— \].^:^M. No. 58571, holotype ; No. 63417, paratypes. 

Remarks. — T. Scott established this genus for a species obtained 
in the Firth of Forth. G. O. Sars found the same species on the 
Norwegian coast and also a new species in the upper part of Chris- 
tiania Fiord. The present species differs from these two in the 
length of the abdomen, in the width and bluntness of the rostral 
plate, and in the details of the mandibles and the first and fourth 
swimming legs. Like the other species it was found in shallow 
water over a muddy bottom. It does not occur in sufficient abun- 
dance to render it of any economic importance in the life of the bay. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 35 

CLETODES LONGICAUDATUS (Boeck) 

Enhydrosoma longicaudata Boeck, Christiania Videnskebeliger Selskabet For- 

handlinger, p. 54, 1872. 
Cletodes Jotigicaudatus G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 286, pi. 

197, 1909. 

Occurrence. — About 20 specimens of this copepod were taken in 
a bottom net at Station R on December 8, 1920, drawn from a depth 
of 47.5 meters over a bottom of mixed mud and sand. This was 
the only appearance of the species during the entire survey. 

Remarks. — The copepod first described by Brady and Robertson 
in 1875 and afterward by Brady alone in his British Copepoda as 
Cletodes longicaudatus is not identical with the present species, and 
possibly, as Sars suggests, does not even belong to the same genus. 
So far as known the species has not before been reported from our 
American coast. 

CLYTEMNESTRA ROSTRATA (Brady) 

Ooniopsyllus rostratus Brady, Challenger Copepoda, p. 107, pi. 42, figs. 9-16, 

1883. 
Clytemnestra rostrata Giesbrecht, Fauna uud Flora des Golfes von Neapei, 

vol. 19, pp. 566, 572, pi. 45, figs. 19, 20, 22, 25, 26, 31, 33, 1892. 

Occurrence. — Obtained only at the surface in the ocean outside the 
bay, where the depths were 118 and 67 fathoms. The combined 
catches consisted of only a few specimens, including both sexes. 

Remarks. — This copepod nowhere occurs in any abundance : Brady 
obtained but a single specimen, and Esterly reported one female in 
summer, but added " occurs also in winter " without specifying the 
number. Brian and Giesbrecht recorded it as rare in the Mediter- 
ranean, and it apparently never becomes numerous enough to possess 
economic value. It is a pelagic copepod and is not likely to be found 
within the limits of the bay. 

DACTYLOPUSIA BREVICORNIS (Glaus) 

Daotylopus ircvicornis Glaus, Die Copepodenfauna von Nizza, p. 29, pi. 3, figs. 

20-25, 1866. 
Dactylopusia brevvcornis G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 130, pi. 80, 

1905. 

Occurrence. — Two specimens of this species were obtained at 
Station W in a surface net on December 7, 1920, and were the only 
ones found during the survey. 

Remarks. — This tiny harpactid is manifestly a rare species in the 
bay. Two other species of the genus, more cosmopolitan in their 
distribution, were obtained by Sharpe at Woods Hole, but the 
present one has not been hitherto reported from our American 
shores. It is abundant in the Mediterranean, and Brian has given a 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

detailed description of five copepodid stages in its life history. It is a 
littoral form and is easily distinguished from the other species of the 



genus; 



DIOSACCUS TENUICORNIS (Claus) 



Dactylopus tenuicornis Claus, Die frei lebenden Copepoden, p. 127, pi. 16, figs. 

17-23, 1863. 
Diosacciis temiicot-nis G. O. Saes, Cru.stacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 146, pis. 89, 

90, 1906. 

Occurrence. — A single female was taken in the vertical net at 
Station F on December 4, 1920, in water 16 meters deep over a 
muddy bottom. This was the only specimen obtained during the 
survey. 

Reinarhs. — Sars said that this species was abundant along the 
whole Norwegian coast in the littoral zone among the algae. It is 
probable, therefore, that it occurs in Chesapeake Bay in greater 
abundance than this single capture indicates. It is not likely, how- 
ever, to become of economic importance in the plankton of the bay. 

ECTINOSOMA CURTICORNE Boeck 

Ectinosoma ourticorne Boeck, Christiania Vidensk. Selskabet Foihaiidlinger, 
p. 45, 1872.— G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 36, pi. 20, 1904. 

Occurrence. — ^Well distributed, more particularly in the inner bay, 
where it was found at a majority of the stations. Taken usually 
in the bottom net in the outer bay, but often at the surface in the 
inner bay. A winter species but lasting into spring and sometimes 
into summer. The largest single haul was in a vertical net at Sta- 
tion Z on March 27, 1921, in 13 meters of water over a muddy bot- 
tom, when about 700 specimens were obtained. 

Remarks. — This little copepod is found in sufficient numbers in 
the inner bay to form an important constituent of the plankton. It 
is evidently a littoral species and lives in brackish water. 

ECTINOSOMA NORMANI T. and A. Scott 

Ectinosoma normani T. and A. Scott, Trans. Linnaean Soc. London, vol. 6, p. 
435, pi. 36, figs. 21, 29, 39 ; pi. 37, figs. 12, 26, 34, 51 ; pi. 38, figs. 5, 18, 42, 
45 ; 1897.— G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 35, pi. 19, 1904. 

Occurrence. — About 30 specimens of this species, all females, were 
taken in the bottom net at Station Y, January 27, 1921, from water 
20 meters deep over a muddy bottom ; this is the only record for the 
bay. 

Remarks. — This species is much less common than E. curticorne 
and probably occurs but rarely in the bay. Like the other species 
of the genus it is a littoral form and lives in the shallower and less 
saline water. The bright-red pigment patch on each side of the 
head between the bases of the first and second antennae forms a 



AKT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 37 

striking character, and the color remains in some of the preserved 
specimens. This furnishes a quick method of distinguishing the 
species from others of the genus, and the distinction can afterward 
be verified by an examination of the fifth legs. 

HARPACTICUS CHELIFER (O. F. Muller) 

Cyclops cJielifcr O. F. Muixer, Zoologicus Dauaae Protliomus, p. 2913, 1776; 

Eutomostraca, p. 114, pi. 13, figs. 1-3, 1785. 
Harpacticus ohelifer G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 49, pis. 27, 28, 

1904. 

Occurrence. — Only two females of this species were taken, at 
Station G in a surface net December 4, 1920. 

Remarhs. — This is a northern form, littoral in habit, and hence 
is likely to occur in any numbers in the bay. It can be recognized 
at once by the enormous chelae on the maxiilipeds, which are much 
larger than those of other species of the genus. Sars recorded it as 
found in " quite shallow water close to the shore among algae, and 
not infrequently left in tidal pools together with other littoral spe- 
cies." From the distribution given by various authors this is an 
extremely cosmopolitan species, appearing in nearly every sea and 
ocean. 

HARPACTICUS GRACILIS Glaus 

Harpacticus gracilis Claus, Die frei lebenden Copepoden, p. 135, pi. 19, flg. 
20, 1863.— G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 52, pi. 30, 1904. 

Occurrence. — Widely distributed throughout the bay but more 
abundant in the inner portion. Taken most frequently at the sur- 
face and in the winter, but lasting into spring and sometimes into 
summer. Nowhere found in sufficient numbers to constitute more 
than 1 or 2 per cent of the total haul, and usually much less than that. 

Remarks. — In spite of the wide distribution of this copepod 
throughout the bay, the small numbers found at each station prevent 
it from becoming of much importance in the economy of the plank- 
ton. It does help, however, by its continued presence through most 
of the year, and contributes its quota toward the food supply. It 
is a littoral form and was reported by both Sars and Brian as found 
in comparatively shallow water among algae. As far as known it 
has not before been reported from our American coasts. 

HARPACTICUS LITTORALIS G. O. Sars 

Harpacticus chelifer Brady, British Copepoda, vol. 2, p. 146, pi. 64, figs. 19-20; 

pi. 65, figs. 1-15, 1880. 
Harpacticus littoralis G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, 363, suppl. 

pi. 8, 1910. 

Occurrence. — About 40 specimens of this species were obtained 
in a surface net at Station R' on December 8, 1920, and a few 
stragglers were also taken at Stations S and T. 



88 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Remarks. — Sars said of this copepod : " It is a pronouncedly littoral 
species, being generally found in very shallow water, especially in 
flat sandy creeks." R' and T were two of the shallowest stations in 
the bay, the water measuring 7 and 9 meters, respectively, but S 
was considerably deeper. In all three, however, the water was de- 
cidedly brackish, especially at the surface, where these specimens were 
obtained. In general, therefore, the conditions here in Chesapeake 
Bay correspond favorably with those given by Sars. 

MACROSETELLA GRACILIS (Dana) 

Betella gracilis Dana, Wilkes Expedition, Crustacea, vol. 14, p. 1198, pi. 84, 
fig. 3, a~g, 1853.— Wheelek, Bull. U. S. Bur. Fisheries, vol. 19, p. 188, fig. 
24, 1900. 

Occurrence. — Nearlj' 100 specimens of this species were taken in 
a surface net over a depth of 67 fathoms in the outside ocean ; none 
were found within the limits of the bay. 

Remarks. — This copepod can be recognized at once by its linear 
body and excessively long caudal setae. It is a true pelagic form and 
is not likely to be found anywhere in the bay. 

MICROSETELLA NORVEGICA (Boeck) 

Setella norvegica Bobcic, Christiania Videnskebeliger Selskabet Forhandlinger, 

pi. 11, fig. 1 (9 figs.), 1864. 
Microsetella norvegica G. O. Sars, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 44, pi. 24, 

1904. 

Occurrence. — About 100 specimens, including both sexes, were ob- 
tained in a vertical net at Station F on December 4, 1920, and 70 
more in a surface net at Station E on January 22, 1921. 

Remarks. — From the distribution given by various authors this is 
a very cosmopolitan species. According to Sars it is a true pelagic 
copepod, always taken near the surface and usually at a considerable 
distance from shore. Although it did not appear during the August 
trip to the 100-fathom line, it is probably present there in winter 
and early in spring, the season at which it was found at the mouth 
of the bay. 

MICROTHALESTRIS LITTORALIS G. O. Sars 

Microthalc stria littoralis G. O. Sabs, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 369, suppl. 
pi. 11, fig. 1 (9 figs.), 1911. 

Occurrence. — This species was widely distributed throughout the 
entire bay, but was nowhere abundant. The largest haul was at 
Station T in a bottom net on March 29, 1921, from water 9 meters 
deep over a muddy bottom. Here it constituted 1 per cent of a catch 
that totaled 25,000, but its numbers were usually so small as to fall 
below a percentage mark. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 39 

Remarks. — Sars called this harpactid " a pronouncedly littoral 
form, being only found in the uppermost part of the littoral zone, 
and very often in shallow pools left by the tide." In Chesapeake 
Bay it was almost wholly confined to winter and early spring. Be- 
ing a new species established by Sars and afterward found by Steur, 
Pesta, and Brian in the Mediterranean, it has never before been re- 
ported from our American coast. Sars found only the female, but 
Brian added the male of the species, and the present specimens in- 
cluded also both sexes. 

ROBERTSONIA CHESAPEAKENSIS, new species 
Pl^TEJ 4, A-I 

Specific characters of female. — Body fairly stout, almost cylindri- 
cal; anterior portion considerably dilated, a little more than half 
as wide as long, widest in the center. Cephalic segment nearly 
equaling in length the entire thorax, widest across its posterior mar- 
gin. Rostrum narrow-triangular, longer than wide and bluntly 
pointed. Second, third, and fourth thoracic segments smoothly 
rounded at their posterior corners. Posterior body three-quarters as 
long and a little more than half as wide as the anterior. Genital 
segment as long as the entire abdomen, with a transverse suture 
near the center, which is distinct on the sides and ventral surface but 
fades out on the dorsal surface. Abdomen of three segments, di- 
minishing in length posteriorly ; anal segment with an angular notch 
between the bases of the caudal rami; the latter wider than long, 
obtusely truncated and tipped with two long and several shorter 
setae. Eye small but fairly distinct. Egg case single. 

Specific characters of male. — Body regions similar to those of the 
female, posterior body rather stouter; its segments fringed on their 
posterior margins with slender spines, especially prominent on the 
ventral surface. Terminal setae of caudal rami considerably stouter 
than in the female, the longest one as long as the entire posterior 
body. 

First antennae 7-segmented, rather densely setose, the fourth seg- 
ment enlarged and armed with two aesthetasks. Second antennae 
short and stout, the proximal segment a little longer than the distal 
and armed on its anterior margin with a stout seta. The outer 
ramus 2-segmented nearly as long as the distal segment and carrying 
five setae, two lateral, and three terminal. Mandibular palp with 
a broad, laminate terminal joint armed with a tuft of setae on its 
rounded tip and a single longer one on the inner margin near the 
center. Maxilliped of moderate size, the basal joint with two long 
setae and several smaller ones at the anterior distal corner ; terminal 
joint about as long as the basal and considerably swollen, with four 



40 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol.80 

P 

or five long setae on its anterior margin ; claw fully as long as the 
terminal joint and itself segmented near the base, where it carries 
a few long setae on its outer margin. 

Endopod of first legs much longer than the exopod, with three 
fingerlike processes on the outer margin of the second segment. 
Endopod of second legs prehensile, the second segment tipped with 
two long and slender, spinelike appendages, closely juxtaposed, each 
ending in a minute claw. On the inner margin of this segment 
close to the bases of the spines are two setae, longer than the spines. 
Fifth legs with the terminal segment broadly triangular and armed 
with five large plumose setae and a much smaller nonplumose one, 
the third from the inner corner. Inner expansion of the basal seg- 
ment not quite reaching the tip of the terminal segment and tipped 
with two plumose setae. A pair of rudimentary sixth legs on the 
ventral surface of the genital segment just behind the median suture, 
each consisting of a small knob tipped with three setae. 

Color (preserved material). — Light brown. 

Measurements. — Length : Female, 0.7 mm. ; male, 0.8 mm. 

Occurrence. — Several specimens, including but a single female, 
were taken in a bottom net at Station T on March 29, 1921, from 
water 9 meters deep over a muddy bottom. The species was not 
found elsewhere in the bay. 

Types.— \J.^.'^.M. No. 58561, male, holotype; No. 63418, 2 males, 
1 female, paratypes. 

Remarks. — The single female was kept intact, and the description 
of the appendages is based upon those of the male, which are con- 
trasted with the male of tenuis., the genus type, described by Sars.* 
The chief points of difference are found in the general body form, 
especially the proportions of the various parts, and in the details of 
the second antennae, mandible, and second legs. 

TACHmiUS LITTORALIS Poppe 

Tachidius littoralis Poppe, Abh. Naturw. Vereiiie, vol. 7, p. 149, pi. 6, 1881. 

Occurrence. — A few females were taken at the surface at Station 
L' on October 19, 1920, in water 8 meters deep. A single female 
was captured in the bottom net at Station N' on January 25, 1921, 
in water 11 meters deep. 

Remarks. — Poppe's specimens came from the mouth of the Ems 
Hiver in northwestern Germany. Brady classed it as a brackish- 
water species found in estuaries and salt marshes. Such localities 
agree well with the two shallow water stations here in Chesapeake 
Bay, mentioned above. As far as known the species has not before 
been reported from American shores. 



'Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 334, pi. 222, 1909. 



ABT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY — WILSON 41 

TISBE FURCATA (Baird) 

Canthocamptus furcatus Baibd, British Entoinostraca, p. 210, pi. 25, figs. 1-2; 

pi. 30, figs. 4-6 ; 1850. 
Idyaea furcata G. O. Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 5, p. 88 ; pis. 51, 52, fig. 1,^ 

1905 ; p. 367, 1910. 

Occun-ence. — Taken at Station G' in a vertical net on December 4, 
1920, and at the surface on May 30, 1921, the latter haul yielding 
more than 200 specimens. One hundred and fifty specimens were 
also obtained in a bottom net on the 100-fathom line in the outside 
ocean. 

Remarks. — ^The genus name of Idya being preoccupied, Lillje- 
borg's name of Tisbe must be substituted for it, not Idyaea. Sars 
said : " This is perhaps the commonest and most widely distrib- 
uted of all our Harpacticoida." It is a littoral form and north- 
ern in its habitat, and possibly Chesapeake Bay is near the south- 
ern limit of its range. 

Suborder CYCLOPOIDA 

BOMOLOCHUS EMINENS Wilson 

Bomoloch^is eminens Wilson, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 39, p. 368, pi. 53, figs. 
148-154, text fig. 6, 1911. 

Occurrence. — Half a dozen specimens, including both sexes, were 
obtained at Station P in a surface net on August 24 and in a bottom 
net on October 19, 1920. Development stages, probably of the same 
species, were also taken at this station. 

Remarks. — This species was established to include certain speci- 
mens taken from the gill cavity of the false Spanish sardine, 
Clwpanodon pseudohispanicus, at the Tortuga Islands. This fish 
is abundant about Cuba and in the Gulf of Mexico and goes north- 
ward along the Atlantic coast as far as Woods Hole. Either this 
or some closely allied fish probably serves as host to the Boniolochus 
parasite in Chesapeake Bay. 

CORYCELLA* CARINATA (Giesbrecht) 

Corycacus carinatus Giesbbeicht, Fauna uiid Flora des Golfes von Neapel, 
vol. 13, p. 675, pi. 51, figs. 20, 26, 1892. 

Occurrence. — About 40 specimens, all females, were obtained at the 
surface on the 100-fathom line on August 21, 1921, and a few were 
taken in a vertical net at Station G in the mouth of the bay on 
December 4, 1920. 

Remarks. — This is evidently a pelagic form and does not get far 
into the bay. From the dates given by other authors, this copepod 
is probably found throughout the year in the open ocean. 

" The name Corycella Farran, 1911. was used by Leger for a genus of Protozoa in 
1898. Blake has proposed in manuscript the name Farranulu for this genus, but as it 
has not yet been published Corycella is retained here. 



42 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAX. MUSEUM vol.80 

COKYCAEUS ELONGATUS Claus 

Corycaeus elongatus Claus, Die frei lebenden Copepoden, p. 157, pi. 24, figs. 3, 
4, 1863. — GiESBKECHT, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, p. 
674, pi. 15, figs. 6, 7, 1892. 

Occurrence. — A few specimens, including both sexes, were taken in 
n bottom net at Station C on December 20, 1920, and a few females 
were captured in a surface net in the outside ocean on August 21, 
1921. 

Remarks. — This copepod advanced a little farther into the bay 
(luring winter than Corycella carinata. According to the authors 
the present species does not seem to be abundant anywhere, but is 
always found in small numbers. This fact and its small size make 
it of no economic importance in the plankton of the bay. 

CORYCAEUS LUBBOCKII Giesbrecht 

Corycaeus lubhocMi Giesbeexiht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, 
vol. 19, p. 674, pi. 51, figs. 57, 58. 1892. 

COEYCAEUS ROBUSTUS Giesbrecht 

Corycaeus robustus Giesbrecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, 
vol. 19, p. 673, pi. 51, fig. 38, 1892. 

CORYCAEUS ROSTRATUS Clans 

Corycaeus rostratus Claus, Die frei lebeudeu Copepoden, p. 157, pi. 28, fig. 5, 
1863. — Giesbrecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, p. 674, 
pi. 51, fig. 16, 1892. 

CORYCAEUS SPECIOSUS Dana 

Corycaeus speciosus Dana, Wilkes Expedition, Crustacea, vol. 14, pt. 2, p. 1220, 
pi. 86, fig. 1, 1, a-d, 1853. — Giesbkecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von 
Neapel, vol. 19, p. 673, pi. 51, fig. 40, 1892. 

Occurrence. — These four species of Corycaeus were found in small 
numbers at the surface on the 100-fathom line, and were not taken 
within the limits of the bay. 

Remarks. — From the locality where they were found it will be 
seen that these four species are pelagic copepods not likely to be 
taken within the limits of the bay. Moreover they are not found 
anywhere in abundance but always in very small numbers. To- 
gether with their small size, this prevents them from becoming of 
economic importance. 

CORYCAEUS VENUSTUS Dana 

Corycaeus Venustus Dana, Wilkes Expedition, Crustacea, vol. 14, p. 1222, 
pi 86, fig. 4a, 1853. — Giesbrecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, 
vol. 19, p. 674, pi. 51, figs. 32-34, 47, 1892. 

Occurrence. — Found in small numbers at Stations B, C, E, and F 
in surface and vertical nets during autumn and winter ; also in sur- 
face and bottom nets on the 100-fathom line in the outside ocean. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CEUSTACEANS OP CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 43 

Remarks. — This was the most widely distributed species of Gory- 
caeus in the bay, but like all the others it occurred only in very small 
numbers. It is quite different from the other species in dorsal view 
and may be recognized without much difficulty. 

CRYPTOPONTIUS GRACILIS, new species 
Plate 4, J-S 

Specific characters of female. — Anterior body broadly expanded 
but not strongly deptessed, with the epimeral lappets close together 
and curved backward. Cephalothorax as wide as long and about a 
fifth longer than the remainder of the body, broadly rounded in front 
with no dorsal crista; rostral projection minute. Lappets on the 
second and third thoracic segments broad and pointed, those on the 
third segment not reaching the center of the genital segment. Lap- 
pets of the fourth segment very small and conical in form, almost 
wholly concealed in dorsal view. Fifth segment very short and nar- 
row and without lappets. Anterior half of genital segment dilated 
laterally to nearly twice the width of the posterior half. Abdomen 
with three segments, decreasing in width, but increasing in length 
posteriorly. Caudal rami as wide as long and rounded at the tip, 
each carrying five setae, of which the second from the inside is the 
longest and the second from the outside is the shortest. 

Anterior antennae with nine segments, of which the second is short 
and the third and ninth quite long. According to Giesbrecht's in- 
terpretation the long third joint represents segments 3 to 8 fused, the 
fourth joint segments 9 to 11 fused, the fifth joint the twelfth seg- 
ment, the sixth, seventh, and eighth joints three segments each, and 
the ninth joint segments 22 to 25 fused. On this basis the large 
aesthetask, which is two-thirds as long as the entire antenna, is 
attached to the twenty-third segment. 

The posterior antennae are 4-segmented, the second and fourth 
joints about equal and much longer than the first and third, the 
middle terminal seta stout and rigid. The rudimentary exopod 
is rather large and is tipped with a single seta. The mouth tube 
is slender and extends nearly to the posterior margin of the cephalo- 
thorax; its basal portion is a little more than six times as wide 
as the terminal. The outer lobe of the maxilla is two-thirds as long 
as the inner, with a single stout apical seta, while the inner lobe 
ends in a minute seta. The terminal segment of the second maxilla 
is but little longer than the basal and enlarged at its tip, with a 
short and stout terminal claw. The terminal claw of the maxilliped 
is stout and is not so long as the second and third joints combined. 

Specific characters of male. — Cephalothorax a fifth longer than 
wide and also a fifth longer than the rest of the body. The first 
antennae have ten segments, with aesthetasks of half the length of 



44 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM yol. 80 

the entire antenna on the dorsal surface of segments two to eight. 
The entire genital segment is dilated to twice the width of the 
abdomen; the latter has four segments, of which the basal and 
terminal are twice the length of the other two. 

Color (preserved material). — Uniform yellowish white. 

Measurements. — Length: Female, 1 mm.; male, 0.85 mm. 

Occurrence. — Six specimens, including both sexes, were taken in a 
bottom net at Station A on December 5, 1920, in water 46 metere 
deep over a bottom of black mud. This station is well inside the 
mouth of the bay, and the species may occur elsewhere. 

Types.— [5.^.'^. M. No. 58562, male, holotype; No. 63419, 1 male, 
4 females, paratypes. 

Remarks. — This species is closely related to hrevifurcatus^ the type 
of the genus, but differs in the greatly increased width and decreased 
length of the cephalothorax of the female, and in the details of the 
various appendages, especially the mouth tube and the first maxillae. 
In Sars's figure of the female of hrevifurcatv^ the cephalothorax is 
twice as long as wide and also twice as long as the remainder of the 
body. In Giesbrecht's figure of the male the cephalothorax is only 
one-fifth longer than wide, but is nearly twice as long as the re- 
mainder of the body. These are very different proportions from 
those here given. In the female Sars makes the mouth tube ten 
times as long as its basal width, with the terminal portion exceedingly 
slender and tapering regularly to the tip. Here the length is only five 
times its basal width, and the terminal portion is stout and somewhat 
enlarged at the tip. 

HEMICYCLOPS AMERICANUS, new species 
Plate 5, A-H 

SpecifiG characters of female. — Body cyclopoid and fairly stout, 
with the anterior division sharply separated from the posterior, 
strongly depressed and obovate in outline. Cephalic segment consid- 
erably wider than its length on the midline, and longer than the four 
succeeding segments combined, with a small triangular rostral proc- 
ess, invisible dorsally. Epimeral plates of the second, third, and 
fourth segments close together and rounded at their posterior corners, 
the fourth segment a little more than half the width of the cephalon. 
Fifth segment abruptly contracted to half the width of the fourth, 
swollen through the bases of the fifth legs, and strongly narrowed 
anteriorly. Genital segment a little wider than fifth segment ante- 
riorly but tapered posteriori}^, with a median transverse suture visible 
at the sides but fading out on the dorsal surface. iVbdomen of three 
segments slightly tapered, the basal segment the longest, the second 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 45 

segment the shortest. Caudal rami twice as long as wide, rounded 
at their tips and almost parallel. Egg cases elongate-ovate in form, 
reaching the anterior margin of the last abdominal segment. 

First antennae reaching but little beyond the center of the cepha- 
lothorax, abruptly bent at their base and considerably tapered, the 
second and fourth segments the longest. Second antennae projecting 
beyond the margin of the carapace, penultimate joint wider than 
long, much shorter than the antepenultimate and terminal joints; 
distal corner strongly produced and armed with a tuft of stout setae ; 
terminal joint tipped with six strong setae, four of which are genicu- 
late, and a few short bristles. 

. First maxillae tipped with two stout spines and two setae on the 
inner margin inside the spines; palp tipped with four setae, with a 
well-defined lobe on the inner margin, also bearing four setae. 
Second maxillae with two coarse setae and a tiny one between them 
near the tip of the proximal joint on the inner margin; distal joint 
tipped with two stout clawlike spines and two setae about as long as 
the spines. Maxillipeds with the middle joint slightly swollen on 
the inner margin and armed with two plumose setae ; terminal joint 
tipped with two plumose setae, but without any curved spines. 

Swimming legs with the endopods longer than the exopods, the 
spines on both rami slender, minutely pectinate and armed just below 
the tip with a threadlike cilia. Fifth legs with a widened proximal 
joint carrying a stout seta on the anterior distal corner ; distal joint 
laminate, densely ciliate on the lateral margins, with a few minute 
spines on the posterior margin near the tip, an apical spine accom- 
panied by a bristle, and three spines on the anterior margin, all the 
spines pectinate. 

Color (preserved material). — Clear yellowish white. 

Measurements. — Length of adult female, 1.65 mm.; width of 
cephalothorax, 0.65 mm. 

Occurrence. — Two females were obtained in a bottom net at Sta- 
tion E' in water 7 meters deep over a bottom of muddy sand on June 
2, 1921; four females in a bottom net at Station W on March 25, 
1921, in 13 meters of water over a muddy bottom; and two females 
at the latter station in a bottom net on June 3, 1921. The first two 
are made the types. 

Types.— U. S. N, M, No, 58563, holotype ; No, 63420, paratype. 

Remarks. — From the record just given it is evident that this 
copepod is probably a bottom species, found in the brackish water 
of the inner bay during spring and summer. The type species of the 
genus, purpureus^ was found by Sars in the Christiana Fiord on the 
Norwegian coast and was also recorded by T. Scott from the coast 
of Scotland. 



46 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

METACYCLOPS GRACIUS (LUIjeborg) 

Cyclops gracilis Lilljbbokg, De Crustaceis ex ordinibus tribus in Scania occur- 

rentibus, Appendix, p. 208, 1853. 
Mesocyclops gracilis G. O. Saes, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 6, p. 63; pi. 39, 

1914. 
Metacyclops gracilis Kiefeb, Das Tierreich, Lief. 53, p. 72, 1929. 

Occurrence. — Fourteen specimens of this species were taken in a 
surface net at Station Z on October 17, 1920, in water 13 meters deep 
over a muddy bottom. 

Remarks. — This is a fresh-water species that has been found in 
central Europe and on the Scandinavian peninsula, but has not been 
heretofore reported from American waters. The salinity at the 
surface where the specimens were obtained was 10.4, which is not 
high enough to offer any serious obstacle to their presence. They 
might easily have drifted out of the Patapsco Kiver, the mouth of 
which is just above Station Z. But it is also evident that their 
presence at the station was accidental, and that they are not likely to 
be found in any abundance or to be widely distributed in the bay. 

OITHONA BREVICOBNIS Giesbrecht 

Plate 3, I ; Plate 5, I-N 

Oithona hrcvicornis Giesbrecht, Atti Accademei Lincei, Rome, ser. 4, vol. 7, p. 
475, 1891; Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, 538, pi. 34, 
figs. 6, 7, 1892.— Farban, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1913, p. 191. 

Farran gave the following specific characters in the reference given 
above : " Eostrum present, ventrally directed, short, curved, not visi- 
ble in dorsal view ; exopod of first foot with 1.1.3 outer edge spines ; 
exopod of fourth foot with 1.1.2 outer edge spines; length 0.7 mm." 
Giesbrecht in the second reference above, under the diagnoses of the 
species of Oithona on page 754, enumerated the following characters 
for the present species : " Forehead ending in a pointed rostrum, 
directed ventrally and not visible in dorsal view. First antennae 
scarcely reaching the posterior margin of the front body or falling 
distinctly short of it. Furca longer than the anal segment. Length 
0.7 mm." The present specimens agree with these diagnoses except 
that the caudal rami are sometimes apparently shorter than the anal 
segment. In Giesbrecht's figure of the female in dorsal view (pi. 
34, fig. 6) he put in a short anal segment next to the caudal rami 
similar to the one seen in the male. This was visible in about half the 
Chesapeake Bay specimens, but in the other half it was indistinguish- 
ably fused with the segment in front of it, and the two together were 
longer than the caudal rami. Giesbrecht also wrote that the male was 
unknown, and Farran accepted his statement. The only description 
of the female is the one given by Giesbrecht, which is extremely 
brief and tells us nothing about the appendages. Accordingly a 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 47 

detailed description is here given of both sexes, with figures of the 
appendages to supply the omitted details. 

Specific characters of feTnale. — Body of the usual slender form but 
relatively stouter than in any species except rohusta and hehes, the 
width of the anterior portion being nearly half its length. Rostrum 
considerably shorter than that of similis and rohusta, pointed and 
curved over ventrally so as to be wholly invisible in dorsal view. 
Head more or less completely fused with the first thoracic segment, 
the dividing suture often practically invisible. Head itself half the 
length of the anterior body; first thoracic segment as wide as the 
head, the second, third, and fourth segments tapering regularly 
backward, the fourth one a trifle more than half the width of the 
first. Fifth segment abruptly contracted into a narrow neck an- 
teriorly, swollen through the bases of the fifth legs to twice the 
width of the neck, and contracted again posteriorly. Genital seg- 
ment swollen anteriorly and tapered posteriorly, as long as the en- 
tire abdomen, with the transverse suture just in front of the center. 
Abdomen of three segments, the terminal or anal one the shortest 
and often indistinguishably fused with the one in front of it. 
Caudal rami longer than this anal segment, more than twice as long 
as wide, each tipped with four setae. The second seta from the out- 
side is the longest and is curved inward across the base of the one 
next to it, which is second in length. 

First antennae slender and, when reflexed, reaching the posterior 
margin of the second thoracic segment; composed of about 11 seg- 
ments, but the grooving of the basal portion is so faintly defined as 
to be very uncertain. Second antennae 2-jointed, the tenninal joint 
a little shorter than the basal and tipped with a tuft of six plumose 
setae, with three others on the outer margin nearer the proximal end. 
First maxillae with the masticatory lobe large and tipped with two 
very stout setalike appendages, and on the outer margin a small 
jointed knob carrying spines; proximal lobe recurved, ending in 
three long setae, with two other shorter ones on the outer margin. 
Second maxillae 5-jointed, basal joint with three setae and a knob 
bearing three other setae; second with two setae; third joint with 
two large setae and a third much smaller one; fourth joint with a 
single seta on each distal corner; fifth joint tipped with two setae. 
The large setae are branched rather than plumose, the branches scat- 
tered and much too large for plumes. Maxillipeds 4-jointed, basal 
joint with one large and two small setae; second joint with two 
large setae; third joint with two of moderate size; last joint with one 
large and a smaller one. Swimming legs like those of other species 
of Oithona, the exopod of the first pair with 1.1.3 outer-edge spines,, 
and the exopod of the fourth pair with 1.1.2 outer-edge spines. 



48 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Specific characters of mole. — Body proportionally wider than in 
the female ; length of anterior body to width as 16 to 9 (as 9 to 4 in 
the female) ; greatest width at posterior margin of cephalothorax, 
while in the female it is a short distance in front of that margin. 
Second segment as wide as the cephalothorax, third segment nar- 
rowed a little, fourth segment abruptly contracted to three-fifths of 
the width of the third segment; fifth segment nearly circular in 
outline, fifth legs longer than in the female. Genital segment ovate, 
armed on the dorsal surface at each posterior corner with a long 
seta. Abdomen of four segments, all the same width; caudal rami 
considerably longer than the anal segment and three times as long 
as wide. 

First antennae apparently 14-jointed, but with the jointing of the 
basal portion very indistinct; terminal portion made up of two 
joints of about the same length. The basal portion of each antenna 
is bent near its center, and the joint at the flexure is armed at its 
distal posterior corner with a small spine inside of which is a rather 
long seta. The second antennae and mouth parts are like those of the 
female. 

Measurements. — Female: Total length, 0.6 mm.; length of an- 
terior body, 0.33 mm. ; greatest width, 0.15 mm. ; length of posterior 
bc^y, 0.27 mm. Male: Total length, 0.55 mm.; length of anterior 
bod3% 0.32 mm. ; greatest width, 0.18 mm. ; length of posterior body, 
0.23 mm. 

Occurrence. — Taken at every station in the bay except U, abundant 
everywhere and sometimes constituting 50 per cent or more of the 
total catch. More abundant in the inner bay than in the outer, al- 
though the two largest single hauls of the species were both made 
in the outer bay. 

Distribution. — Western Pacific near Hong Kong (Giesbrecht) ; 
Mediterranean (Pesta, Giesbrecht ) ; Atlantic Ocean, latitude 6° S. 
(Cleve) ; Woods Hole (Fish). 

Remarks. — The peculiar crossing of the long setae on the caudal 
rami of the female is a notable characteristic of this species. It is 
one of the smallest copepods in the bay, but also next to the two 
Acartias it is the most widely distributed. Hence its regular occur- 
rence and comparative abundance more than offset its diminutive 
size and make it of great economic importance in the plankton. It 
was not found by Esterly on the California coast, but its place was 
taken by Oithona nana, another of Giesbrecht's species. A com- 
parison of specimens taken at Woods Hole in the summer of 1923 
with these from Chesapeake Bay shows that the two are the same 
species. Fish has recorded it as a summer form, while in Chesapeake 
Bay it was found throughout the entire bay during both summer and 



iBT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 49 

winter. It is also found in the outer bay during autumn and proba- 
bly during spring and in the inner bay during spring. Cleve, in 
discussing the geographical distribution of Atlantic Copepoda and 
their physical conditions,^" gave 20.29 as the mean salinity of the 
water in which this species was found. In the records here given 
the average salinity is much less than that, and at several stations 
was less than 10. This species, therefore, can accommodate itself to 
marked changes in salinity with almost as much ease as the two 
species of Acartia and Harpacticus gracilis. 

OITHONA PLUMIFERA Baird 

Oithona plumifera Baird, Newman's Zool., vol. 1, p. 59, 1843. — Giesbrecht, 
Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, p. 754 ; pis. 4, 34, 44, 1892. 

Occurrence. — This copepod was not found within the limits of the 
bay, but many specimens were obtained in the bottom net from 
depths of 20 and 118 fathoms in the outside ocean. 

Remarks. — This is a pelagic form and not likely to be found within 
the limits of the bay. It has never been found anywhere in sufficient 
abundance to become of more than scientific interest. 

OITHONA SIMILIS Clans 

Oithona similis Claus, Die Copepodenfauna von Nizza, p. 14, 1866. — G. O. 
Saks, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 6, p. 6 (1918, p. 207), pi. 3, 1913. 

Occurrence. — Found at every station in the bay except D, H, M, 
and U; found much more abundant in the imier bay, but not so 
well distributed nor in such large numbers as brevicornis; decidedly 
a winter form but present also at other seasons. 

Remarks. — Fish lists this copepod as a summer form at Woods 
Hole, and Wheeler obtained his specimens in July. Chesapeake Bay 
is much farther south, and while this species was found sometimes 
in summer in the outer bay, it was taken almost exclusively during 
autumn and winter in the inner bay. Like hrevicomis^ it was pres- 
ent in sufficient numbers to offset its diminutive size and formed an 
important addition to the plankton. 

OITHONA SPINIROSTRIS Claus 

Oithona spinirostris Claus, Die frei lebenden Copepoden, p. 105, pi. 11, figs. 
4-9, 1863.— G. O. Sabs, Crustacea of Norway, vol. 6, p. 6, pis. 1, 2, 1913. 

Occurrence. — A few specimens were taken in a surface net at 
Station G on December 4, 1920. About 40 specimens were also 
obtained in a bottom net at a depth of 20 fathoms in the outside 
ocean during the trip to the 100-fathom line on August 21, 1920. 

^^ Ofversigt af Kongl. Vetenskaps-Akademiens FSrhandllngar, p. 139, 1900. 



,50 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Reinarhs. — This species has been generally confused with plumif- 
era, but it lacks the plumes, which are the essential characteristic 
of that species, and is considerably larger. Like flumifera it is a 
pelagic form, widely distributed over the northern Atlantic, but 
not likely to penetrate very far into the bay. Sars said of it : " To 
judge from the structure of the oral parts, the animal must be of 
a very rapacious nature, probably feeding upon other small pelagic 
animals." ^^ 

ONCAEA MINUTA Giesbrecht 

Oncaea mlnuta Giesbrecht, Fauna uud Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, 
p. 603, pi. 47, figs. 3, 6, 26, 46, 59, 1892.— G. O. Sabs, Crustacea of Noi-way, 
vol. 6, p. 217. pi. US, fig. 2, 1918. 

Occurrence. — About 25 specimens were obtained in a surface net 
at Station C on August 22, 1920. A few females were also taken at 
the surface at Station E on October 21, in a bottom net at Station F 
on August 22, and in a bottom net at Station L on August 25. 

Remarks. — This little cyclopid was taken only late in summer and 
in autumn, and in very small numbers, except at Station C. It has 
not been reported as abundant anywhere and hence does not become 
of real importance in the plankton. 

ONCAEA VENUSTA Philippi 

Oncaea venusta Philippi, Arch. Naturg., vol. 9, p. Ill, fig. 3, 1843. — Giesbrecht, 
Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, vol. 19, p. 602, pi. 3, fig. 7 ; pi. 47, 
figs. 2, 5, 13, 19, 39, 44, 48, 1892. 

Occurrence. — One hundred specimens were obtained at the surface 
on the 100-fathom line in the outside ocean and 150 in the bottom 
net. Six hundred were obtained at the surface in water 67 fathoms 
deep, and 15 in the surface and bottom nets where the depth was 10 
fathoms. A single female was found in the mouth of the bay. 

Remarks. — This is apparently a pelagic form and widely distrib- 
uted in all the oceans, to judge from the localities given by various 
authors. Hence it is not likely to be found inside of the very mouth 
of the bay. 

SAPPHIRINA GEMMA Dana 

Sapphirina gemma Dana, Wilkes Expedition, Crustacea, vol. 14, p. 1252, pi. 88, 
fig. 1, a-f; fig. 2, a-g; 1853. — Giesbrecht, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von 
Neapel, vol. 19, p. 640, pi. 3, fig. 4 ; pi. 52, figs. 3, 4, 62, 64 ; pi. 53, figs. 19, 
31, 32, 61 ; pi. 54, figs. 10, 12, 46 ; 1892. 

Occurrence. — A few specimens, including both sexes, were obtained 
in the bottom net drawn from depths of 40 and 118 fathoms during 
the trip to the 100-fathom line in the outside ocean. 

"Crustacea of Norway, vol. 6, p. 7, 1913. 



ART. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WELSOK 51 

Remarks. — Though captured swimming freely this copepod lives 
commensally within some species of Salpa. According to Giesbreclit 
it uses S. deniocratica as a host, but Wheeler's specimens were taken 
in company with S. cordiformis. 

SAPPHIRINA SINUICAUDA Brady 

Sapphirina sinuicanda Brady, Challenger Expedition, Copepoda, vol. 8, p. 129, 
pi. 49, fig.>-'. 7-10, 1883. — GiESBBECHT, Fauna und Flora des Golfes von 
Neapel, vol. 19, p. 648, pi. 52, figs. 31, 33, 34 ; pi. 53, tigs. 42, 50 ; pi. 54, tigs. 
26, 36, 70, 1892. 

Occwrence. — ^About 40 specimens of this species were taken in a 
bottom net at the 100-fathom line in the outside ocean; none were 
found within the limits of the bay. 

Remarks. — Like >S'. gemma, this is also a pelagic form and not 
likely to be found within the limits of the bay. Thus far all the 
specimens have been captured while swimming freely, but like other 
species of the genus it is probable that the present one lives com- 
mensally within some species of Salpa. 

Suborder CALIGOIDA 

CALIGUS SCHISTONYX Wilson 

Caucus schistonyx Wilson, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 28, p. 564, pi. 6, figs. 
6&-78, 1905. 

OcGurrenoe. — Several specimens were obtained in the surface net 
at Station G in the mouth of the bay on October 21, and in the 
vertical net on December 4, 1920. Others were captured in both 
surface and bottom nets at Station C on October 20, 1920. All the 
specimens taken were swimming freely in the tow. 

Remarks. — Of the 15 lots of this species already in the collection 
of the United States National Museum, 9 were obtained from the 
tow. This species is very often captured when swimming freely, 
probably because it is an external parasite on the common menhaden 
{Brevoortia tyrannus). These fishes serve as the prey or food of 
other fishes, and while being caught and eaten some of their external 
parasites would naturally be set free in the water. 



52 



PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



SPECIMENS DEPOSITED IN THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL. MUSEUM 

AND INDEX OF SPECIES 

Out of the large number of specimens here recorded, those listed 
in Table 4 have been selected to serve as types of the new species and 
as samples of the identification of the other species. Considerable 
care was exercised in the selection of these samples, in order that 
they might exhibit the average characteristics of the species. 

Table 4. — Specimens of copepods reported upon in this paper deposited in the 
United States National Museum, and index of species 



Species 



U. S. N. M 
No. 



Station 



Page 



Acartiaclaasii. 



Acartia longlremis. 



Alteiitha depressa 

Amallophora brevicornis. 
Anomalocera patersoni 

Bomolochus eminens 



Calanus finmarchicus. 



Calaniis helgolandicus. 
Caligus schistonyx 

Oandacia armata 



58472 
58482 
58504 
68514 
58549 
58441 
58458 
58506 
68512 
68514 
58528 
58557 
58558 
68464 
58470 
58465 
58477 
68502 
58609 



Canuella elongata, new species. 
Centropages bradyi 



Centropages hamatus. 



Centropages typicus. 



Cletodes longicaudatus. 
Clytemnestra rostrata.. 

Corycaeus elongatus 



Corycaeus lubbockii.. 
Corycaeus robustus... 
Corycaeus rostratus- . 
Corycaeus sj>eciosus.. 



Corycaeus venustus. 



Corycellacarinata. 



58446 
68496 
68503 
« 58571 
63417 
58543 
58446 
58488 
58521 
68442 
58483 
58484 
58516 
58454 
68529 
58453 
58497 
58530 
58534 
58515 
58613 
58449 
58520 
58559 
58536 
58542 



3 

Y 

C 



Z 

E 

F 
1 100-f. 1. 

C 

C 

F 
100-f. 1. 
..do... 

P 
-.do--. 

E 

G 
100-f. 1. 
..do... 



G 

100-f. 1. 

40-f. 1. 

W 

100-f. 1. 

E 

G 
100-f. 1. 

E 

E 

G 
100-f. 1. 

R 
100-f. 1. 

C 
..do.... 
100-f. 1. 
..do.... 
..do.... 
..do.... 

E 
100-f 

B 
..do. 

Q 



,1. 



19 



20 



33 
20 
21 

41 



21 

21 
51 

22 

33 
22 

22 



23 

35 
35 

42 

42 
42 
42 
42 

42 
41 



> 100-fathom line. 



' Type specimen. 



iBT. 15 COPEPOD CRUSTACEANS OF CHESAPEAKE BAY WILSON 



53 



Table 4. — Specimens of copepods reported upon in this paper deposited in the 
United States National Museum, and index of specie*— Continued 



SPEaES 



Cryptopontius gracilis, new species. 



Dactylopusia brevicornis. 
Diosaccus tenuicornis 



Ectinosoma curticorne. 



Ectinosoma normanl 

Euchaeta norvegica 

Eurytemora americana.. 

Eurytemora hirundoides . 



Harpacticus chelifer. . 
Harpacticus gracilis. . 
Harpacticus littoralis. 



Hemicyclops americanus, new species. 



Labidocera aestiva. 



Labidocera wollastoni. 
Macrosetella gracilis... 

Mecynocera clausii 

Metacyclops gracilis... 
Metridia lucens.. 



Microsetella norvegica... 
Microthalestris littoralis. 



Oithona brevicornis. 



Oithona plumifera... 

Oithona similis 

Oithona spinirostris. 



Oncaea minuta. 



Oncaea venusta. 



Paracalanus parvus. 



Pontella atlantica. 
Pontella meadii... 



Pontella pennata, new species. 



Pseudocalanus elongatus. 



U. S. N. M. 
NO. 



'58562 
63419 



58468 
58469 
58556 
58474 
58495 
58487 
68524 
58550 



68493 
68466 
« 58563 
63420 
58452 
68461 
68485 
58499 
68519 
58523 
58561 
68480 
58672 
68494 



68501 
68444 
68459 
68463 
58462 
58510 
58535 
58490 
68486 
68552 
58481 
68447 
58505 
58664 
6849 
68533 
68443 
68518 
58526 
68655 
58491 
58564 
68565 
58567 
8 68568 
68566 
63416 
68467 
58476 
68600 
58525 



Station 



F 
Z 
O 
Y 
100-f.l. 
V 
M 
Z 



V 

R' 

..do.... 

G 

E 

Y 
60-f.l. 

F 

A 

O 

G 
100-f.l. 
..do.-.. 



100-f.l. 
E 
F 
N' 
F 
H' 
F 
100-f.l. 
Q 
F 
G 
E 
100-f.l. 

C 

100-f. 1. 

...do... 

E 

100-f.l. 

..do... 

100-f.l. 

...do.... 

F 

C 
..do.... 
..do.... 
100-f.l. 

E 

Y 

40-f.l. 

100-f.l. 



Page 



43 

35 
36 

36 

36 
23 
24 

24 

87 

37 
37 

44 



24 



25 
38 
25 
46 
25 

38 

38 

46 

49 
49 
49 

60 
60 

26 

26 
26 



27 



29 



' Type specimen 



54 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80: art. 15 

TABI.B 4. — Specimetis of copepods reported upon in this paper deposited in the 
United States National Museum, and index of species — Continued 



Species 



Pseiidodiaptomus coronatus. 



Rhlncalanufi nasutiis .- 

Robertsonia cbesapeakensis, new species. 



Sapphirina gemma 

Sapphirina sinulcauda. 

Tachidius littoralis 

Temora discaudata 



Temora longicornis. 

Temora turbinata. . 
Tisbefurcata 



U. 8. N. M. 
No. 



58450 
58475 
58507 
58511 
58570 
58489 
« 58561 
63418 
58517 
58508 



Station 



Page 



58451 
58456 
58460 
58478 
58560 
58465 
58492 



R' 
Y 
A 
C 
O' 
100-f. 



100-f. 
..do.. 



Q 
„do. 
-.do. 

G 
..do. 

F 

Q' 



30 

32 

39 

£6 
51 
40 
32 

32 

33 
41 



• Type specimen. 



a S. SOVERNMENT PRINTINS OFFICE: I»i2 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL 80. ART 15 PL 1 



1 mm. 




PONTELLA PENNATA 

A Dorsal view of female; B, side view of female; C, dorsal view of male; D, grasping antenna of male; 
E, second antenna of female; F, mandible and palp; G, mandible of male; H, fifth legs of female; 
I, fifth legs of male. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 15 PL. 2 



5 mm 




PSEUDODIAPTOMUS CORONATUS 

A, Dorsal view of feiiiak'; li, dorsal view of male; C, side view of posterior body of female; 
D, ventral view of posterior body showing asymmetry; E, second antenna; F, mandible 
and palp; O, second maxilla; II, maxilliped; 1, fifth legs of female; J, fifth legs of male. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80, ART. 15 PL 3 




Canuella elongata and OITHONA BREVICORNIS 

A-n, Cnmielln rUrnijata: A, Dorsal vii'W of femak'; B, side view of female; (", mandible and palp; 

D, first ma.\illa; F, maxilliped; G, first swimming leg; H, second swimming leg, 
I, Oithona brevkoTnis: Dorsal view of male. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 15 PL. 4 



10 mm 




ROBERTSONIA CHESAPEAKENSIS AND CRYPTOPONTI US GRACILIS 

A-I, Roberhonia chesapeakensis: A, Dorsal view of female; B, ventral surface of posterior body 
showing rudimoiitarv sixth legs and spines on posterior margins of segments; C, second antenna, 
1) mandibular palp'; E, maxilliped; F, first swimming leg; O, second leg; H, fifth leg. 

J-S, Cryptopontius (iracilU: J, Dorsal view of female; K, dorsal view of male; L, first anteiina of 
female; M, second antenna; N, mouth tube; O, f.rst maxilla; P, second maxilla; Q, maxUlipccl, 
R, first swimming leg; S, fourth leg. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80, ART. 15 PL. 5 




HEMICYCLOPS AMERICANUS AND OlTHONA BREVICORNIS 

A-H, Ilemicyclops anifrkamis: A, Dorsal view of ffinale; B, second antenna; (', mandible 
and palp; D, second maxilla; E, maxilliped; F, first swimming leg; G, fourth leg; H, fifth leg. 

I-N, Oithona hrevicornis: I, Dorsal view of female; J, second antenna; K, first maxilla; L, 
second maxilla; M. maxilliped; N, first swimming leg. 



THE ANCIENT CAVES OF SZECHWAN PROVINCE, CHINA 



By David Crockett Graham 

Collaborator, tyinilhsoiiian Institution 



In the Province of Szechwan, in the western part of China, there 
are thousands of artificial caves. (Figs. 1, 2, 3.) They have been 
chiseled out of solid 
sandstone on the sides 
of hills and cliffs, 
and are found all 
the way from Hupeh 
Province on the east 
to the highlands of 
the Seech wan-Tibetan 
border. There are 
also similar caves 
along the Yellow 
River, in the Prov- 
ince of Kansu.^ 

The caves are usu- 
ally found in steep 
places, both singly 
and in groups. Many 
are difficult of access. 
They vary in depth 
from a few feet to 
130 feet, and are gen- 
erally about 6 feet 
wide and G feet high 
on the inside. The 
floors, sides, and tops 
are the solid stone out 
of which the caves 
have been carved. 
The marl« of the 
chisels can plainly be seen. Some caves are so close together that holes 
have been knocked through the walls that separated them. Excepting 

1 Bishop, C. W., The problem of the Min River caves, p. 1. Reprinted by the Peking 
Express Press from The Chinese Social and Political Science Review, vol. 10, no. 1, Peking, 
January, 1926. 
1 

No. 2916 Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 16. 




FiGUEE 1. — Floor plan of a six-chamber cave, carved from 
the stone diflfs near Kiating. Native rock pillars have 
been left in the common entrance. Length, 130 feet ; 
breadth, 54 feet 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



in a few instances where steps have been made in the rock, there are 
no special approaches to the caves; the typical entrance is simply a 
square hole or door in the solid rock. While the best caves have 
elaborate carvings, which are above and around the front openings, 
or on the sides and pillars near the entrances, most of the caves have 
no carvings at all. 

The popular belief is that these caves, called mantsu dong^ or bar- 
barian caves, were made and used as dwellings by aborigines who 

inhabited Szechwan 
Province before the 
arrival of the Chi- 
nese. There is increas- 
ing evidence, however, 
that they are Chinese 
tombs, and that they 
were constructed for 
77772 burial purposes in the 
/y^^ Han dynasty (206 
'-^'^ B. C.-220 A. D.),and 
possibly during the 
early years of the 
Three Kingdoms. The 
belief of the Chinese that the caves of Szechwan were aboriginal 
dwellings is probably due to the fact that the Chinese population 
of Szechwan Province was practically exterminated by Tsang Sliien 




FiGOEB 2. — Plan of a cave near Kiating. 
\vidth at rear. 6 feet 



Length, 25 feet ; 



''^zMMm^ 





w/////mf^ 



FiGunE 3. — Plan of double cave near Kiating. Total length, 61 feet : width of 

entrance, 21 feet 

Tseng near the close of the Ming dynasty. The new immigrants 
naturally knew little about the past history of the Province. 

There is reliable evidence that the Chinese took possession of 
Chengtu, the capital of the Province, about 300 B. C, and later ex- 
tended their territory westward and sontliward. Monuments at 



AET. 16 CAVES OF SZECHWAN PROVINCE, CHINA GRAHAM 



Yachow and near Lushan show conclusively that during the later 
Han dynasty the Chinese were in possession of Yachow. Kiating 
was in the hands of the Chinese during the Han dynasty, but for 
centuries after Christ the highlands west of Suifu, between the 
Yangtse and the Min Eivers, were under control of the aborigines. 
Suifu was a difficult place for the Chinese to take and occupy, and 
still more difficult to protect from the raids of the mantsus (bar- 
barians) who lived in the mountains not far away. Chu Ko Liang, 
the famous Chinese warrior, placed a garrison in Suifu in 225 A. D. 
For centuries afterwards the city and surrounding country were in- 
cluded in the Kien Wei district and were governed either from Kien 
Wei or from Nan Ch'i. The Suifu history states that the whole Kien 

Wei district, which included ^ ^ ,^ ^^ ^^ .^ 

the Suifu prefecture, was Q-<y<><rX><><><y-q 

an aboriginal country, al- 
though governed by Chinese 
officials who lived in Kien 
Wei. The name Yong Cheo, 
or Mantsu Town, though 
later replaced by various 
other designations, and finally 
by Hsu Cheo Fu, has tended 
to cling to the city of Suifu 
until the present day. 

If the aborigines made and 
lived in the Szechwan caves, 
the Suifu district should 
abound in them, for it has 
plenty of sandstone. Also, 
Suifu was one of the mantsu 
centers and was probably the last large city in Szechwan to be 
taken from the aborigines by the Chinese. There should be fewer 
caves near Chengtu, Kiating, and Yachow. But the fact is that 
at Suifu there are only four or five very small caves, while there 
are many near Yachow and Chengtu, and near Kiating there are 
probably thousands of them. So far as the writer has been able 
to learn, there are no similar artificial caves in Kweichow or 
Yunnan, or even in Tibet, where there are still large numbers of 
mantsus or aborigines. The caves of Szechwan are found in 
the territory occupied by the Chinese during the Han dynasty 
and at the beginning of the Three Kingdoms. Those in Kansu 
Province are reported to be along the Yellow River, in a territory 
that was probably inhabited by the Chinese centuries before Christ. 




PiGDKE 4. — Schematic drawing of the south side 
of a Hau dynasty memorial arch near Ya- 
chow. Height about 25 feet 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 




FiQCRB 5. — A tile roof edge forms a decorative motif fre- 
quently found in caves tluoughout Szechwan Province 




Near Yachow is a memorial arch, about 25 feet high, whose in- 
scriptions show beyond doubt that it was erected in the later Han 
dynasty. It has elaborate carvings (fig. 4), which give an excellent 
basis for comparison with the carvings in the caves. In the public 
museum of Chengtu there are artifacts which were taken from Han 
dynasty graves on the Chengtu plain. Another interesting collec- 
tion, secured in the 
Szechwan caves, is 
preserved in the 
museum of the 
West China Union 
University. 

In the historic museums of Peiping are many artifacts (some of 
which are from Han dynasty graves) dating from the Manchu 
dynasty back to the very beginnings of Chinese history. The Field 
Museum in Chicago, 111., has a collection of articles from Han 
dynasty graves in eastern China. The Smithsonian Institution has 
nearly two hundred 
artifacts, mostly frag- 
mentary, collected by 
the writer in the caves 
of Szechwan Province. 
The writer has visited 
the memorial arch at 
Yachow, the museums 
mentioned above, and 
many of the caves of 
Szechwan, and this 
article is largely the 
result of his impres- 
sions.^ 

The most common 
design used in the 
Szechwan caves is a 
decoration consisting of a series of circles, bridged by quarter circles 
resembling new moons. These are also conspicuous on the Han dy- 
nasty monument at Yachow and on memorial arches, shrines, temples, 
and even ordinary buildings throughout Szechwan Province. The 
same design probably occurs all over China, for it resembles the 
edge of a tile roof, the circles representing the ends of round beams 

* The writer gladly acknowledges his Indebtedness to Rev. Thomas Torrance and to Prof. 
Daniel Sheets Dye, of the West China Union University, both of whom have studied the 
Szechwan caves ; also to Dr. Walter Hough, head curator, department of anthropology, and 
Neil M. Judd, curator of archeology, both of the U. S. National Museum, for their invalu- 
able assistance In the preparation of this article. 



FiGCRE 6. — This carving on the wall of a cave-tomb near 
Kiatlng portrays the side of a tile-roofed house 



AET. 16 CAVES OF SZECHWAN PROVINCE, CHINA GRAHAM 





FiGUEE 7. — Schematic drawing from a cave near 
Kiating, showing the type of half brace fre- 
quently seen in later Chinese buildings and 
memorial arches. Width, about 5 feet 



or poles; the part circles, curved tiles such as are used throughout 
China. (Figs. 5, G; pi. 14.) 

Another common design observed in the caves is the brace, which 
is found in two forms. First is the half brace, employed as fol- 
lows: When, in a build- 
ing or on a memorial arch, 
the space between two 
upright posts is bridged 
by a long beam of wood 
or stone on which rests a 
heavy weight, half braces 
are often brought out from 
the uprights to strengthen 
the crossbeam. (Fig. 7.) 
These half braces, occasion- 
ally seen as ornamental 
carvings in the caves, are very common in Chinese architecture, and 
especially in buildings and on memorial arches. 

The regular or full brace in its simplest form 
somewhat resembles the letter U. (Fig. 8.) 
When a crossbeam bears up a heavy load, 
and is likely to break, another crossbeam may 
be placed a little way below, and several of the 
braces fitted between the two beams. This 
adds to the upper beam the strength of the 
lower beam. Many of these braces are carved 
as ornaments in the Szechwan caves (fig. 9) ; 
several occur on the Han dynasty monument at Yachow. The writer 
has seen many more, some of which are elaborate in design, on me- 
morial arches and 
in Chinese build- 




FiGDRB 8. — A simple 
type of ancient Chi- 
nese brace 



iy=o=^y==o=G=u=^o=^a='o^=^:y=^^^ 



o 




o 



____„__ XT 
ings, both in Szech- 
wan Province and 
in Peiping. (Figs. 
10, 11.) 

In a cave near 
the great Buddha at 
Kiating there is a 
carving of a chariot 
drawn by a man. In 
the public museum 
at Chengtu there 
are two bricks from 
a Han dynasty grave on the Chengtu plain, on each of which is the 
design of a chariot pulled by a horse. These two chariots are similar 



Figure 9. — Carved entrance to the double cave near Kiating. 
(See fig. 3 for plan.) Note representations of the tile 
roof and brace on central column 



6 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



in shape. Three Han dynasty chariots of this kind are illustrated 
by S. W. Bushell in " Chinese Art." ^ Some of the chariots repre- 
sented on the Han dynasty arch at Yachow are of a different type 
and closely resemble the one pictured in " Outlines of Chinese 

History " by Li Ung Bing.* Apparently 
both types mentioned above were common 
in China during the Han dynasty. The 
history of the Three Kingdoms frequently 
mentions chariots in Szechwan Province 
and in other parts of China. 

In two different caves near Kiating are 
carvings which represent, respectively, a 
house (fig. 12) and the roof of a similar 
building (fig. 13). Both resemble modern 
Chinese houses, especially in the upturned 
ends of the roofs. 

In determining by whom and for what 
purposes the caves of Szechwan were 
made, the artifacts actually found in 
the caves are of primary importance. 
Are they Chinese or aboriginal? Are 
they such as are found in homes or in 
tombs? 

Rev. Thomas Torrance, who has studied the Szechwan caves for 
years and was the first to assert that they were of Chinese origin, 
gives the following list of their contents : 





V J 




V 


\ 




J 


\ 


y 


) 




\ ) 




\ 






J 


V 




J 















FiGCBB 10. — Diagram of a 
brace made of bricks. 
Bight such braces hold up 
each story of the old 
Suifu pagoda 





1 


1 






PiGUEE 11. — Brace found at each Bide of a cave ten li west of Kiating. 

Instead of straw or movable wooden figures of men you find them of burnt 
clay, gray and terra cotta in color, glazed and unglazed, from a few inches 



' Bushell, S. W., Chinese Art, vol. i, opposite p. 26, published in London under the 
authority of the Board of Education, 1924. 

* Blng, Li Ung, Outlines of Chinese history, p. 36, Commercial Press, Shanghai, 1»14. 



AUT. 16 



CAVES OF SZECHWAISr PKOVUSTCE, CHINA GRAHAM 



high to nearly full life-size. Tliey represent persons of botli sexes and various 
ranks and callings. There are besides models of houses, cooking pots, boilers, 
vice steamers, bowls, basins, vases, trays, jars, lamps, musical instruments, dogs, 
cats, horses, cows, sheep, fowls, ducks, etc. Standing with your reflector lamp 
in the midst of a large cave it seems verily an imitation of Noah's avk.° 




FiGCRB 12. — Chiseled on the wall of a cave near Kiatlng is this representation of 

a house (slightly idealized) 

The following are among the burnt-clay figures, mostly unglazed, 
secured by the writer in the Szechwan caves, and now in the 
United States National Museum. 
(The accompanying numbers are 
U.S.N.M. catalogue numbers.) 

Plate 1, 5, illustrates a frag- 
ment of an elephant's foot (No. 
342202). In the public museum 
at Chengtu is an unglazed arti- 
fact, taken from a Han dynasty 
grave on the Chengtu plain, on 
which are several images of ele- 
phants, very artistically designed. 
We have historical evidence that 
elephants were known in Szech- 
wan during the early Christian 
centuries. An aborigine chief 
is said to have ridden an elephant in a battle against Chu Ko 
Liang, and the saint, P'u Hsien, now worshiped as a god, is 
said to have ridden an elephant to Mount Omei. 




FiGUEB 13. — Representation of a bouse roof, 
carved on a stone pillar in a cave-tomb 
near Kiating 



5 .Tournal of the North-China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. 41, p. 68. Kelly 
and Walsh, Shanghai, 1910. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM tol. 80 

One fragment is the neck of a large bottle or flask with the figure 
of a person clinging to it. (PI. 2, a; No. 341358.) It is covered 
with green ghize, and the orifice was molded over a stick or other 
cylindrical object. It should be noted that glazed figures are rare 
in the caves of Szechwan. 

A second specimen bearing green glaze is a fragment of a bell or 
drum. (PI. 2, h; No. 341373.) The shape appears to have been 
similar to the Chou dynasty drums in the Confucian Temple at 
Peiping. 

Fowls are frequently represented among the clay offerings from 
the Szechwan caves. Among others in our collection is the image of 
a duck, supported by a circular base. (PI. 3, a; No. 342189.) On 
the back is what resembles a small pot or vessel with a flat top. 

Chickens are frequently represented by the images found in the 
caves of Szechwan Province. Perhaps none is more characteristic 
than that shown in Plate 3, &, which represents a mother hen with 
one baby chicken on her back and three others peeping from under 
her breast. (No. 341385.) 

The dog also provided a favorite theme for the ancient sculptors 
of Szechwan. Three such images are included in the series under 
consideration. One is merely a head fragment (pi. 4, a; No. 341346) ; 
another is the erect head and right foreleg of an animal at rest 
(pi. 4, h; No. 341335) ; while the third is the well-modeled body of 
a dog from which the head is missing (pi. 4, c; No. 342207). In the 
case of the first two, both have flat noses and short, alert ears. Of 
the numerous similar images examined by the writer, from the 
Szechwan caves and from Chinese tombs dated in the Han dynasty, 
only one had a pointed nose. Flat or pug noses, short ears, and 
tails curled up over their backs are common ch'iracteristics of dog 
figures from both the Szechwan caves and the Han dynasty graves. 

The image of the headless dog is especially interesting. Its tail 
curls up over the back in true pug fashion. Harness is represented 
by a collar around the neck and by a belt. These are joined together 
at the back of the neck by a ring to which, presumably, a rope might 
be tied. Several similar images having this type of leash have been 
noted in various collections by the present writer. 

Our series includes several fragments of horses' heads and hoofs, 
most of which are very artistically modeled. (PI. 1, a, No. 341411 ; 
pi. 1, (\ No. 341381.) To juclo-e from these fragraonts and from 
other specimens seen in West China, horses of the Szechwan cave 
period were handsome, spirited animals. 

From our twentieth century point of view, none of the Szechwan 
cave artifacts can possibly be more interesting than the images of 
human beings. Several of those in the Smithsonian collection repre- 
sent servants. One fragment shows the hand of a cook resting on 



ART. 16 CAVES OE SZECHWAN" PEOVINCE, CHINA GRAHAM 9 

a fish which he is about to prepare for food. (PL 5, &/ No. 345078.) 
In these figurines servants invariably wear simple hats ; some of them 
have smiling countenances. (PI. 8, a, c.) 

Another instructive figure is that of a seated man (the head is 
missing) playing a flute. (PI. 6; No. 341342.) That this was not 
the only musical instrument known to the early Chinese is evidenced 
by a second fragment which shows a hand strumming a lute. (PI. 
o, a; No. 342200.) The writer saw one lute of this kind in Suifu 
in 1930 and there are several on exhibition in the Imperial Museums 
at Peiping. 

That the builders of the Szechwan caves were devotees of the 
theater is at least suggested by one figure, evidently that of a clown 
or a comedian. (PI. 7, 6/ No. 345077.) The left eye is half closed, 
while the other is wide open. The face is contorted; the mouth is 
drawn out of shape and the tongue protrudes. A bit of plaster 
adheres above the right eye, but we find nothing to indicate that 
the entire face was whitened. On the Chinese stage to-day it is 
customary for clowns or fun makers to whiten themselves around 
the eyes, and one is led to wonder if the same custom prevailed in 
Szechwan nearly 2,000 years ago. 

A second possible stage figure is the niao yah character, a strange 
human being having large tusks and a long tongue hanging down 
his chest. (PI. 7, c: No. 341403.) The Chinese say that this char- 
acter occurs frequently in local theatricals ; that he is very fierce, and 
that he has been known on the Chinese stage for hundreds if not 
thousands of years. 

Chinese history and literature contain much evidence that the 
inhabitants of the middle kingdom admired beautiful women. And 
we may assume that the people who constructed the Szechwan caves 
were equally discerning, for the cave artifacts include many frag- 
ments of female figurines. A number of heads in our collection show 
undeniable beauty and unquestioned skill on the part of the artist. 
Some of these heads wear earrings; others have jewels or similar 
ornaments on their hats, just above the forehead. In most instances, 
the features are rather dimly indicated, but there is a smile in each 
case and the eyes and nose are distinctly Mongolian. In this they 
resemble present-day Chinese women, and according to Chinese 
standards at least, both grace and beauty are recognized in the fig- 
ures. All of them portray slender women. (PL 7, a, No. 341393; 
pi. 8, 6, No. 342179; pL 9, No. 341336.) 

A possible exception to this latter statement is the remarkable 
little head shown in Figure 14 (No. 342199). Like the others, it was 
molded; unlike the others, it is solid. It is small, measuring only 
1% by li/i inches. The nose is wide, thick, and low; the chin is 



10 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



double — the mark of a well-rounded figure. The face wears an en- 
gaging smile and dimples lie just beneath the surface. Earrings 
hang from the ears. But the most interesting thing is that the 
bangs, indicated by incised lines, are combed straight down over 
the forehead and clipped off just above the eyebrows. This same 
style of coiffure — ^bangs combed straight down — is still very popular 
among young women and girls in Szechwan Province, and probably 
all over China. Apparently it has persisted 2,000 years. 

Not only do the figurines in the collection before us tell much of 
character — at least the artist's conception of what character should 
be — but they also provide information as to the nature of both mas- 
culine and feminine dress in the days 
when the caves of Szechwan Province 
were under construction. One frag- 
ment (No. 341405) shows the method 
of attaching a sandal. Loops rise 
from the extreme toe and heel and 
from each side near the proximal ends 
of the first and fifth toes; through 
these loops passes a single cord, sup- 
ported by a strap across the instep, 
which is exactly the manner of tying 
the common straw sandal worn to-day. 
Here again we have evidence that some 
customs have changed but little in 
Szechwan during the last 2,000 years. 
Plate 10 (No. 342178) represents a 
servant with broom and dustpan. The 
latter closely resembles the bamboo 
dustpan, or ts^o gi^ used in almost 
every Szechwanese home, urban or 
rural, at the present time. Farmers often employ large ones, attached 
to poles, as a means of carrying fertilizer and other stuffs. The 
resemblance between that on the clay image before us and those in 
use to-day is so close that there is little doubt that the latter are 
survivals of an early type of Szechwan dustpan. 

A man with hands folded in the wide sleeves of his long gown is 
shown by the fragment pictures in Plate 11 (No. 342177). Gowns 
with long, flowing sleeves were in use in China centuries before 
the Christian era and they are still being worn. It is a common 
practice in West China to use the ample sleeves as muffs. The hands, 
folded inside, are comfortably warm even on the coldest winter days. 
Most of the clay images in the present collection were made in half 
molds and joined together while still moist. Externally, the figures 




FiGDBE 



14. — Head from 
figurine 



a small 



AET. 16 CAVES OP SZECHWAN PROVINCE, CHINA GRAHAM 11 

show no retouching except along the sutures, where careless scraping, 
usually, has removed superfluous clay from the seam. As might 
readily be expected, the inside in every case is left rough — just as 
the modeler completed his pressing and gouging. The plastic clay 
was pressed into the irregularities of the mold; the excess hastily 
removed with a blunt, flat-faced instrument. There was no attempt 
at smoothing. It seems not unlikely that, before casting, the molds 
were first dusted with dry clay. 

The " flute player " (pi. 6) and the little head with the double 
chin (fig. 14) are exceptions to the above statement. Both are solid, 
not hollow ; the former at least was made in a half mold and finished 
flat at the back. 

Among the vessel fragments shown in Plates 12 and 13, use of the 
potter's wheel is evidenced, we believe, by the continuous striations 
inside and by the nature of the flat bottoms. We would emphasize, 
however, that we are not positive these vessels were wheel made. 

One of the most common artifacts in the Szechwan caves is the 
earthenware coffin. It has often been found in place, sometimes 
containing human bones. More frequently broken pieces of the cof- 
fins can be seen strewn over the floors of the caves. Almost all the 
caves have coffin niches, but in some cases the coffins are merely 
cavities chiseled in the stone and fitted with stone lids. Some caves 
have places for several coffins, indicating that they were used by 
families. Two coffins are sometimes found side by side, evidently 
for the burial of a man and his wife. 

We have already referred to the fact that there are collections of 
artifacts from Chinese Han dynasty graves in the Field Museum, 
in the public museum at Chengtu, and in the Imperial Museums at 
Peiping. The objects in these collections so closely resemble those 
herein described that one can scarcely avoid the conclusion that 
the " mantsu " caves of Szechwan Province are really Chinese tombs- 
made during the Han dynasty and possibly during the early years 
of the Three Kingdoms. This conclusion is emphasized by the fact 
that many of the carvings and artifacts reflect customs or repre- 
sent implements that were in use by the Chinese 2,000 years ago, 
many of which have persisted until the present day. The " mantsu " 
caves, with their characteristic contents and ornamentation, seem 
very much at home in the Chinese culture but in a strange world 
among the aborigines of West China. We know of no primitive 
tribe that now makes and uses artificial caves or artifacts such as 
those found in Szechwan Province. Further, the Rev. Thomas Tor- 
rance has informed the writer that on top of a hill on the edge of 
the Chengtu plain, typical graves of the Han dynasty period occur, 
while along the sides of the same hill Szechwan caves may be seen. 



12 PEOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAIi MUSEUM TOL. 80 

and that in form of construction and nature of contents the two are 
alike. 

While Chinese inscriptions are rare in the caves of Szechwan, 
there are Chinese characters in one cave recording the joint owner- 
ship by two Chinese, and in another giving the date of the cave as 
103 A. D.® Moreover, Han dynasty coins are found in previously 
undisturbed cavesJ The above facts indicate that the caves can 
not possibly antedate the Chinese. 

The burial customs of the Chinese have had a long history and 
evolution. In the earliest times men and women were killed and 
buried with their dead leaders so that their souls might accompany 
those of the deceased and serve them in the land of shades. The 
history of the Cheo dynasty (B, C. 1122-255) gives several instances 
when the living were buried with the dead, a custom probably con- 
fined to the upper strata of society. We note in this history (ninth 
book, sec. 33, p. 4) that when the emperor, Ch'i Huang Gong, was 
buried, his two wives and many others in the palace were interred 
with him, a total of several hundred people. Again, in an account 
of the death of Chin Muh Gong (twelfth book, sec, 47, p, 16), it 
states that 177 people, in addition to three high officials, were buried 
-with him and that the populace sorrowed because of the death of 
these three nobles. A third instance (fourteenth book, ch. 55, p. 19) 
tells of an official who ordered that his favorite wife should be killed 
and buried with him, but whose sons refused to carry out his instruc- 
tions. In book 18 (ch. 70, p. 12) we read of an emperor who took 
refuge in the home of a farmer after being defeated in a revolution. 
The farmer, with traditional hospitality, presented his two daugh- 
ters as wives for the Emperor. But even this magnanimous gesture 
did not conquer his melancholy. When he hanged himself shortly 
thereafter the two women were killed and buried with him. 

Farther on in the history (nineteenth book, sec. 75, pp. 19-20) we 
read the sad story of King Wu, who had a daughter whom he 
loved dearly. As evidence of his deep affection, it was his custom 
to divide any good food he had, sending half to his daughter. She 
misunderstood this, thinking he was esteeming her lightly and giv- 
ing her only the remnants from his table. Humiliated, she com- 
mitted suicide. In preparing for her burial, the King ordered the 
construction of an artificial pond in the center of which, on a little 
island, he placed the grave, surrounded by a wall. A tunnel led 
from the mainland, under water, to the grave. People gathered out 
of curiosity to witness the funeral, and when some of them went 

° Journal, North-China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. 41, pp. 68-69, 
Shanghai, 1910. 
» Ibid., p. 69. 



ART. 16 CAVES OP SZECHWAN PEOVINCE, CHINA GRAHAM 13 

into the pasaage, the King had them shut in and allowed them to 
perish there so they would accompany his daughter into hades and 
there be her servants. 

These, and other instances that could be mentioned, show that in 
China, as in other parts of the world at a much later date, it was 
customary between two and three thousand years ago to kill and 
bury human beings with kings, nobles, and others of the upper class. 
With them were also buried fowls, dogs, weapons, jewelry, money, 
and other objects. At a later date images of wood and straw were 
substituted for the living. During the Han dynasty unglazed burnt- 
clay images were used. By the time of the Tang dynasty (A. D. 
620-907) the images were generally glazed. People had also begun 
to burn paper money (it was believed that burning transformed it 
into real money that could be used by the departed souls in hades) 
instead of placing actual coins- in the tombs. This custom of sub- 
stitution spread until it included all the diverse offerings, animate 
and inanimate, formerly interred with the deceased. Burials in the 
Szechwan caves were accompanied by clay images which differ in 
no appreciable degree from those found elsewhere in Chinese tombs 
of the Han dynasty and of the Three Kingdoms. For these reasons 
it seems quite evident that the Szechwan caves are of Chinese origin 
and that they can not be earlier than the Han dynasty. 

In China to-daj^ paper money and paper images of people, domes- 
tic animals, houses, and many other things are burned during the 
funeral ceremonies. It is believed that, through burning, these 
paper figures are transformed into real people, houses, money, etc.,. 
for use of the departed souls. Chinese widows rarely remarry, for 
the simple reason that they hope after death to rejoin their late 
husbands in the other world. 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRiNTINS OFFICE: 1932 



U, S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL RO ART. 16 PL 





Fragments of a Horses Head, an Elephants Foot and a Horses 

Foot 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 16 PL. 2 




U^ S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80, ART. 16 PL. 3 




U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 16 PL 4 




FRAGMENTS OF DOG EFFIGIES 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL 80. ART. 16 PL. 5 




Q 

Z 
< 

liJ 

H 
D 
_l 



Z 




z 

I- 

U) 

UJ 

q: 

Q 

z 
< 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80, ART. 16 PL. 6 




FIGURE OF A MAN PLAYING A FLUTE 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS VOL 80. ART 16 PL 7 




U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 16 PL. 8 




O 



'W^'- 







i 




^<:> 



(/) 
lli 
d: 



u. 

< 
J 

u 

1 



a: 
li. 

(/) 

Q 

< 

UJ 

I 



U S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL 80 ART 16 PL. 9 




HEAD FROM THE CLAY IMAGE OF A WOMAN 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 16 PL 10 




Servant with Broom and Dustpan 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 16 PL. 



1 1 




Fragment of a Male Figure with Hands in s 



LEEVES 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 16 PL. 12 




J 
UJ 

Ul 

> 



U- S NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOU- 80, ART, 16 PL. 13 



^■■■ 



*•■- mr 
















A 4k 4^ 



ja m ^ \ ^ r, 



■«■* 



Jf M' ■& S- 

J. ^ 4 



<'.-i<'-v; 




Shards Showing Type of Decoration 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80. ART. 16 PL 14 




U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS VOL 80 ART. 16 PL. 15 




f^ 




lU 

D 
h 


U 

ill 
m 
ui 
z 

I 
u 

z 
a: 
111 

Q 


2 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL 80. ART. 16 PL. 16 











...-. 


JL* 








ij^ 




^HMCi 








^ifl 




^H 




JJK 




j^H 




^1 


_. 


-j^^^^BSt 




^^H 




MM 




'mM 


^K' ^^fi^l 


1 




H 




^W" 




^B 




H 




4 




H 


^^^^^^Ik. " '^''"ifiUfflMB 


1 


■^•'■^_ 


• ».»;■<(#»• 








1 


■Ml 


lifldi 



a, Near Kiating 




^, i\'ear Huang Sha Ch'i, Szechwau rrovince 
Ancient Chinese Cave Tombs 



A NEW MARINE SHELL OF THE GENUS XENOPHORA 

FROM FLORIDA 



By Paul Bartscii 

Curator, Division of Molltisks and Cenozoic Invertehrates 
United States National Museum 



During the summer of 1931, Dr. William H, Longley, executive 
officer of the Marine Biological Laboratory of the Carnegie Insti- 
tution at the Tortugas, Fla., made a number of deep-sea dredge hauls 
south of Loggerhead Key. In one of these hauls two large living 
Xenofliora were obtained in 98 to 125 fathoms of water, which prove 
to belong to an undescribed species, which I take pleasure in naming 
for Doctor Longley. 

XENOPHORA LONGLEYI. new species 

Plate 1 

Shell unusually large for the genus. The type has about 8 
whorls; as the apex is somewhat fractured, the exact number is 
slightly in doubt. The shell is of grayish- white coloration. The 
whorls are broadly conic and overhanging, particularly so in the 
later turns, where, for example, in the last whorl a very broad 
peripheral fold extends obliquely outward. The basal portion of 
the turns is more or less ornamented with fragments of attached 
shells, in this instance rather less so than is usual in the genus. 
The actual sculpture on the upper side of the turns consists of 
retractively curved, irregular, incremental lines, which lend a some- 
what wavy appearance to the shell. There are also wavy, closely 
spaced, fine, threadlike elements placed at right angles to the incre- 
mental lines, which give to the surface a decidedly ripple-marked 
effect. The periphery of the last whorl has a decided curtainlike 
flap, to which I have alluded above. The basal side of this flap is 
smooth and porcelaneous white, while the rest of the base has a 
reddish tinge, but here and there it shows an indication of the 
incremental lines. The base of the shell is moderately openly 
umbilicated. The basal wall is moderately convex and is marked 

No. 2917.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 17 

82798—31 1 



2 PROCEEDIjSTGS op the national, museum vol. 80 : art. 17 

by rather strong, sublamellar, retractively curved, riblike elements, 
which join the outer peripheral flap in a series of slender buttresses. 
In addition to this, the base is marked by fine, irregularly placed, 
spiral lirations. The aperture is of irregular shape. The basal lip 
is decidedly sigmoid, forming an even, concave curve from the flap 
to the columella. The parietal wall is covered with a glazed callus, 
while the outer lip is constituted by the continuation of the broad 
parietal flap. 

r?/;?e.— U.S.N.M. No. 382689 measures: Altitude, 85 mm.; great- 
est diameter, 144 mm. The topotype is entered as U.S.N.M. 
No. 382690. 

Remarks. — U.S.N.M. No. 92922 contains four badly worn and 
battered specimens dredged in 1885 by the United States Bureau of 
Fisheries steamer Albatross at Station 2625 in 247 fathoms on gray 
sand bottom; bottom temperature, 46° F. ; 75 miles south by east, 
^2 east off Cape Fear, N. C. These specimens in the past were 
referred, probably on account of their poor condition, to Xenofhora 
caribaea Petit, but they are in reality members of the present species. 

The present species differs from Xenophora caribaea Petit in being 
much larger, less ornamented with borrowed shells, and much more 
closely sculptured with much more overhanging whorls, but the 
greatest distinguishing characteristics are in the basal portion of the 
turn, which in X. caribaea has a spiral keel immediately within the 
junction of the peripheral flap and in the basal wall, which is absent 
in the present species. X. caribaea lacks the expanded riblets of the 
base, which extend as buttresses on the flap in the present species. 

From Xenofliora conchyliophora Born, the only other Floridian 
Xenophora, the present species differs by having the broad peripheral 
flap, which is missing in X. conchyliopliora. Here, too, the base is 
not umbilicated and entirely differently sculptured. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1931 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 17 PL. 1 




.y -y,. 



\ 



>»- 







Xenophora longleyi. New Species 



THE PARASITIC HABIT IN THE DUCKS, A THEORETI- 
CAL CONSIDERATION 



By Herbert Friedmann 
Curator, Division of Birds, United States National Museum 



It has been well known for many years that a number of kinds of 
waterfowl are rather careless in their egg-laying habits, not infre- 
quently laying one or more eggs in a near-by nest of another bird of 
the same or other species, but still caring for their own nests and 
eggs. Thus, among North American birds, some of the grebet, 
the great auk, certain of the auklets and murrelets, a number 
of gulls and terns, pelicans, ducks, rails, herons, a few shore 
birds, and others have been known to drop an occasional egg in 
another bird's nest. Gallinaceous, picarian, and passerine birds 
have been laiown to act in a similar fashion at times, and I have 
such records for not fewer than 54 species of North American birds, 
not counting the regularly parasitical cowbirds. Years ago Paul 
Leverkuhn compiled a great mass of data on this and allied topics 
in his book Fremde Eier im Nest: Ein Beitrag zur Biologie der 
Vogel (Strange Eggs in the Nest: A Contribution to the Biology 
of Birds), published in 1891. Since the publication of this work a 
still greater mass of data has been put on record, while other writers, 
such as Swynnerton,^ have attacked the problem of rejections by 
birds of eggs unlike their own. 

Among all the groups of birds involved, the habit is met with most 
frequently in the Anatidae. The literature is so full of records that 
a few quotations may here be sufficient. Sheparclson ^ writes that 
waterfowl are addicted to this carelessness, " * * * many species 
leaving their eggs to the care of other birds. Thus the eggs of the 
Ruddy Duck, the Redhead, the Shoveller, and others are frequently 
found in the nests of other ducks and coots." Job ^ found " * * * 
nests of Gadwall, Baldpate, and Scaup that had each 1 or 2 

> Ibis, 1918, pp. 127-154. 

'Condor, vol. 17, p. 100, 1915. 

« Among the wild fowl, p. 201, 1902. 

No. 2918.— Proceedinqs u. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 18. 

91547—32 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Scoter's eggs in them, and that these first thre« also intermingled 
with one another." He calls the ruddy duck, the most given to the 
habit, "semiparasitic." Bent ^ notes that the redhead and the can- 
vasback " * * * have a peculiar habit of building what we called 
dumping nests in which large numbers of eggs are deposited but 
apparently not incubated; we found two such nests, one of which 
contained 19 eggs, 9 of the Redhead and 10 of the Canvas-back piled 
up indiscriminately and some of them had rolled out of the nest 
which was partially broken down and evidently deserted." In an- 
other place ° the same author writes that the redhead " * * * seems 
to be particularly careless about laying its eggs in other ducks' nests. 
We found one of its eggs in a Ruddy Duck's nest * * * and 
in three cases found from three to four of its eggs in nests of the 
Canvasback. * * * All the Canvasbacks' nests that we found 
contained one or more eggs of the Ruddy Duck or Redhead * * *." 
Job ® found " * * * Red-head's eggs in a Canvas-back's nest, 
Ruddy's twice in a Red-head's, Lesser Scaup's in a Shoveller's, and 
* * * Shoveller's eggs in the nest of a Baldpate." The ruddy 
duck has also been known to deposit its eggs in nests of grebes and 
bitterns, while the Canada goose has been recorded laying an egg in 
an osprey's nest, and the osprey was seen to incubate the egg.'' 

In view of the widespread tendency among the ducks to drop 
an occasional egg in another bird's nest, it was no great surprise 
when it was discovered that the Argentine black-headed duck 
{Heteronetta atricapilla) was regularly and entirely parasitic in its 
reproductive activities. This remarkable duck, rather closely allied 
to the ruddy duck, has been found by Daguerre, Wilson, and others 
to be parasitic on coots, ducks, limpkins, and other birds, and its eggs 
have been found in a hawk's nest as well. Phillips * has summarized 
these data as follows : 

It is very extraordinary that no nest of this species has ever been found, or 
at any rate described. This gap in our Ijnowledge of the bird's life-history may 
be due to the fact that the species is extraordinarily parasitic, depositing its 
eggs in the nests of such birds as the Coscoroba Swan (Ooscoroba) , the Crested 
Screamer (Chauna), the South American Limpkin {Aramus), Gulls (Larus), 
Coots (Fulica), White-faced Ibises (Plegadis), Black Rails (Pardirallus), and 
even the nests of the Chimango, or Southern Caracara Hawk {Milvago 
chimango). Ducks' eggs found in such situations were at first attributed to 
the Rosy-billed Duck ♦ • * but a later writer (Daguerre * * *) has 
discovered that these parasitic eggs are slightly different from those of the 
Rosy-bill, being more whitish and the surface very finely granulated; they are 
also thicker and more blunt. Most convincing is his statement that these sup- 

* Auk. vol. 24, p. 422, 1907. 
•Auk. vol. 19, p. 9, 1902. 
•Auk, vol. 16, p. 165, 1899. 

f Fannin, Auk, vol. 11, p. 322, 1894. 

• Natural history of the ducks, vol. 3, p. 96. 1925. 



ART. 18 PARASITIC HABIT IN DUCKS FRIEDMANN 6 

posed Rosy-bill eggs are identical with a mature egg which was taken from 
the oviduct of a female of the Black-headed Duck. It may be remarked in 
this counection that the Black-headed Ducks are not uncommonly seen in the 
company of Coots. 

Since the time this was published, a few additional data have been 
forthcoming, all of which tend to show that Heteronetta is regularly 
parasitic in its breeding habits. It lays a relatively large ^gg for its 
size, usually larger than the eggs among which its own are deposited. 

Of all the nonparasitic forms, the ruddy ducks {Eris7natura or 
Oxyura) are certainly the most frequent offenders, and it is of great 
interest and suggestive value that, for their body size, they lay the 
largest eggs of any of the ducks except Heteronetta, which lays a 
similarly large egg. At first sight it might seem that the large size 
of the eggs, as compared with the smaller ones of the other ducks in 
whose nests they are laid, is a factor directly correlated with the rela- 
tively greater frequency of parasitism in the ruddy ducks, parallel- 
ing in a way the case of the cowbirds parasitizing birds smaller than 
themselves; but while the facts are perfectly sound, the correlation 
appears to be only an indirect one. Ruddy ducks are notoriously 
shy at their nests ; this is true not only of the North American species 
Erismatura jamaicensis, but of the Old World forms as well. In 
fact, so marked is this trait in the Palearctic Erismatura leucoceyhala 
that there are many stories to the effect that the bird sits on the eggs 
for a few days only, and that after the embryos have gotten well 
started in their development the parent ceases incubation entirely 
and actually does not even revisit the nest. 

Phillips -^ writes that Icucocephala occasionally uses old nests of 
coots, thus sometimes not building for itself. Of the North Ameri- 
can ruddy duck he records some very significant facts. The birds do 
not mate early, or, at least, often not until after reaching their breed- 
ing grounds. Some of the nests are — 

* * * very poorly constructed and in some cases the eggs have actually 
been found wet in a carelessly made nest * * *. 

Another curious thing about the Ruddy is that not all the eggs found are in 
the same stage of incubation and it is certain that the females lay more or 
less in each others' nest, for their nests are often rather close together * • *. 

As a general thing so shy is the female that she is never seen near the nest 
at all, even when the eggs are well along in incubation * * *. 

* * * The male retains some little pride in his own or other families 
(we hardly know which) and is seen with the young broods until they are a 
third or half grown, behaving in a most gallant fashion, displaying on any or 
every occasion and rushing at real or imaginai-y intruders with a great show 
of jealousy. He is therefore wholly an exception to any other North American 
duck (excepting only the Tree Ducks) for he goes into molt much later than 
any other species and spends the summer parading about in the full glory of 
his rich, red plumage. 



• Natural history of the ducks, vol. 4, p. 156, 1926. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vou 80 

Another bird allied to the ruddy ducks, the African white-backed 
duck {Thalassomis leuconotus), is similarly shy about the nest, and 
the egg is similarly large in size. 

When a species begins to show a loss of some of the instinctive 
behavior usually exhibited by the female, one is led to wonder if it 
may not be becoming what Riddle and others might call a " male 
species," that is, one in which the females are more malelike and the 
males " normally " masculine. It is of great interest to find, then, 
that Wetmore ^^ observed that the female ruddy ducks very commonly 
mimic the males in display postures and even make a rattling noise 
with their bills against their cheeks. He noted that this was given 
at times by females that were apparently unmated. This suggests a 
latent form of maleness in the females, and I suspect that in these 
individuals this type of homosexual urge was stronger than in most, 
and that they were not displaying because they were unmated but 
were unmated because they were displaying. 

In the tree ducks {Dend7'ocyg7ia) the males take some part, if 
not the major part, in the incubation of the eggs. Shields ^^ found 
the fulvous tree duck {Dendrocygna hicolor) to be occasionally 
parasitic. Another species, Dendrocygna javanica, is known to make 
use of old nests of cormorants, kites, and crows very frequently. 
Another instance of increasing " maleness " in the female is shown 
by the New Zealand sheldrake, Casai'ca variegata. Of this duck 
Phillips ^^ writes as follows : 

It is a very interesting fact that the female is very forward, very active 
and very amatory, vrhile the male assumes a rather passive role. Taken in 
connection with the fact that the young resemble the male, and that the female 
plumage is so different and perhaps the result of more recent specialization, 
the relation of the sexes would well repay further investigation * • ♦. 

All Sheldrakes are prodigious fighters, at least during the breeding season, 
but this species leads them all in strength and combativeness * * *. Here 
again the female takes the initiative, egging her mate on with loud calls and 
excited movements. 

For our immediate purpose, however, it is sufficient to know that the 
females of the ruddy duck are not so " feminine " in their breeding 
behavior as what we are accustomed to consider " normal," or, to use 
a better term, usual, in ducks. This diminution of the care of the 
eggs, coupled with the high frequency of carelessness with regard to 
the nest in which they lay them, opens the path to joarasitism as a 
regular, well-established habit. 

Even if we grant the above conditions, the parasitic habit could not 
become successfully established unless the eggs laid in strange nests 
materialized into young birds. If they did not, then all this care- 

"Auk, vol. 37, p. 247, 1920. 

^ Bull. Cooper Orii, Club. vol. 1, pp. 9-11. 1899. 

" Natural history of the ducks, vol. 1, p, 253, 1922. 



ABT. 18 PARASITIC HABIT IN DUCKS FRIEDMANN D 

lessness would only result in a form of check upon the increase of 
the species population. The fact that the female ruddy ducks seem 
to incubate but little after the first few days suggests that their eggs 
may have a higher viability than most, or may be able to keep on 
developing under rather adverse conditions. If this were so, then 
the eggs laid at random in other birds' nests might well survive even 
if only incubated a little now and then. It is therefore of pertinent 
interest to find that such is definitely the case in the European ruddy 
duck {Eris7natura leticocephala) . Henke " took some eggs of this 
duck, and, after putting them in a bowl at room temperature, found 
that they kept as warm as if they had been incubated. Not only was 
slight cooling, such as room temperature, ineffective in harming 
them, but extreme heat was likewise survived by the embryos. By 
accident Henke left the eggs on a warm stove for some hours, and 
then removed them, and after a week he was agi'eeably surprised to 
see the eggs hatch. Apparently they were not injured by the stove 
heat, but still the heat was probably considerably more than that of 
ordinary incubation. This experiment, while crude and still un- 
checked, serves to indicate the high degree of probability of ruddy 
ducks' eggs surviving rather untoward conditions. 

Recently Meyer and Stresemann " have suggested that megapodes' 
eggs and ruddy ducks' eggs hatch by virtue of the heat they retain or 
generate themselves after the first few days of embryonic develop- 
ment. The notion that the heat is supplied the megapodes' eggs by 
the fermentation and decay of the vegetable matter in the mound is 
thought to be questionable ; the mound may serve merely to prevent 
the loss of heat from the eggs after the first few days, when the eggs 
do actually receive heat from the mound or sun. As far as I know, 
there is no positive evidence in favor of these eggs possessing any 
mechanical or structural peculiarity in their thermal adjustments 
not found in eggs of other birds, but the facts of their incubation 
seem quite well founded. 

It seems, from the above, that in the ducks there is a tendency 
to drop an occasional egg in another nest; this tendency becomes 
more pronounced in some species, and reaches its climax in the ruddy 
ducks and their near allies, and its very pinnacle in the parasitic 
Heteronetta. With the growth of this tendency is correlated an 
independent factor, namely, the heat-retaining, or perhaps heat- 
generating, properties of the eggs. Thus it may be that the so- 
called " dumping nests " of the redhead and canvasback, mentioned 
by Bent, are extra nests of birds that have lost some of the single- 
nest limitations and contain eggs that have been partially incubated 
and that are left to their own heat resources. Wliether the eggs 

>»Zool. Garten, vol. 21, pp. 142-147. 1880. 
" Orn. Monatsb., vol. 36, pp. 65-71, 1928. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

of the redhead and canvasback are able to meet such a situation is 
immaterial; the fact that such a habit is practiced indicates that 
it may well be expected in the ruddy ducks as well, and probably was 
a stage in the development of the present parasitic habit of the black- 
headed duck of Argentina. In the ruddy ducks the eggs seem to be 
able to meet such a thermal situation. The large size of these eggs 
is possibly correlated with their heat-adapting abilities, and may 
therefore be an indirect correlative of the parasitic habit. It has 
not yet been demonstrated whether the eggs of Heterorietta also 
possess these thermal abilities ; there are two alternatives to be here 
considered. If the eggs of this duck are heat adaptive, their sur- 
vival in strange nests is easily accounted for, as the victims un- 
doubtedly do take care of them to some extent. If they are not 
heat adaptive, then the parasitic habit is the sole cause for the sur- 
vival of the species, for if eggs unable to cope with thermal diffi- 
culties are laid in nests where they are uncared for, as in the " dump- 
ing " nests, the chances are all against their survival. If, however, 
they are laid in nests where they are given incubation by some other 
bird, they will have a good chance to hatch out. Therefore, if the 
eggs of Heteronetta are not thermally adaptive, the fact that they 
are laid in cared-for nests is the secret of their survival. If they 
are able to cope successfully with the thermal difficulties attendant 
on the lack of regular incubation, then the parasitic habit is due 
merely to the loss of the nest-building instinct, as the eggs would 
get along in uncared-for nests just as well as in others where they 
receive incubation. If the eggs were laid in uncared-for nests, that 
is, old or abandoned nests, the birds could hardly be called parasitic. 
Whichever of these two possibilities is correct, however, the fact 
remains that Heteronetta appears to have lost the nest-building 
habit. The problem of the parasitic habit then must be considered 
unsettled until this angle is delved into more fully. 

We have seen that the ruddy duck sometimes uses old nests of 
coots; at other times it builds very poor nests; we have seen, inci- 
dentally, that the concept of territory is not well maintained, as the 
nests are often close together ; the mere fact that females with nests 
of their own lay in one another's nests shows how poorly established 
are the territorial limitations of the actions of the individual birds. 
The diminution of the territorial and nest-building instincts are 
seemingly correlated with the diminution of incubating activity on 
the part of the female parent ; if the bird comes to the nest relatively 
little, it follows that it will not be apt to respect its territorial bound- 
aries as much as a bird with a strong instinctive attachment (through 
incubation) to the nest. In the case of ducks the territory as such 
vanishes after the eggs hatch, as the parents take their offspring into 



ART. 18 PARASITIC HABIT IN DUCKS rRIEDMANN 7 

the water, and from then on any place is home to them. Hence the 
territory lasts only as long as the incubation activities of the parents. 
Thus it seems that the cause of the diminution of the potency of 
territorialism is dependent on the lessening of the incubation activi- 
ties. Inasmuch as the lessening of incubation is merely a step in the 
path toward a complete lack of incubation, such as in the case of 
those eggs laid in strange nests (that is, lack of incubation on the 
part of the bird that laid the eggs), it follows that as this diminishes, 
approaching zero as a limit, so too the territory as such becomes less 
and less real and finally vanishes. In an analysis of the cyclical 
instincts of birds during the reproductive period, the nest is merely 
something constructed within a territory for the purpose of being a 
receptacle for the eggs that are to come. Therefore, with the dis- 
appearance of the territory as such, there must inevitably come about 
a loss of the nest-building instinct. It is impossible to construct 
something in a nonexistent space. Hence it follows that the loss of 
the nest-building instinct is also dependent on the decrease in the 
amount of incubation given the eggs by the female parents. Further- 
more, to carry this idea a little further, it appears that the origin of 
the parasitic habit in the Anatidae is bound up with the heat 
adaptability of the eggs of the ruddy and black-headed ducks. If 
their eggs did not have this peculiarity, any lessening of incubation 
would have resulted in the extermination of the species; the fact 
(?) that they have, has allowed for the development of parasitism 
in this group of birds. 



v. S. •OVi;rNIIENT PBINTIHS office: 1992 



A REVIEW OF THE NEMATODES OF THE GENUS 
HASTOSPICULUM, WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF TWO NEW 
SPECIES 



By B. G. Chitwood 

Assistant Zoologist, Zoological Division, Bureau of Animal Industry, United 

States Department of Agi-iculture 



The genus Hastospiculum was proposed by Skrjabin (1923) for a 
filarid {H. varani) found underneath the peritoneal lining of a 
lizard {Varanus griseus). To this genus Yorke and Maplestone 
(1926) added a second species {H. gouldi), from Varanus gouldi; 
and Chandler (1929) added a third (H. spinigeimm) , from Varanus 
favescens, and pointed out that Fila7'ia hipinnnta von Linstow prob- 
ably also belongs to Hastospiculum. Baylis (1930) redescribed 
Filaria macrophallos Parona as a member of this genus. 

In the present paper two new species of HastospiculuTn are de- 
scribed. The first was collected by Dr. E. W. Price on October 14, 
1929, from a python {Python reticulatus) , which died in the National 
Zoological Park, and the second was taken by the writer from two 
specimens of a boa {GonstHctor imperator) , which died in the same 
park on January 19, 1931, and February 12, 1931, respectively. In 
addition, E. spinigerum Chandler is herein redescribed, and brief 
descriptions of the other species of the genus are brought together 
into a form in which comparisons can be made. As Baylis points 
out, some of the species may be synonyms, but until further informa- 
tion can be obtained they must be regarded as valid species. 

HASTOSPICULUM SETIFERUM, new species 

Plate 1, Figukes 1-4 

Description. — Hastospiculum: The mouth opening is elongate 
dorsoventrally and surrounded by a raised, thickened region of the 
cuticle. A pair of blunt, lateral, liplike projections arise from the 
outer surface of the cuticular elevation, each of which bears at its 
base a single inward-projecting process. The external manifesta- 
tions of the amphids, or so-called lateral papillae, are small round 
pores around which the surface is perceptibly elevated. They are 

No. 29I9.-PROCEEDINGS U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM, VOL. 80, ART. 19 
93098—32 ] 



2 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

located farther posteriorly than the above-mentioned lips and are 
situated nearly in the same circle with eight submedian papillae. 
The esophagus is divided into an anterior, short, muscular portion, 
about 610/t in length, and a posterior, wide, less muscular portion of 
which the exact length was not determined because of the opacity of 
the specimens. The nerve ring surrounds the posterior fourth of the 
anterior part of the esophagus in both sexes. 

Male^ 75 mm. long by 550/i, wide, the diameter practically uniform 
throughout. The cuticle is finely striated, but not annulated as in 
the female. Testis single, reflexed ; tail surrounded by a cuticular 
expansion in the form of a pair of alae supported by four pairs of 
preanal papillae and one pair of postanal papillae. There are three 
pairs of sessile, cone-shaped, subventral papillae near the end of the 
tail ; the tail is cone-shaped and bears minute denticles. The spicules 
are unequal, the left one being 2.35 mm. long by 12.5;u. in diameter, 
and the right one 280/a long and 52)u, in maximum width. 

Female^ 520 mm. to 540 mm, long and 1.8 mm. to 2 mm. in maxi- 
mum diameter. Both extremities are bluntly rounded, the posterior 
being slightly more attenuated than the anterior. The cuticle is 
marked by fine striations, as well as by irregular annulations, which 
fuse with one another and do not extend completely around the body. 
The vulva is situated 800/* from the anterior end of the body. There 
are two ovaries; the anterior one twists about the intestine and 
esophagus, while the posterior one extends nearly to the end of the 
body. The anus is apparently atrophied. The uterus is filled with 
embryonated eggs, which are nearly spherical and are 80)U, long by 69//. 
wide. 

Host. — Python reticulatus (Schneider). 

Location. — Under the peritoneum. 

Distribution. — National Zoological Park, Washington, D. C. 

Type specijnens. — U. S. N. M. Hehn. Coll. No. 29265; paratypes. 
No. 30767. 

HASTOSPICULUM ONCHOCERCUM, new species 

Plate 2 

Description. — Hastospiculum: Mouth opening surrounded by a 
cuticular elevation as in H. setiferum., but elevation not set off so 
distinctly dorsally and ventrally as in the foregoing species. The 
blunt, paired, lateral, liplike projections, which arise from the outer 
margin of the elevation, are quite square. The subcuticular tissues 
form a structure that might be likened to an epaulette. The amphids, 
which are prominent, open in the distal portion of the lateral pro- 
jections of the "epaulette." Eight submedian papillae are present; 
the four external submedian papillae have their bases in the dorsal 



AET. 19 NEMATODES OF GENUS HASTOSPICULUM CHITWOOD 6 

and ventral projections of the " epaulettes," while the four internal 
submedian papillae are distinctly set off from them. The cuticle is 
marked in both sexes with coarse elevations or annulations, which do 
not pass completely around the body but join one another to form a 
network. Finer intra-annular striations are also present. The annu- 
lations are most marked in the mid-region of the body, becoming less 
conspicuous at the posterior end and often disappearing near the 
head. 

Male, 38 mm. to 55 mm. long and 500/a to 600|U, in maximum di- 
ameter. The nerve ring surrounds the esophagus 80/x to 100/i, from 
the anterior end of the body. The anterior muscular portion of the 
esophagus is 380/x to 420/i, in length and has a maximum diam- 
eter of 60ju, to 120/x. The posterior portion of the esophagus is 
7.4 mm. to 8.8 mm. in length and has a maximum diameter of 260jli 
to 390ya. Testis single, reflexed. Tail surrounded by a bursalike 
pair of alae supported by five pairs of pedunculate papillae, four 
pairs of which are preanal and one pair postanal. There are also 
two pairs of smaller sublatcral papillae slightly anterior to a pair 
of ventral cone-shaped ones. The latter are situated very slightly 
anterior to the tip of the tail, which is rounded and does not bear 
denticles. The left spicule is 1.84 mm. to 2.2 mm. long, its proximal 
portion being wider {20/x wide) than the distal portion, from which 
it is set off by a slight twist at a point 400/x to 480ju, from the proxi- 
mal end; the distal portion is delicately filiform and about 12/1 
wide, and terminates in an exceedingly fine point. The right spicule 
is short and curved, 240ju to 280/i long, and about 20/a in maximum 
width. 

Female, 170 mm. to 350 mm. long and 2.4 mm. to 2.8 mm. in maxi- 
mum diameter. The nerve ring surrounds the esophagus approxi- 
mately 280/x from the anterior end of the body. The muscular 
portion of the esophagus is 600/^ to 650/x long and has a maximum 
diameter of 120/a to IGO^a. The posterior part of the esophagus is 
15 mm. to 18 mm. long and oOOfi to 600/4 wide. The anus is appar- 
ently atrophied. The tail is bluntly rounded. The vulva is located 
posterior to the base of the muscular portion of the esophagus, 850/i 
to 1 mm, from the anterior end of the body. Eggs embryonated, 
spherical, and 44/i to 48/i long by 40/1 to 44/i wide ; shell simple. 

Host. — Coristrictor imperator (Daudin). 

Location. — Under the peritoneal covering of the stomach and 
intestine. 

Distribution. — National Zoological Park, Washington, D. C. 

Type specimens.— \J. S. N. M. Helm. Coll. No. 30759; paratypes, 
No. 30740. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

HASTOSPICULUM VARANI Skrjabin, 1923 

Plate 3, Figxires 6, 7 

Description. — Hastospiculum: Large filarids characterized by a 
special ornamentation of the head ; mouth oval, bearing on each side 
a distinct lip arising from a wide base. Surrounding the mouth 
there is an epaulettelike structure situated dorsoventrally, bearing, 
according to Skrjabin, 10 papillae, of which 2 are the so-called lateral 
papillae or amphids, and 8 are the submedian papillae. The epau- 
lettes are joined dorsally and ventrally by a cuticular band. The 
cylindrical esophagus is 17 mm. in length. 

Male^ 135 mm. to 140 mm. long and 680/* maximum breadth. Tail 
surrounded by a pair of alae supported by six pairs of preanal 
papillae (the last two pair may be adanal) and two pairs of postanal 
papillae. Skrjabin does not state whether the latter also support the 
alae. Spicules unequal; the left is 4.4 mm. long, bearing lancelike 
expansion at the tip, and the right is 660/a long and is bow-shaped. 
From the figure one would judge that the left spicule is compara- 
tively strong and not delicate as in E. setiferuvi and H. gouldi. 

Female., unknown. 

Host. — Varanus griseus. 

Location. — Under the peritoneal lining. 

Distribution. — Russian Turkestan. 

HASTOSPICULUM GOULDI Yorke and Maplestone, 1926 

Plate 3, Figitbes 8-11 

Description. — Hastospiculmn: Mouth opening, arrangement of 
papillae, and other head structures as in H. varani. 

Male., about 180 mm. long. Anterior portion of the esophagus 
300/A long, posterior portion 9.4 mm. long. Spicules unequal, the 
longer (left) being 1.1 mm. long and the shorter (right) 200/i long. 
Left spicule slender, delicate, and filiform or setaceous. A pair of 
caudal alae meet posteriorly and surround the tail. There are three 
pairs of large pedunculated preanal papillae, two pairs of smaller 
preanal papillae situated more subventrally, and one pair of large 
pedunculated postanal papillae. On the midventral line there are 
two conical processes, the first near the cloaca, the second near the 
tip of the tail. From the figure, as given by Yorke and Maplestone, 
there appear to be other papillae on each side of the posterior 
conical process. 

Female., about 180 mm. long. Anterior portion of esophagus 
about 300/A long; posterior portion of esophagus, 16 mm. long. 



ART. 19 NEMATODES OF GENUS HASTOSPICULUM CHITWOOD 5 

glandular. Vulva approxiiiiately 1 mm. from the anterior extrem- 
ity. Anus atrophied. 

Host. — Varanus gouldi. 

Location. — Presumably under the peritoneum. 

Distribution. — Not given; probably Australasia. 

Remarks. — Baylis (1930) states that H. gouldi may be a synonym 
of //. macroyhoXlos Parona, but this seems unlikely since the left 
spicule of the latter species is very strong as compared with that of 
H. gouldi. H. gouldi is probably more closely related to H. seti- 
ferurti and H. onchocercu7)i, but it differs from these two species in 
the arrangement and number of caudal papillae of the male, length 
of spicules, length of body, and position of vulva in the female. 

HASTOSPICULUM BIPINNATUM (von Linstow, 1899) Chandler. 1929 
Plate 3, Figures 4, 5 

Synonym. — FilaHa hipinnata von Linstow, 1899. 

Description. — Hastospiculuin: The head bears two small projec- 
tions, which may be interpreted as being identical with the lateral 
liplike organs of H. varani. In both sexes the ends of the body are 
bluntly rounded, the posterior end tapering a little more than the 
anterior end. 

Male., 32 mm. long by 590/x wide. Esophagus }{^ and tail i^g, 
of the body length ; spicules unequal, the larger being 1.01 mm. long, 
and the smaller 190/* long- Six pairs of caudal papillae, four of 
them preanal and two postanal. 

Female, 145 mm. long. Vulva ](j.^ of the body length from the 
anterior end. The embryonated eggs are 65/a long by 47/x wide. 

Host. — Varanus griseu^. 

Location. — Lying loose under the peritoneum of the gut. 

Distribution. — North Africa. 

Remarks. — The data for this description were obtained from von 
Linstow's (1899) description and figures- He failed to state which 
of the spicules is the longer, and his figures do not show this; pre- 
sumably the left is the longer. Skrjabin (1923) pointed out that 
H. bipinnxitum differed from H. varani in length of body, length of 
esophagus, size of spicules, and number of preanal papillae. 

HASTOSPICULUM SPINIGERUM Chandler. 1929 
Plate 1, Figures 5, 6 

Description. — Hastospiculum: An anterior view of the head shows 
that the subrectangular mouth is surrounded by a cuticular elevation, 
which is not distinctly epaulettelike in contour, and that paired lat- 
eral projections arise from the outer margin of this circumoral eleva- 



6 PROCEEDIJSTGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol.80 

tion. There are three smaller papillate structures at the inner side 
of the base of each of these projections ; they may, however, be under 
the surface. Eight submedian papillae, in addition to the paired 
lateral organs or amphids, are present. 

Male (incomplete specimen), 75 mm. long by 560jli wide. The tail 
is provided with a pair of caudal alae. The larger left spicule is 
2.75 mm. long and 42ju, wide. The right spicule is only 420/a long. 
The single specimen is in poor condition, and the caudal papillae are 
somewhat difficult to see. There are five papillae supporting the 
right side of the caudal alae. The most posterior of these might be 
considered adanal. On the left side there are seven pedunculate 
papillae of which the most posterior two might be considered adanal. 
Toward the end of the tail there is a group of at least three sessile 
cone-shaped papillae, two on the right and one on the left side of the 
cone-shaped tail ; the tail does not bear denticles. 

Fetnale^ 220 mm. long by approximately 2 mm. wide. Anterior 
part of the esophagus 550/x to 570/x. long and about 220ju, wide ; poste- 
rior part 520)U, wide, length not determined. Vulva 850/x from the 
anterior end of the body. Opisthodelphous ; the embryonated eggs 
present in the uterus measure 50)u, to 52/i, by 33)u, to 34/x, and are pro- 
vided with an operculumlike structure at both ends. Tail bluntly 
rounded ; anus somewhat atrophied, situated at the end of the tail. 

Host. — Varanus flavescens. 

Location. — Under the peritoneum. 

Distribution. — Calcutta Zoological Gardens, Calcutta, India. 

Type specimens. — U.S.N.M. Helm. Coll. No. 8009; paratypes, No. 
8010. 

Remarks. — This description was made from a restudy of the type 
specimens. The most outstanding differences between H. spinigervnn 
and H. gouldi., H. setiferwm., and H. onchocercwin are in the relative 
coarseness of the left spicule. H. spinigerum might well be identical 
with H. macrophallos^ as shown by Baylis, but there are important 
differences in the relative lengths of the spicules and in the number 
and position of the papillae on the tail of the male. 

HASTOSPICULUM MACROPHALLOS (Parona, 1889) Baylis. 1930 

Plate 3, Figitres 1-3 

Synonym. — Filaria macrophallos Parona, 1889. 

Description. — Hastospiculwm : Mouth elongate dorsoventrally, sur- 
rounded by a circumoral elevation bearing a pair of laterally placed 
truncate teeth or liplike organs. There appear to be three finger- 
like processes converging toward the base of each of the toothlike 
structures.- Baylis states that these may possibly be the attachments 



AST. 19 NEMATODES OF GENUS HASTOSPICULUM OHITWOOD 7 

of muscles, and is of the opinion that at least in H. macrophallos 
the so-called epaulettelike structure is not superficial but rather 
is a manifestation of subcuticular bodies. Only four submedian 
papillae are described. Concerning the presence of four additional 
submedian papillae Baylis states : " There is a faint indication of a 
structure of some kind, suggesting a papilla, near each corner of 
the ' epaulettes,' but this does not appear to be superficial, and it 
seems possible that it may be the point of attachment of a muscle or 
some other subcuticular structure." Lateral organs, or amphids, are 
situated in a position similar to that occupied by the same structures 
in other members of the genus. 

Male^ 80 mm. long, according to Parona (1889) ; maximum diam- 
eter 0.041 (probably meant to be 0.41 mm.). Spicules unequal, the 
left being 2 mm. long and 0.042 mm. wide, and the right 0.051 mm. 
long, according to Parona, or 0.04 mm., according to Baylis. Baylis 
suggests that the decimal point is misplaced in Parona's figure for 
the length of the right spicule. Parona figures four pairs of large 
pedunculated papillae, while Baylis figures only three, two preanal 
and one postanal. There are also three pairs of smaller, subventral, 
preanal papillae and two pairs of conical, postanal papillae. The 
figure of the tail of the male given by Parona shows the left spicule 
quite heavy, as would be expected from his measurement; Baylis's 
figure is not quite so clear in this respect. 

Female^ 250 mm. long by 1.4 mm. wide, according to Baylis and 
Daubney (1922), who found females that they described as Filaria 
niacro'phallos. The esophagus consists of a short, narrow, muscular 
portion 600/x long, and a long, glandular portion 30 mm. long; the 
nerve ring surrounds the esophagus caudad of the middle of the 
anterior portion. Vulva 1.15 mm. from the anterior end. Tail 
bluntly rounded, bearing a pair of papillae at its extremity; anus 
terminal. Eggs embryonated, barrel-shaped, 50/a long by 30/i wide, 
with thick shells possessing annular thickenings. Parona (1889) 
had males only and hence gave no description of the female in 
proposing this species. 

Hosts. — Varanvs {Hydrosaurus) sdlvator^ V. nebulosus, and V. 
niloticus. 

Location. — Among the abdominal muscles. 

Distribution. — Burma, India. 

DISCUSSION 

On the basis of characters of the ova, one would regard Hdsto- 
spiculum splnifferuvi as at least very closely related to H. macrophal- 
los. The relative thickness of the left spicule also presents a simi- 



8 PROCEEDIN-QS OP THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80 

larity. However, the number of submedian head papillae for U. 
macro'phaUos, as given by Baylis, is four, while the number in the 
other members of the genus in which it is known is eight. H. varani 
and n. hipinnatuni are too poorly described for conclusions to be 
drawn as to their possible identity with either of the above forms. 
Having only the present inadequate information as to the variation 
of the body length, the length of the spicules, and the number of tail 
papillae, one can not consider that any two of these species are 
identical. The above four species have one point in common, the 
relatively thick left spicule. On the other hand, H. gouldi, H. seti- 
ferwn, and H. onchocercum have in common a narrow, delicate left 
spicule. 

After a study of the literature and the three available species, it 
appears necessary to emend slightly the generic diagnosis as given 
by Yorke and Maplestone (1926), as follows: 

HASTOSPICULUM Skrjabin, 1923 

Generic diagnosis. — Filariidae: Mouth elongate dorsoventrally, 
more or less rectangular in outline, surrounded by a heavy cuti- 
cular elevation, which may or may not give the appearance of 
epaulettes, depending on the distinctness of the cuticular and sub- 
cuticular tissues; paired, lateral liplike organs projecting from the 
outer margin of the circumoral elevation, and smaller papillate 
structures sometimes present at the base of the latter ; paired, lateral 
organs (amphids) and at least four, usually eight, submedian papil- 
lae ; esophagus composed of a shorter, anterior, muscular portion and 
a longer, relatively wide, glandular, posterior portion. Vulva an- 
terior, in the esophageal region ; opisthodelphous ; oviparous. Anus 
in the female more or less atrophied. Male with a single testis, 
spicules unequal, the left much longer than the right; tail sur- 
rounded by a pair of caudal alae supported by pedunculated papillae. 

Type species. — Kastospiculum varani Skrjabin, 1923. 

KEY TO THE SPECIES OF THE GENUS HASTOSPICULUM 

For the purpose of separating the species described in this paper 
from those previously described, the following key is given : 

1. Left spicule as wide as riglit 2 

Left spicule not so wide as right 5 

2. Male 135 mm. to 140 mm. long; left spicule 4.4 mm. long, right 

spicule 660/4 long; female unknown varani 

Male less than 100 mm. long ; left spicule not more than 2.75 

mm. long, right spicule not more than 510/^ long ; female known 3 



ART. 19 NEMATODES OF GENUS HASTOSPICULUM CHITWOOD 9 

3. Male 32 mm. long ; left spicule 1.01 mm. long, right spicule 190/tt 

long ; female 145 mm. long ; vulva 2 mm. from anterior end bipinnatum 

Male 75 to SO mm. long ; female more than 200 mm. long 4 

4. Left spicule 2.75 mm. long; six pairs of preaual papillae; vulva 

850,14 from anterior end spinigerum 

Left spicule 2 mm. long ; five pairs of preaual papillae ; vulva 

1.15 mm. from anterior end macrophallos 

5. Male 75 mm. long ; left spicule 2.35 mm. long, right spicule 280/i 

long ; four pairs of preanal papillae ; females 520 mm. to 540 

mm. long, vulva 800/* from anterior end setiferum 

Males not more than 56 mm. long; females not more than 350 

mm. long 6 

6. Left spicule 1.1 mm. long, right spicule 200/a long; five pairs of 

preanal papillae gouldi 

Left spicule 1.84 mm. to 2.20 mm. long; right spicule 240/1 to 

280ja long; four pairs of preanal papillae onchooercum 

REFERENCES 
Baylis, H. a. 

1930. Filaria maci'ophallos Parona, and the genus Hastospiculum Skrjahin 
(Nematoda). Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist, ser. 10, vol. 6, pp. 672-677, 
figs. 1-2, Dec. 
Baylis, H. A., and Daubney, R. 

1922. Report on the parasitic nematodes in the collection of the Zoological 

Survey of India. Mem. Indian Mus., (Calcutta, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 

263-347, figs. 1-75, Dec. 
Chandlek, Asa C. 

1929. Some new genera and species of nematode worms, Filarioidea, from 

animals dying in the Calcutta Zoological Garden. Proc. U. S. Nat. 

Mus., vol. 75, art. 6, no. 2777, pp. 1-10, pis. 1-3, Apr, 6. 
LiNSTOw, Otto von. 

1899. Nematoden aus der berliner zoologischen Sammlung. Mitt. zool. 

Samml. Mus. Naturk. Berlin, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 3-28, pis. 1-6, figs. 

1-78. 
Paeona, Corrado, 

1889. Sopra alcuni Elminti di Vertebrati Birmani raccolti da Leonardo Fea. 

Ann. Mus. Civ. Storia. Nat. Genova, vol. 27 (ser. 2, vol. 7), pp. 

765-780, pi. 3, figs. 1-18. 
Skbjabin, K. I. 

1923. Hastospiculum varani n. gen. n. sp. HoBaa ^Hjinpna pei;THjintt. (K 

no3HaHHK) rejibMHHTo^ayHW Pocchh) (Hastospiculum varani n. gen. 
n. sp. Eine neue Filaria der Reptilien.) 7 pp., 1 pi., 2 figs.; Ger- 
man summary, p. 7. Moskva. [Reprinted from Russk. Zhurual 
Trop. Med., vol. 1, 1923.] 
YoRKE, Warrington, and Maplestone, P. A. 

1926. The nematode parasites of vertebrates. 536 pp., 307 figs. London. 



U. S. GOVEBNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1932 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS, VOL. 80, ART. 19 PL. 1 





ozmm 





HASTOSPICULUM SETIFERUM, NEW SPECIES. AND H. SPINIGERUM 
1-4 na.Um,kii\nm .etifrrnm: 1, Anterior view of head; 2, lateral view of anterior end of male; 

■.i lateral view of tail of male; 4, ventral view of tail of male. 
0, 6, //. 'spiniyerum: 5, Anterior view of head; 6, dorsal view of tail of male. 



U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL. 80. ART. 19 PL. 2 




o-/mm 





UOuS /J//f 




-p-'-X 



r- ti 






Hastospiculum onchocercum. New Species 

1, .\iitorior view of head; 2, lateral viovv of head of male; 3, lateral view of head of female; 4, lateral 
view of tail of male; S, ventral view of tail of male; (i, anterior portion of left .spicule, two views; 
7, detail of culirle; S, ejjg. 



S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS. VOL.. 80, ART. 19 PU. 3 











Species of Hastospiculum 

l-H Ilastospicuhim macrophallos: 1, .\iilcri(ir view of liciid (after Haylis, 1930); 2, ventral vii-w 

of tail of male (after Haylis, 19:«l); H, ventral view of tail of male (after Parona, 1889). 

4..-,, //. bipiniKitiim: 4. Lateral' view of head; '.. ventral view (jf tail of male. (After von 

Linstow, 1899.) 
(;, 7. //. niraiii: (i, .\nterior view of head; 7, lateral view of tail of male. ( Aller .-^kriabm. 19iL) 
h-'lL //. 'joiildi:i<, Lateral view of anterior end of female: 9, lateral view ofhea.j; ID. \entral view 
of tail of male; 1 I , lail of fem;ile. ( After Vorke and Ma|ilest(ine. I9'J(;.) 



RECORDS OF DIPTEROUS INSECTS OF THE FAMILY 
TACHINIDAE REARED BY THE LATE GEORGE DIM- 
MOCK, WITH DESCRIPTION OF ONE NEW SPECIES 
AND NOTES ON THE GENUS ANETIA ROBINEAU- 
DESVOIDY 



By J. M. Aldrich 
Associate Curator, Division of Insects, United States National Museum 



Several years ago Dr. George Dimmock gave to the United States 
National Museum a series of reared insects with his notes upon them. 
Many rearings of Tachinidae were included, the records for which 
were mostly unpublished. I planned to prepare the list for publica- 
tion, but Avas obliged to await the appearance of Mr. Webber's revi- 
sion of the genus Achaetoneura, as he was describing several of the 
species as new. The present paper lists the species as the lots were 
numbered by Doctor Dimmock, with a few necessary notes and the 
description of one new species. Several of the species are repre- 
sented only by puparia, which have been identified for me by my 
colleague C. T, Greene, who has made an extensive study of the 
characters of early stages of Diptera. 

A. REARED FROM LEPIDOPTERA 

148. From Sphinx chersls Hiibner. Cambridge, Mass., 1882. Pu- 
paria found in soil where caterpillar tried to pupate. Three females, 
identified by Webber as Achaetoneura frenchii Williston, " var. ? " 

246. From Amphidasis cognataina Guenee. Wachusetts, Mass., 

1882. Pupa only. Determined by Greene as Exorhta larvarniTm 
Linnaeus {Tachina mella Walker). 

423. From Drepana hilineata Packard. Cambridge, Mass., June, 

1883. Pupa only. Greene finds that the puparium is different from 
2iny in the National Museum, and hence can not identify it. 

505. From Danaus archippus Fabricius {Anosia plexippus Lin- 
naeus of literature). Cambridge, Mass., emerged August 3, 1883. 
One male, four females. Achaetoneura archippivora Williston. 

570. From Sphinx chersis Hiibner. Cambridge, Mass., emerged 
June 13, 1884. Nine males and two females of Sturmia incompta 
Van der Wulp. The species was described as a Brachycoma^ and 
inquinata Van der Wulp is a synonym of it, as I found from the 

* Biologia, Diptera, vol. 2, p. 99, 1890. 

No. 2920. — Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 20. 

92744—32 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM TOL. 80 

types in the British Museum. Coquillett had identified the Dim- 
mock material as Sturmia inquinata Van der Wulp. 

616. From larva on apple. Arlington, Mass., emerged June 17, 
1884. One male of ZeniUia confinis Fallen. 

674. From Diacrisia virginica Fabricius. Springfield, Mass., 1885. 
Notes on moth with this number, but no reference to the parasite. 
Pupa only. Greene identified it as Ernestia ampelus Walker. 

898. From arctian at Canobie Lake, N. H., 1889. Determined by 
Coquillett as Exorista eudryae Townsend. No specimens are to be 
found in the National Museum. There is no reason to doubt that 
Coquillett determined the species correctly; he had the same species 
from Dimmock several times, and the other material agrees with 
the revision of Aldrich and Webber, where the species is referred to 
the genus ZeniUia. 

934. From Gingilia catenaria Walker. Several rearings at Canobie 
Lake, N. H., in August, 1892. The Museum has under this number 
one male of Phorocera claripennis Macquart; one male of ZeniUia 
hlanda Osten Sacken, as restricted by Sellers ; one Sarcophaga rapax 
Walker (heUcis Townsend) ; and a long series of Geroniasia aurifrons 
Townsend. The last was determined by Coquillett as Masicera 
festinans Meigen. 

963. From Tephroclystis absynthiata Clerck. Canobie Lake, N. H. 
One male of Siphophyto floridensis Townsend. 

992. From mixed species of microlepidoptera on Myrica aspleni- 
folia Linnaeus. Springfield, Mass, 1892. One female of ZeniUia 
hlanda Osten Sacken, as restricted by Sellers. 

997. Adult flies near caterpillars of Pheosia inmosa Packard, as if 
waiting to oviposit. One female, same as No. 1009. 

1009. From Sphinx gordius Cramer (?) at Canobie Lake, N. H. 
Emerged September 20, 1892. Thirteen specimens, both sexes, of 
Winthemia quadripustulata Fabricius, apparently a slight variant 
of the restricted form as made out by H. J. Reinhard in his recent 
studies.' The only difference that I note is the restriction of the 
parafacial hairs, which are almost confined to the upper half and 
inner or mesial portion of the paraf acials. 

1019. From Sphinx chersis Hiibner. Canobie Lake, N. H., 
emerged June 23, 1893. Twelve males and females of Sturviia in- 
compta Van der Wulp. See note to No. 570. 

1031. From Paonias excoecata Smith and Abbott. Canobie Lake, 
N. H., emerged 1892. One small female of Blepharipeza leucophrys 
Wiedemann. 

1112. From tortricid larva on Baptisia tinctoria Linnaeus. Ar- 
lington, Mass., emerged June 22, 1898. One male of Actia pilipennis 
Fallen. Determined as the same by Coquillett in 1905. 

»Proc. D. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 79, art. 20, p. 14. 1931. 



ABT. 20 KECORDS OF TACHINIDAE ALDRICH d 

1126. From Srnerinthus gemhiattcs Say. Springfield, Mass., 1895. 
One female of Achaetoneura frenchii Williston, "van?" Deter- 
mined by Webber. 

1181. From Vanessa atalanta Linnaeus. Springfield, Mass., 
emerged July, 1897. One male and three females of Zenillia 
(Eusisyropa) futilis Osten Sacken. 

1227. From Lagoa ci^pata Packard. Chicopee, Mass., emerged 
May 10, 1898. One female of Phorocera claripennis Macquart. 
Same determination for Dimmock by Coquillett. 

1232. From Euthisanotia grata Fabricius. Longmeadow, Mass., 
emerged June 5, 8, and 18, 1898, the caterpillars having been collected 
in the preceding year. One female in the National Museum, Zenillia 
evdryae Townsend. 

1346. From lepidopterous larva on Rhus copalUna Linnaeus at 
Springfield, Mass. Emerged June 5, 1898. Two males and one 
female of Achaetoneura dinimocki Webber. Type series. 

1371. From Euthisanotia at Belchertown, Mass. Emerged June 
19, 1898. One male and two females of Tieiiillia eudin/ae Townsend. 

1372. From arctiid pupa (woolly bear?). Springfield, Mass., 
emerged June 8, 1898. One male of Sturmia ricinoruiii Townsend 
{albifrons Walker 1849, preoccupied). Determined by Coquillett as 
albifrons, correctly, but he was unaware of the preoccupation. I 
examined the type of Walker's species in the British Museum. 

1441. From Diacrisia virglnica Fabricius. Springiield, Mass., 
emerged August 18, 1898. I can not find any specimens with this 
number in the National Museum, but Dimmock's notes state that 
Coquillett determined the species as Tachina mella Walker. It is 
therefore reasonably certain that the species is what I now call 
Exorista larvarum Linnaeus, the same as No. 246. 

1446. From Cerura at Springfield, Mass. Emerged September 3, 
1898. One male and five females of Exorista larvarum Linnaeus. 

1516. From Automeris io Fabricius. Tatham, Mass., emerged July 
12, 1900. One male and three females of Achaetoneura dimmocid 
Webber. Type lot. 

2103. From Pholus larva. Springfield, Mass., September, 1902. 
Sixteen specimens, both sexes, the type lot of Achaetoneura pholi 
Webber. 

2646. From Atreus pleheja FRhrichis {Sphinx plehejus) . Spring- 
field, Mass., 1920. One female of Gonipsilura condnnata Meigen. 

B. REARED FROM COLEOPTERA 

691. From larvae of Ceruchus piceus Weber. Milton, Mass., 
emerged in 1884 from larvae kept over winter. One male and one 
female, determined by Coquillett as Theresia canescens Walker. The 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

type of canescens in the British Museum is a Ptilodexia^ quite distinct 
from the present species, which is the species named Eutheresia 
nionohaimni^ new genus and species, by Townsend.^ I have examined 
with care the descriptions of three new species of Eutheresia by West 
and two by Curran, but on comparing the series of 28 specimens in 
the National Museum it seems that the pollen varies so much that I 
do not feel much confidence in the specific value of the characters 
offered for these species. I therefore tentatively allow our material 
to stand as nnonohwinmi. 

1671. From G helymor'pha cassidea Fabricius {argus of authors). 
Springfield, Mass., emerged July 12, 1900. Two males and two 
females. The species was identified by Coquillett as Hypostena bar- 
bata Coquillett, which was a mistake. I am describing it as Ayietia 
dinwiocki in the present paper. 

1820. From the pupae of Monochamus scufellatus Say. Spring- 
field, Mass., emerged May 14, 1901. Two males, the same species 
as No. 591, Eutheresia monohammii Townsend. 

1937. From Geruchus piceus Weber. Springfield, Mass., emerged 
June 13, 1901. One female in poor condition, but no doubt the same 
as No. 591, EutJieresia monohammi Townsend. 

2032. From Xyloryctes sp. at Wilbraham, Mass. Emerged May, 
1902. One male and four females, correctly identified by Coquillett 
as Macroineigema chrysoprocta Wiedemann. 

2053. From Geruchus piceus Weber. Springfield, Mass., emerged 
April 19, 1902. One female. Same as No. 591, Eutheresia mono- 
ham.mi Townsend. 

2075. From Ghelymorpha cassidea Fabricius {argus of authors). 
Chicopee, Mass. One male and three females, erroneously deter- 
mined by Coquillett as Masicera exilis Coquillett. It is really the 
same species as No. 1671. 

C. REARED FROM HYMENOPTERA 

1115. Reared from sawfly larvae on Phius rlglda at Canobie Lake, 
N. H. Emerged about July 7, 1894. One small female of Phorocera 
claripennis Macquart, as identified by Coquillett. 

1478. Found in wasp's nest, probably Odynerus^ containing dip- 
terous pupae, at Hollys Ledge, Llolyoke, Mass., in October, 1898. 
Flies emerged June, 1899. One male and two females of Pachyoph- 
thalnius signatus Meigen. Correctly identified by Coquillett. 

D. REARED FROM DEAD BAT 

1356. Larvae in dead bat in barn, Springfield, Mass., eating all the 
flesh, 1898. Eighteen specimens of the fly, both sexes. Sarcophaga 
securifera Villeneuve. Identified by Coquillett as Sarcophaga sp. 

^ .Tourn. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 20, p. 117, 1912 ; lusecutor Inscitiae Menstiuus, vol. 
4, p. 51, 1916. 



ART. 20 RECORDS OP TACHINIDAE ALDRICH 5 

ANETIA DIMMOCKI, new Species 

Description. — Smallish, rather slender, gray species, with three 
posterior dorsocentrals, black palpi, discals well developed, one 
bristle on outer side of middle tibia. Female with piercer and 2 
to 4 pairs of striking blunt spines on edge of inflexed tergites 2 and 
3, on middle of venter. Infrasqiiamal setules absent. 

Male : Front 0.225 of head width at vertex, not widening to mid- 
dle; pollen of parafacials, parafrontals, and face grayish white, 
hardly silvery. One pair verticals, ocellars large and proclinate, 
three pairs reclinate frontals above, the uppermost, however, very 
small ; about nine other frontals, the single row ending at about 
mifldle of second antennal joint. Parafrontal with only a few very 
minute hairs besides frontals; frontal stripe dark brown, wider 
above than one parafrontal; parafacial bare, narrower at its middle 
than third antennal joint. Antennae black, third joint rather 
slender, almost reaching vibrissae, hardly more than twice as long 
as the second joint. Arista thickened on basal third, microscopically 
pubescent, basal joints short. Vibrissae at oral margin, only a few 
hairs above them on the divergent part of the ridges. Cheek one- 
seventh eye height. Eyes bare; back of head with white hair except 
one row behind eye. 

Thorax black, subshining, from behind showing thin pollen, on 
which a pair of slender black stripes lie between the acrostichals 
and the dorsocentrals and extend considerably behind the suture; 
outside the dorsocentrals a pair of broader black stripes reaching 
to the hindmost dorsocentral. Acrostichal, 3, 3, one pair close in 
front of the suture; inner presutural (anterior intraalar) present; 
sternopleural, 2, 1. Scutellum black to apex wnth three pairs margi- 
nal, one smallish discal, and a pair of decussate apicals about half 
as long as adjacent marginal; the apicals are only a little upturned. 

Abdomen black, pointed, rather slender, second to fourth segments 
of equal length, first not much shorter; one-half or more of second 
and third segments shining black, the base with an ill-defined band 
of gray pollen fading out behind and clearly interrupted in the 
middle; fourth segment with narrower basal band hardly inter- 
rupted. First segment with a pair of strong medium marginals, 
second with a discal and a marginal pair, the latter stouter; third 
with discal pair and stout but sparse marginal row numbering only 
six in the whole width; fourth segment with stout bristly erect hairs 
all over dorsal surface and a few irregular bristles, apex especially 
below with long backwardly directed bristles. Venter mostly shin- 
ing except in very oblique view. Along the median dorsal region 
between the bristles of second and third segments the hairs are 
noticeably erect and coarse. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Legs black, tarsi long, claws and piilvilli long, the latter brownish ; 
front tibiae with one outer bristle below middle; hind ones irregu- 
larly bristled on outer side. 

Wings hyaline, third vein with 2 to 4 setules at base above and 
below; fourth vein with rounded, oblique bend, then straight to 
margin, joining the costa not very far before extreme apex of wing, 
the distance being equal to half the length of the hind cross vein. 
Calypters white. 

Length, 5.5 mm. 

Female : Front at vertex 0.25 of head width, widening very little 
until close to antennae; pollen of front distinctly yellowish; para- 
frontals wider than in male but parafacials not. Outer verticals 
not half as long as inner; ocellars smaller than in male; third anten- 
nal joint slightly shorter, not quite twice the second. Dorsal bristles 
of abdomen as in male but less strong, no erect hairs along median 
line. The stubby bristles of venter, mentioned in diagnosis, may be 
very striking if the venter happened to dry with protruding keel, 
or may be difficult to see if the keel is completely flattened down. 
The length of the fourth segment below is considerablj^ longer than 
that of the two preceding segments combined. 

Length, 4.4 mm. 

rype.— Male, U.S.N.M. No. 43589. 

Remarks. — The foregoing description is based on the type and 
allotype. Most of the other females do not show the yellow tinge 
to the parafrontal pollen. A few of the numerous females lack the 
pair of discals on the second segment. Several males have a dis- 
tinct brownish tinge on the wings and calypters. 

Described from the following material (all paratypes except the 
first two) : 

(a) Type, allotype, one additional male and two females, reared 
from Chelymorpha cassidea Fabric! us, at Chicopee, Mass., by 
George Dimmock (Dimmock No. 2075). 
(6) One male and one female, reared from the same host in 1900, at 
Springfield, Mass., by Dimmock (Dimmock No. 1C71). 

(c) Two males and two females, reared from the same host in New 
Hampshire by workers of the Gipsy Moth Laboratory (G. M. L. 
No. 12172). 

(d) One male, one female, reared from the same host in 1900, at 
Chicopee, Mass., by F. Knab. 

(e) One male, Hatch Experiment Station of Massachusetts, with 
label, "Parasite on Lady-bird." The host larva was probably 
the same as preceding, which might easily be mistaken for a 
coccinellid. The date is August 10, 1895. 

(/) One female, reared from the same host as type, at Cedar Keys^. 
Fla., by Hubbard and Schwarz, May 6, 1875. 



ART. 20 KECORDS OP TACHINIDAE ALDRICH 7 

(g) One male, one female, reared from same host, at Arlington, Va., 

July 2 and 9, 1919, by M. T. Van Horn (Chittenden No. 6062). 
(A) One male, reared at College Park, Md., from Coptocycla sp. by 

K. C. Babcock (Chittenden No. 6017). 
(i) One male, one female, reared from Dcloyola clavata Fabricius, 
from North Carolina Department of Agriculture, presumably 
reared in that State. 
{j) Six males and eight females, reared at Baton Rouge, La., from 
Metriona hicolor Fabricius, July and August, 1921, by C. E. 
Smith (Chittenden No. 7030). 
{k) Thirty-three collected specimens (22 males and 11 females) : 3 
males, Lawrence, Kans., 1893, identified for the writer by D. W. 
Coquillett about 1898 as Hypostena harhata Coquillett ; 12 males 
and 4 females, La Fayette, Ind. ; one male, Turtle Mountains, N. 
Dak., June 21, 1918; one female. Mount Vernon, Va., July 21, 
1923 ; one female, Great Falls, Va., August 9, 1923 ; one female, 
Shenandoah River, Clarke Count^^, Va., September 3, 1923 (all 
the preceding collected by the writer) ; two males, Sandusky, 
Ohio, July (Reinhard) ; two males, Blendon, Ohio, September 
11, 1901 (Hine) ; one male, Sugar Grove, Ohio, June 20, 1926, 
no collector; one female, College Station, Tex., June 1, 1923 
(Reinhard) ; one male, Bexar County, Tex., June 9, 1928 
(Parks) ; one female. Meridian, Miss., September 3, 1922 (Al- 
len) ; one female, Onondaga County, N. Y., August 11, 1897, no 
collector; and one female. Falls Church, Va., September 6 
(Banks). 
Coquillett * records a specimen of Hypostena harbata Coquillett as 
bred from a larva of Coptocycla clavata Fabricius, at College Park, 
Md., by Willis G. Johnson. I am unable to find the specimen in the 
National Museum at present ; but as Coquillett was considerably con- 
fused in his identifications of what he called this species, and identi- 
fied my Lawrence, Kans., males of dimmocki as the same, it is very 
probable that this rearing record also belongs to dimviocki.^ 

NOTES ON THE GENUS ANETIA 

The genus Anetia was described by Robineau-Desvoidy,® with the 
single species occlusa^ new, which Bezzi ^ made a synonjan of Tachina 
nigripes Zetterstedt. The latter has been supposed for years to be 
the type species of the genus Lydella Robineau-Desvoidy ; but Doc- 
tor Villeneuve ^ has shown that Lydella has been entirely raisunder- 



* Revision of the Tachlnidae of America North of Mexico, Tech. Ser. No. 7, Div. Ent., 
U. S. Dept. Agr., p. 17, 1897. 

■ See Aldrlch, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 30, p. 42, 1928. 

" Dipteres de environs de Paris, vol. 1, 1863, p. 868. 

' Catalogue of Palaearctic Diptera, vol. 3, p. 292, 1907. 

*BuIl. et Ann. Soc. Eut. Belgique, vol. 49, p. 103, 1929; Konowi.n, vol. 9, p. 218, 1930. 



8 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 : art. 20 

stood, and its type species griscscens Kobineau-Desvoidy is the species 
which has been known in recent literature as Masicera senilis ISIeigen 
(and which should be known as Lydella grisescens Robineau-Des- 
voidy, since the true senilis of Meigen is an entirely different species). 
There appears to be no earlier generic name for what has been called 
Lydella than Anetia, and Doctor Townsend in a recent letter advises 
me that he adopts this. 

The striking genitalic characters of the females, with piercer and 
stubby ventral abdominal spines, imply such biological difference that 
they should if possible be recognized as generic, although I readily 
admit that it is difficult to separate the males of these species from 
those in which the females do not have a piercer. A. dimviocki dif- 
fers from the type of Anetia^ Tachina nigripes Zetterstedt, a Euro- 
pean species represented in the National Museum by several speci- 
mens of both sexes indentified by Villeneuve, Bezzi, and Nielsen, 
chiefly in lacking the tuft of minute setules underneath the calypter 
(a single distinct setule is present in one male from La Fayette) ; 
nigripes also has several large bristles on the outer front side of the 
middle tibia, not usually regarded as generic. A. dimmocki fits bet- 
ter here than in Dexodes Brauer and Bergenstamm (in which I 
would include as synonyms Paranieigenia Townsend, Paradexodes 
Townsend, and Auhaeanetia Townsend), as the latter has no piercer 
in the female. 



U. i 60VERNMENT PRINTINS OFFICEi I9>t 



INSECTS OF THE ORDER ORTHOPTERA OF THE 
PINCHOT EXPEDITION OF 1929 ^ 



By A. N. Caudell 
Entomologist, Bureau of Entomology, United States Department of Agriculture 



The Orthoptera brought back in 1929 by the Pinchot Expedition 
to the South Seas were mostly taken on Barro Colorado Island, Canal 
Zone, and in the Galapagos Islands. This material, numbering 66 
specimens of 20 species, represents no new genera and but one new 
species. There are, however, a number of new geographical records. 

For convenience the following report is separated under geo- 
graphical headings. All specimens bear the Pinchot expedition 
label, and one indicates the collector, Dr. A. K. Fisher. Some also 
bear the Accession No. 105848. 

WEST INDIES 

Nymphs of two well-known roaches comprise the only Orthoptera 
brought b}' the expedition from the West Indies. They are as 
follows : 

Family BLATTIDAE 

Periplaneta australasiae Fabricius: One small nymph labeled 
" G. Cayman, W. I., Apr. 17, 1929." 

Pycnoscelus surinainensis Linnaeus : One immature specimen 
bearing same data as above. 

BARRO COLORADO ISLAND. CANAL ZONE 

The artificial island of Barro Colorado, standing in an artificial 
lake resulting from the Panama Canal project, seems to be a natural- 
ist's paradise. Fairchild ^ presents a map of the island and its sur- 
roundings, together with several excellent photographs; and a small 
book by W. C. and M. H. Allee, entitled " Jungle Island," published 
in 1925, has to do with the flora and fauna of this island, but it con- 
tains no reference to Orthoptera. The only paper Imown to the 
writer listing even in part the forms occurring on Barro Colorado 
is one by Allee ^ in 1926, which listed representative forms of various 

1 The narrative of this expedition will be found in the book To the South Seas, by Gifford 
Pinchot, published In 19.30. 

2 Journ. Heredity, vol. 15, pp. 99-102, 1924. 
5 Ecology, vol. 7, pp. 445-468, 1926. 

No. 2921.— Proceedings U.S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. 21 

97988— .32 1 



2 PROCEEDIlSrGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

stratifications of the tropical forest. No list of the Orthoptera of 
the island as a whole has yet appeared, and special collections should 
be formed before such a list approaching completeness is attempted. 
All the Orthoptera taken here were collected on May 3, 1929. 

Family TETTIGONIIDAE 

Subfamily Phaneropterinae 

Insara holivari Griffini : Two adult males. The National Museum 
also contains a male of this species taken on the island by S. W. Frost, 
January 21, 1929. 

Subfamily LiSTROSCELiNAE 

Phlugis teres De Geer: One adult female. A female taken by N. 
Banks on the island on June 26, 1924, is in the National Museum. 

Family ACRIDIDAE 
Subfamily Acridinae 

AmMytropidia i7isignis Hebard : One adult male. 

Orphulella 'punctata De Geer : Three male and three female adults 
and one immature female. All these are of the brown phase, but 
specimens of both green and brown forms were taken on the island 
b^^ P. Rau and are in the National Museum. 

Subfamily Oedipodinae 
Heliastus venezuelae Saussure : A sing-le female is labeled " From 



to^ 



boat 2 days out from Panama, July 23, 1929." Thus its exact locality 
of origin is unknown, but it is probably not Barro Colorado Island. 
Aside from Paulinia acuminata De Geer, which is included by Heb- 
ard under the subfamily name Paulininae, this seems to be the only 
member of the subfamily Oedipodinae now in our Panamanian lists. 

Subfamily Cyrtacanthacrinae * 

Opshomala cylindrodes Stal: One female. The female of this 
species and that of O. goethalsi Hebard are said to be almost insep- 

* Recently this rather well-established subfamily name for the spine-breasted grass- 
hoppers has been dropped by some writers in favor of the name Catantopinae. As pri- 
ority does not prevail in names higher than genera, one is allowed to use his judgment 
in such matters. If any change at all were necessary the name Podisminae would be 
preferable, as that is based on the oldest included generic name. Indeed this name Is so 
much shorter and more euphonic that it would be chosen by the present writer for 
adoption except for the fact that the longer name Cyrtacanthacrinae is now so well 
^established in general use. 



AST. 21 OKTHOPTEKA OF THE PINCHOT EXPEDITION CAUDELL 6 

arable. Neither species seems to have been recorded before from 
Barro Colorado, and the present specimen is here listed as cylin- 
drodes mostly because it is the older of the two names. 

Osmilia flavolineata De Geer : One male. 

Xyleus rosulentus Stal : One adult male taken on the island by 
Allee. This species was not collected by the Pinchot expedition, but 
it is entered here for the purpose of record and to introduce the 
following matter for nomenclatorial interest : 

In 1822 Kuhl erected a genus of reptiles under the name Tro- 
pinotus, which was, as I am informed by Dr. Leonhard Stejneger, 
a nomen nudum. Four years later, Bois ^ validated the genus under 
the emended name Tropidonotus. In 1831 Serville erected his genus 
Tropinofus in the Orthoptera, and this generic name was emended 
to Tropidonotus by Stal in 1878. In 1848 Gistel ® proposed the 
generic name Xyleus to replace the preoccupied Servillean name. 
Not knowing of this erection of a replacing name by Gistel, Bolivar 
introduced for the same purpose the new name Diedranotus in 190G. 
Thus it is clear that Gistel's name Xyleus is the proper name for thi& 
genus, 7'ropinMus and Diedronotus falling into synonymy under 
Gistel's name. 

GALAPAGOS ISLANDS 

The Orthoptera of the Galapagos have been rather fully covered, 
Giinther in 1877 ' presented a report on the forms taken in these 
islands by the expedition of H. M. S. Peterel; in 1889 ® Howard 
listed a few forms ; and Scudder,^ in 1893, gave an illustrated report 
of the Ortlioptera of the Galapagos Islands in which appears a 
resume of earlier literature, the most comprehensive treatment of 
the fauna of this region up to that time. In 1901 McNeill^** 
reported on the Orthoptera of the Hopkins Stanford Galapagos 
expedition of 1898-99, and in the following year Snodgrass ^^ dis- 
cussed the acridid genera Schistocerca^ Sphingonotus^ and Hal- 
menus occurring in these islands. This paper is accompanied by a 
map of the islands comprising the Galapagos Group. The latest 
comprehensive report on Galapagos Orthoptera is by Hebard,^^ 
who treats the material collected by the expedition of the California 
Academy of Sciences to the Galapagos Islands, 1905-6. A review 
of previous records is also given. The latest mention of importance 

^ Isis von Oken, 1826, p. 205. 

« Naturgescbichte des Thierreichs fiif hohere Schulen, p. xi, Stuttgart, 184S.. 

''Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1877, pp. 87-88. 

« Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 12, pp. 1<J2-1U4, 1889. 

» Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 25, no. 1, 25 pp., 3 pis., 1893. 

'oProc. Washington Acad. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 487-506, 1901. 

"Proc. Washington Acad. Sci., vol. 4, pp. 411-454, pis. 26, 27, 1902. 

"Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 4, vol. 2, pp. 311-346, 1 pi., 11 flgs., 1920. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATION" AL MUSEUM vol. 80 

is by William Beebe in 1924 in his book " Galapagos, World's End," 
where Anaulacomera darwinii^ Galapagia solitaria, Schistocerca 
-melanocera^ and Halmenus robtistus are noted. These references 
include two new island records, Galapagia solitaria from Seymour 
Island and Halmenus robitstus from Tower Island. The following 
species were also taken by Beebe but were not mentioned in his 
printed book: Conocephalus exitiosits, an immature female, Conway 
Bay, Indefatigable Island, May 1, 1923 ; Gryllus assimilis, one half- 
grown male nymph on Tower Island, April 28, 1923 ; Cryptoptitum 
lepismoide, an adult male on Tower Island, April 28, 1923. This 
last constitutes a new island record. 

The Orthoptera of the Galapagos brought back by the Pinchot 
expedition are as follows: 

Family TETTIGONIIDAE 

Subfamily Pseudophyllinae 

Liparoscelis coohsoni Butler : One female. Tower Island, June 16. 
This short-winged katydid has hitherto been recorded from 6 of the 
16 main islands of the Galapagos group, but the present record is 
the only one from Tower Island. 

Family ACRIDIDAE 

Subfamily Oedipodinae 

Sphingonotus fuscoirroratus Stal: Three males and one female, 
Hood Island, July 1. This small grasshopper is recorded from 11 of 
the 16 islands. 

Subfamily Cyrtacanthacrinae 

Ealvienus rohustus Scudder: Two males and two females from 
Tower Island, June 16. First record from Tower Island. From a 
careful study of descriptions and comparison with a paratype, this 
seems to be typical rohustus. 

Schistocerca literosa var. hyalina Scudder: Six males, three fe- 
males, taken on Tower Island on June 16. 

Schistocerca literosa var. punctata Scudder: Two females, Hood 
Island, July 1. 

The above determination of varieties is made mostly from the 
respective localities of capture. From comparisons made with the 



ABT. 21 OETHOPTEEA OF THE PINCHOT EXPEDITION OATJDELL 6 

characters given in tabular form by Scudder,^^ which Hebard ^* says 
will easily distinguish these forms, I fail to appreciate differentiating 
characters of real value. 

Schistocerca melanocera Stal : One adult female and a female 
nymph from Charles Island, June 27; 1 male and 2 females from 
Tower Island, June 16; and 3 males and 3 females labeled only 
Galapagos, June 19. 

The specimens from Tower Island constitute a new island record. 
They, as well as the female from Charles Island, agree exactly with 
the colored figures of Hebard's paper of 1920, but those bearing the 
label " Galapagos " are decidedly lighter yellowish. These specimens 
were, however, evidently discolored from having been collected in 
spirits. 

This is evidently' the large grasshopper noted b}^ Mr. Pinchot 
in his book on the expedition as being eaten with avidity by a large 
lizard. 

Schistocerca intermedia Snodgrass: One adult male and an im- 
mature female on Duncan Island, June 26. The adult agrees exactly 
with the colored figure given by Hebard, sexual differences being 
allowed for. 

Family GRYLLIDAE 
Subfamily Gryllinae 

Gryll'm assimilis Fabricius: One male and two females. Charles 
Island, June 28. All macropterous. 

MARQUESAS ISLANDS. OCEANIA 

Three species only of Orthoptera were brought back from the 
Marquesas, one being undescribed. They are as follows : 

Family TETTIGONIIDAE 
Subfamily Listroscelinae 

Phisisf sp. : One male without legs. Fatuhiva, September 18. 

Subfamily Copiphorinae 

Euconocephalus lineatipes Bolivar: One female, Fatuhiva, Sep- 
tember 18. 

" Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 25, p. 16, 1893. 

" Proc. California Acad. Sri., ser. 4, vol. 2, p. 327, 1920. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Family ACRIDIDAE 
Subfamily Cyrtacanthacrinae 

PATANGA PINCHOTI, new species 

Collected on Eiao, September 28, 1929. 

This species runs out to the genus Patanga in the l^ey given by 
Uvarov in his revision of the group Cyrtacanthacrini.^^ Some re- 
lation to the genus Austracris is indicated in the somewhat strongly 
retrorse prosternal spine, and it is indeed possible that it really 
should be referred there. This species is named in honor of the noted 
leader of the expedition, Hon. Gifford Pinchot. 

Descriptio7i. — Head with the face rather strongly retreating; eyes 
almost but not quite twice as high as long, the anterior margin 
straight; fastigium of vertex flat, transverse diamond shaped, broadly 
rounding into the frontal costa, which is equally broad throughout, 
or barely narrowed at the ocellus, and with the slightly elevated 
lateral margins just reaching the clypeus; antenna about twice as 
long as the pronotum. 

Pronotum with a veiy low but persistent median carina, the lateral 
carinae indicated only posteriorly; the pronotal disk cut by three 
transverse sulci, the posterior one situated about the middle; the 
anterior margin of disk almost straight, very slightly and roundly 
angulate, while the posterior margin is obtuse-angulate, the tip entire 
and narrowly rounded. The surface of the pronotal disk is punc- 
tated on the metazona, the rest dully rugose. Prosternal spine sub- 
cylindrical, apically pointed and the whole directed rather decidedly 
backward, though normally not nearly reaching the mesosternum; 
in a couple of somewhat crushed specimens almost or quite reaching 
the sternum. Tegmina rather slender, apically slightly narrowing 
and curved very gently backward, the apical third more transparent 
than the basal portion ; wings hyaline with black venation. 

Posterior femora rather slender and with the apical third or more 
with the margins subparallel. 

Cerci of the male slender, gently flattened laterally, tapering grad- 
ually to a point, gently curved inward, the whole about five times as 
long as basally broad and reaching the tip of the supraanal plate. 
Supraanal plate sulcate above in the basal half or slightly more, the 
lateral margins straight and gently converging to near the triangu- 
larly pointed tip, where they terminate in a lateral shoulder. Sub- 
genital plate of male elongate, sharply pointed and directed upward 
and backward, extending decidedly beyond and slightly above the 
tip of the supraanal plate. Valves of the ovipositor moderately 
recurved. 

»Ann. Mag. Nat. mst., ser. 9, vol. 11, p. 143, 1923. 



ABT. 21 ORTHOPTEEA OF THE PINCHOT EXPEDITION CAUDELL 7 

General color brown, the tegmina obscurely maculate with rather 
large rounded spots of darker color; side of pronotum with a gen- 
erally obscure dark spot, and the head with a distinct postocular 
stripe and sometimes with a dark perpendicular streak below the 
eyes: legs marked with black spots, especially noticeable on the 
posterior femora. 

Measurements. — Length, to end of tegmina, c? 41, 9 51 mm.; an- 
tenna, c? 14, 9 16 mm.; pronotum, d^ 7, 9 8.5 mm.; tegmina, S 
33, 9 46 mm.; posterior femora, c? 20, 9 25 mm.; cerci, e 2.25 mm. 

Type maierial. — Four males and seven females and one female 
nymph. Type, c? ; allotype, 9 ; and paratypes A to C, c? , D to I, 
9 , and J, nymph. Tj^pe, U.S.N.M. No. 43590. 

Remarks. — There is very little variation in size or appearance 
noticeable in this series of specimens. 

The present species seems much like the one described as Valanga 
rapm^a by Uvarov^^ and may indeed prove to be the same. Its 
characters appear, however, to indicate proper association with the 
species of the genus Patanga rather than those of the genus Valanga. 
If Uvarov's species does ultimately prove to be the one here described, 
it would seem advisable to refer it to the genus Patanga. 

The Valanga stercoraria of Holdhaus may belong to Patanga, or 
to a new one. Certain of the characters noted for that species b}^ 
Uvarov " seem at variance with those of the genus Valanga. The 
excised posterior margin of the pronotal disk of stercoraria men- 
tioned by Uvarov is not noted in the original description of the 
species by Holdhaus.^^ 

^«Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 9, vol. 19, p. 560, flg. 2, 1927. 

''Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 9, vol. 12, p. 359, 1923. 

^ Deakschr. kais. Akad. Wiss., math.-natui-w. Klasse, Wien, vol. 84, p. 557, 1909. 



«. S. eOVERNMCNT rRIHTINS OFFICE : ia«2 



NEW WEST INDIAN CERAMBYCID BEETLES 



By W. S. Fisher 

Associate Entomologist, Bureau of Entomology, United States Department 

of Agriculture 



The present paper is the result of a study of the beetles of the 
family Cerambycidae from the West Indies found in the collection 
of the United States National Museum, together with the material 
borrowed from the American Museum of Natural History, New 
York, and the Museum of Comparative Zoology, Cambridge, Mass. 
Specimens from the West Indies have been received at various times 
for identification, many of which were forms undescribed, and it 
seems advisable to describe these so that names will be available for 
listing the species from that region. Four genera and 63 species 
are herein described as new. 

Subfamily Prioninae 

XIXUTHRUS DOMINGOENSIS. new species 

Xixuthrus sp. Russo, Bol. Lab. Zool. Gen. e Agr. Portici, vol. 24, p. 141, 1930. 

Male. — Very large, robust, strongly convex, brownish black, with 
the elytra more reddish brown. 

Head longer than wide, deeply depressed behind the epistoma and 
on vertex, with a narrow, longitudinal, median groove extending 
from frontal depression to occiput; surface finely, confluently punc- 
tate, rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, yellowish-white 
pubescence; antennal tubercles narrowly separated and strongly ele- 
vated ; mandibles robust, long, and strongly, arcuately deflexed, inner 
margin of each mandible armed with a small tooth at base, a large, 
broad tooth near middle, and the apex prolonged into a large, rather 
acute tooth, surface coarsely, densely rugose; eyes large, oblong, 
strongly convex, vaguely emarginate, and separated from each other 
on the top by about the width of the upper lobe. Antenna extend- 
ing to apical fourth of elytron; first joint robust, subcylindrical, 
coarsely punctate above, scabrous beneath, extending to anterior 

No. 2922.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum. Vol. 80. Art. 22. 

97806—32 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

margin of pronotum, nearly twice as long as the third joint, which 
is slightly longer than the fourth; apical joints longitudinally ru- 
gose, the eleventh joint distinctly longer than the tenth. 

Pronotum nearly twice as wide as long, distinctly narrower at 
apex than at base, and widest at base; sides nearly parallel poster- 
iorly, arcuately narrowed anteriorly, and strongly, regularly spi- 
nose; disk moderately convex and uneven; surface finely, conflu- 
ently punctate, sparsely clothed with short, inconspicuous pubes- 
cence, and ornamented on each side of middle with an irregularly 
shaped, smooth area, which is acutely produced anteriorly, and with 
two very narrow, more or less distinct, smooth spots on each side 
toward lateral margin. Scutellum strongly transverse, broadly 
subtruncate at apex, surface densely punctate, sparsely clothed with 
short, recumbent, yellowish- white pubescence, and with a narrow, 
longitudinal, median, smooth vitta. 

Elytra five times as long as pronotum, and at base subequal in 
width to the pronotum at base; sides parallel or vaguely expanded 
at middle, tips separately, broadly rounded, each with a small tooth 
at sutural margin; surface vaguely rugose, feebly, finely, densely 
punctate, with a few coarse punctures intermixed, densely clothed 
with very short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, which nearly con- 
ceals the surface, and each elytron with two vague, longitudinal 
costae, extending from base to apical fourth. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, finely, sparsely punctate, sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent, whitish hairs, posterior margin of each seg- 
ment smooth, and glabrous at middle ; last segment broadly, feebly, 
arcuately emarginate at middle. Prosternum finely, confluently 
punctate, and nearly glabrous; prosternal process rather narrow, 
arcuately expanded behind the coxal cavities, and rounded at apex. 
Legs long, scabrous, especially the anterior pair; femora more or less 
serrate on inner margins ; anterior tibiae slightly arcuate, and armed 
with numerous asperities on undersides. 

Length, 78-85 mm. ; width, 28-30 mm. 

Type locality. — Santiago, Dominican Kepublic. 

Other locality. — San Pedro de Macoris, Dominican Eepublic. 

r^/pe.— U.S.N.M. No. 43705. Collected in 1926 by Giuseppe 
Russo. 

Paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. Collected 
on the Conseulo Plantation, San Pedro de Macoris, Dominican 
Republic, in 1919, by an officer in the American Army. 

Remarks. — Described from two males (one the type). 

This species resembles Xixuthrus costatus Montrouzier, described 
from Woodlark Island, but it differs from that species in having 
the antennal tubercules more narrowly separated, pronotum finely, 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 6 

confluently punctured, and distinctly pubescent, each elytron with 
two longitudinal costae, and the pubescence distinctly shorter, basal 
joints of antennae scabrous, and the prosternum finely, confluently 
punctured. 

This is the first sjDecies of the oriental tribe Xixuthri to be found in 
America. All the other described species of this tribe are indigenous 
to the East Indies, It is the second species of oriental Cerambycidae 
to be recorded from the West Indies, the other species being Bato- 
cera ruhus Linnaeus. 

MONODESMUS ATRATUS, new species 

Male. — Broadly elongate, strongly flattened above, rather strongly 
shining, and uniformly black above and beneath. 

Head strongly transverse, somewhat uneven, and deeply, trans- 
versely concave in front, strongly, deeply concave between the an- 
tennal tubercules, which are widely separated and rather strongly 
elevated, the surface nearly glabrous, coarsely, deeply, confluently 
punctate, and more or less rugose; eyes large, strongly convex, 
moderately emarginate, and separated from each other on the top 
by nearly twice the width of the upper lobe. Antenna one and one- 
fourth times as long as the body, finely, densely punctate, vaguely 
pubescent, the joints flattened, and strongly, longitudinally carinate; 
first joint short, cylindrical, feebly expanded toward apex, one-half 
as long as the third joint, which is distinctly longer than the fourth ; 
eleventh joint distinctly longer than the tenth. 

Pronotum one and one-half times as wide as long, subequal in 
width at base and apex, and widest at middle ; sides parallel, sinuate, 
and armed on each side at middle with a very long, acute tooth; 
disk uneven, with two large, round, coarsely punctured gibbosities, 
arranged longitudinally on each side of the middle, and a smooth, 
elongate gibbosity in front of the scutellum ; surface coarsely, irregu- 
larly, confluently punctate, and sparsely clothed with long, incon- 
spicuous hairs. Scutellum elongate-triangular, rounded at apex, and 
coarsely punctate. 

Elytra five times as long as pronotum, and at base distinctly wider 
than pronotum at middle; sides nearly parallel, feebly, broadly con- 
stricted behind middle, the tips conjointly, broadly rounded, with 
a small, distinct tooth at the sutural angles; disk moderately convex; 
surface coarsely, deeply, confluently punctate from base to apex, 
clothed with a few semierect, inconspicuous hairs, and each elytron 
with two vague, longitudinal costae, extending from base to apical 
fifth. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely granulose, finely, sparsely punc- 
tate, and rather densely clothed with long, semierect, whitish hairs ; 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM tol. 80 

last segment broadly, arcuately emarginate at apex. Prosternum 
narrowly transvei*se, coarsely punctate, rather densely clothed with 
long, erect, inconspicuous hairs ; prosternal process narrow, strongly, 
arcuately elevated between the coxal cavities, and broadly rounded 
at apex. Legs long, coarsely, densely punctate, somewhat rugose, 
sparsely clothed with moderately long, whitish hairs; femora sub- 
cylindrical, slightly flattened; tibiae flattened, feebly, gradually 
expanded toward the tips. 

Length, 16 mm. ; width, 4.5 mm. 

Type locality. — Sierra Kangel, Cuba. 

2^y^g._Xj.S.N.M. No. 43706. Collected by Brother Koberto, of 
the La Salle School, Habana, in the Province of Pinar del Rio, 
Cuba, in 1930, and labeled " Estacion Experimental Agronomica, 
Cuba, No. 9437." 

Remarks. — Described from the type, a unique male. 

This species is allied to callidioides Serville, but it differs from 
that species in being uniformly black, and with the elytra coarsely, 
confluently punctured. 

Subfamily Cerambycinae 

PSEUDOEME, new genus 

Head broad, feebly concave between the antennal tubercles, the 
front vertical, and wider than long. Mandibles short, robust, 
arcuate, entire, and rather acute at apices. Ligula corneous. Palpi 
3-jointed, the maxillary twice as long as the labial, and the apical 
joints elongate-triangular. Antenna slender and shorter than body 
in the female, more robust basally and longer than the body in the 
male, densely ciliate beneath; first joint robust, subcylindrical, with- 
out a cicatrix at apex, and shorter than the third joint. Eyes large, 
coarsely granulated, and deeply emarginate. Pronotum about as 
long as wide, feebly constricted at base, even on disk, rounded but 
not tuberculate at the sides. Scutellum transversely oval. Elytra 
elongate, parallel, slightly flattened, and rounded at apex. Abdom- 
inal segments subequal in length. Mesosternum flat, and very nar- 
row between the intermediate coxal cavities, which are open exter- 
nally. Prosternal process very narrow, and not prolonged behind 
the anterior coxal cavities, which are nearly contiguous, and strongly 
angulated externally. Legs moderately long, subequal in length; 
femora robust, flattened, and strongly, abruptly clavate; posterior 
tarsus with the first joint as long as the following joints united. 

Genotype. — Pseudoeme poolei, new sjJecies. 

This genus belongs to the tribe Gemini and is allied to Oeme New- 
man, but it differs from that genus in having the maxillary palpi 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 5 

twice as long as the labial palpi, with the apical joints elongate- 
triangular, and the prosternal process not extending behind the an- 
terior coxal cavities. 

PSEUDOEME POOLEI, new sp«cie9 

Male. — Elongate, parallel, strongly flattened above, subopaque, 
uniformly ochraceous, and in some examples the head, pronotum, 
antennae, and tibiae slightly reddish. 

Head with the front strongly transverse, broadly, feebly concave 
between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated and 
feebly elevated, finely, densely rugose or granulose, sparsely clothed 
with moderately long, inconspicuous, recumbent, pale yellow pubes- 
cence, with a few long, erect hairs around the eyes, and with a nar- 
row, longitudinal groove, extending from epistoma to vertex; eyes 
separated from each other on the top by nearly three times the width 
of the upper lobe. Antenna one and one-fourth times as long as 
the body, basal joints robust, slightly rugose, sparsely clothed with 
long, semierect hairs, apical joints more slender, slightly flattened, 
rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, pale yellow pubes- 
cence, and all joints densely ciliate beneath; first joint finely sca- 
brous, three-fourths as long as the third joint, which is slightly longer 
than the fourth, the following joints subequal in length, except the 
last, which is slightly shorter. 

Pronotum as wide as long, subequal in width at base and apex, 
and widest at apical third; sides strongly, arcuately rounded anteri- 
orly, obliquely narrowed posteriorly to near the base, where they are 
narrowly constricted; disk rather even, and slightly flattened; sur- 
face sparsely, irregularly granulose, sparsely clothed with moderately 
long, recumbent, whitish pubescence. Scutellum transversely oval, 
broadly rounded at apex, the surface slightly concave and sparsely 
pubescent. 

Elytra five times as long as pronotum, and at base subequal in 
width to the pronotum at apical third; humeri strongly developed; 
sides strongly deflexed anteriorly, parallel from base to near the tips, 
which are separately, narrowly rounded; disk even, and feebly flat- 
tened; surface coarsely, densely, uniformly punctate, rather densely 
clothed with moderately long, semierect, pale yellow hairs, with a few 
longer, erect hairs intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath finely, obsoletely punctate, with a few irregu- 
larly distributed asperities, and sparsely clothed with short recum- 
bent, and long erect, pale yellow hairs intermixed; last segment 
broadly, arcuately emarginate at apex. Prosternum feebly, trans- 
versely rugose, with a few small asperities, and clothed with a few 



b PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

inconspicuous hairs. Femora robust, feebly flattened, sparsely 
clothed with long, semierect, pale yellow hairs, and with numerous 
small, brown asperities on the underside, the middle and posterior 
pairs slightly longer, feebly arcuate, petiolate at bases, and strongly, 
abruptly clavate toward the apices. Tibiae slightly flattened, 
coarsely rugose, with numerous small, brown asperities, and densely 
clothed with long, semierect, yellowish hairs. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antennae more 
slender, not quite so long as the body, outer joints cylindrical, the 
first joint only slightly shorter than the third joint, and subequal in 
length to the fourth; abdomen beneath smooth, without asperities, 
and the last segment broadly rounded at apex ; legs less robust, and 
the femora and tibiae without asperities. 

Length, 9-18 mm.; width, 2.2-4 mm. 

Tyfe locality. — L'Atalaye, Haiti. 

Other locality. — St. Michel, Haiti. 

Type., allotype., and paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43707. 

Paratypes. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Remarks. — Described from 45 examples (one male type) : The type, 
allotype, and 37 paratypes, collected at light, at the type locality, 
between February 21 and March 8, 1928, by A. J. Poole; and 6 
paratypes collected in a house at St. Michel, Haiti, between February 
10 and 15, 1928, by the same collector. 

There is considerable variation in size in the series examined, and 
also more or less variation in the shape of the pronotum. Many of 
the examples resemble the type, but in others the pronotum is more 
or less uneven, with an inconspicuous, longitudinal, median, smooth 
vitta, and the sides are regularly, arcuately rounded from base to 
apex. 

METHIA PALLIDA, new species 

Narrowly elongate, strongly flattened above, feebly shining, above 
uniformly pale yellow, except the eyes, which are black, beneath 
pale yellow, with the abdomen usually darker. 

Head in front nearly square, flat, broadly, feebly concave between 
the antennal tubercles, which are broadly separated and feebly 
elevated, feebly, coarsely punctate, finely rugose, sparsely, uniformly 
clothed with short, semierect, yellow pubescence, and with a longi- 
tudinal carina extending from epistoma to occiput; eyes very large, 
nearly divided (connecting piece without facets), and nearl}'^ con- 
tiguous on the top. Antenna one and one-half times as long as the 
bod.y, rather densely clothed with moderately long, semierect yellow- 
ish hairs; first joint robust, cylindrical, slightly enlarged toward 
apex, and one-half as long as the third joint, which is subequal in 
length to the fourth; eleventh joint subequal in length to the tenth. 



ABT. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 7 

Pronotum as wide as long, subequal in width at apex and base, and 
widest at middle ; sides strongly constricted near base and apex, and 
arciiately rounded at middle; disk slightly flattened, even, broadly, 
tranversely depressed near base and apex; surface finely, incon- 
spicuously rugose, and sparsely clothed with long, inconspicuous, 
erect hairs. Scutellum as broad as long, feebly triangular, broadly 
rounded at apex, and the surface glabrous. 

Elytra two-thirds as long as abdomen, four times as long as prono- 
tum, and at base distinctly wider than pronotum at middle; sides 
gradually narrowed from base to the tips, which are separately, rather 
narrowly rounded ; disk moderately flattened, surface rather densely, 
vaguely punctate, and sparsely clothed with short, inconspicuous, 
erect hairs. 

Abdomen beneath finely, sparsely, vaguely punctate, rather densely 
clothed with long, inconspicuous, recumbent pubescence ; last segment 
broadly, deeply, triangularly emarginate at apex. Prosternum 
vaguely rugose, clothed with a few inconspicuous hairs, and without 
a prosternal process; anterior coxae contiguous. Legs long; femora 
arcuately expanded near middle, and strongly flattened; tibiae 
subcylindrical. 

Length, 4.2-8.6 mm.; width, 1.2-1.8 mm. 

Type locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

Type and paraty pes. — U.S. '^M. No. 43708. 

Bemarks. — Described from three examples (one type), all collected 
at light, at the type locality, by H. L. Dozier: The type, collected 
February 17, 1930, and labeled "Ace. 55-30 " ; one paratype, collected 
December 31, 1929; and one paratype, collected February 10, 1930, 
and labeled "Ace. 36-30." Sexes not determined. 

This species is closely allied to necydalea Fabricius, but it can be 
separated from that species in being uniformly pale yellow above and 
in having the eyes practically divided. 

BRITTONELLA, new genus 

Head large, with the front vertical, and wider than long. Man- 
dibles short, arcuate, and rather acute at apices. Ligula membranous 
and bilobed. Cheeks very short. Palpi 3-jointed, subequal in 
length, and the apical joints subtriangular. Antenna not distinctly 
longer than the body in both sexes, not spinose, not ciliate beneath ; 
first joint subcylindrical, without a cicatrix at apex, and longer than 
the third joint. Antennal tubercles not spinose at apices. Eyes 
large, coarsely granulated, and deeply emarginate. Pronotum 
about as wide as long, unarmed at the sides and on disk. Scutellum 
moderately large. Elytra elongate, parallel, slightly flattened, 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM tol. 80 

without eburneous spots, and spinose at apices. Abdominal seg- 
ments unequal in length. Mesosternum broad, obliquely declivous in 
front, emarginate behind. Prosternal process not very narrow, and 
arcuately declivous posteriorly. Anterior coxae large, subglobose, 
moderately prominent, not angulated externally, and the cavities 
open posteriorly. Intermediate coxal cavities open externally. 
Legs unequal in length; tibiae not longitudinally carinate; femora 
spinose at apices, feebly clavate, but not petiolate at bases ; posterior 
tarsus with the first joint scarcely as long as the following two 
joints united. Body not conspicuously pubescent. 

Genotype. — Brittonella chardoni, new species. 

This genus belongs to the tribe Hesperophanini and is allied to 
Hesperophanes Mulsant, but it differs from that genus in having 
the elytra spinose at apices, antennae not distinctly longer than the 
body, and not ciliate beneath, pronotum not transverse, femora 
spinose at apices, and the body only obsoletely pubescent. 

I take great pleasure in dedicating this genus to Dr. N. L. Britton, 
eminent botanist, director for more than three decades of the New 
York Botanical Garden, chairman of the Porto Rico committee of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, to whose able and indefatigable 
services are due in large part the success of the natural history 
survey of Porto Rico. 

BRITTONELLA CHARDONI, new species 

Male. — Elongate, parallel, strongly flattened above, moderately 
shining, uniformly reddish brown, with the legs and antennae more 
yellowish brown. 

Head with the front very short, strongly transverse, uneven, 
deeply, abruptly depressed between the antennal tubercles, which are 
narrowly separated and slightly elevated, feebly, coarsely, irregularly 
punctate, sparsely, irregularly clothed with erect, coarse, whitish 
hairs, and with a narrow, longitudinal groove between the antennal 
tubercles; eyes separated from each other on the top by about the 
width of the upper lobe. Antenna about as long as the body, basal 
joints sparsely clothed with long, erect hairs, apical joints densely 
clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence; first joint rather 
robust, subcylindrical, feebly arcuate, slightly flattened beneath, 
slightly longer than the third joint, which is two-thirds longer than 
the fourth, the following joints subequal in length to the first. 

Pronotum as wide as long, slightly wider at base than at apex; 
sides nearly parallel, rather strongly sinuate, more or less narrowed 
toward apex, and narrowly constricted at base ; disk slightly uneven ; 
surface more or less rugose, sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, 
and sparsely clothed with moderately long, erect, whitish hairs. 



ABT. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 9 

Scutellum subtriangular, broadly rounded at apex, and densely 
clothed with recumbent, whitish pubescence. 

Elytra four and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
distinctly wider than pronotum; humeri rather feebly developed; 
sides nearly parallel from base to apical third, then arcuately nar- 
rowed to the tips, which are conjointly, broadly, arcuately emargi- 
nate, and armed with a long, acute spine at the outer margin of each 
elytron; disk even, and rather strongly flattened; surface coarsely, 
densely, uniformly punctate, sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, 
whitish hairs, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, finely punctate and sparsely clothed with 
long and short, fine, erect hairs; last segment broadly rounded at 
apex. Prosternum transversely rugose, and sparsely clothed with 
fine, erect, whitish hairs ; prosternal process moderately narrow, arcu- 
ately expanded behind the coxal cavities, and broadly emarginate at 
apex. Anterior legs slightly shorter than middle and posterior pairs 
and sparsely clothed with moderately long, semierect hairs; femora 
feebly bispinose at apices, rather slender, slightly clavate, and the 
anterior pair slightly more robust ; tibiae slender, straight, and sub- 
cvlindrical. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antenna consid- 
erably shorter than the body, the first joint more slender, nearly one- 
half longer than the third joint, which is slightly longer than the 
fourth, the fifth joint subequal in length to the first, and the follow- 
ing joints becoming gradually shorter. 

Length, 17-20 mm. ; width, 4.5-5 mm. 

Type locality. — ^Mayaguez, Porto Rico. 

Type, allotype, and paratype. — In American Museum of Natural 
History. 

Paratype.— [J.^.'^.M. No. 43709. 

Described from four examples, one male (type) and three females 
received from the American Museum of Natural History. All the 
specimens were collected at the type locality by E., H. Van Zwalu- 
wenburg. The type was collected October 15, 1917 (Ace. No. 233-17), 
the allotype, August 29, 1914, and the paratypes, June 1, 1917 (Ace. 
No. 73-17), and October 5, 1917 (Ace. No. 228-17). 

This species is named in honor of Carlos E. Chardon, Commis- 
sioner of Public Works in Porto Rico, in recognition of the en- 
couragement of scientific research he has repeatedly displayed. 

EBURIA LONGICORNIS, new species 

Male. — Form rather short and robust. Above and beneath uni- 
formly dark reddish brown, and each elytron ornamented with two 
pairs of elongate, eburneous spots. 



10 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Head transverse in front, deeply, transversely grooved behind the 
epistoma, feebly, longitudinally grooved between the antennal 
tubercles, which are slightly elevated and widely separated, surface 
somewhat uneven, coarsely, irregularly punctate, more or less rugose, 
and clothed with a few very short, inconspicuous hairs; eyes nearly 
divided, separated from each other on the top by twice the width 
of the upper lobe. Antenna slender, nearly four times as long as 
the body, three or four basal joints scabrous, and clothed with a few 
long hairs on the underside, following joints finely, densely punctate, 
and rather densely clothed with very fine, short recumbent, yellowish 
pubescence; first joint short, robust, and strongly clavate; third and 
fourth joints subequal in length, and united twice as long as the first, 
the following joints becoming gradually longer, and the eleventh 
joint as long as the preceding three joints united. 

Pronotum nearly one and one-half times as wide as long, and 
feebly wider at apex than at base ; sides arcuately rounded, and more 
strongly constricted at base than at apex; surface uneven, without 
distinct tubercles on disk or at lateral margins, coarsely, confluently 
alveolate-punctate, nearly glabrous on disk, but sparsely clothed at 
the sides with long, recumbent, whitish hairs. 

Elytra at base about equal in width to pronotum at middle; hu- 
meri prominent, and slightly elevated; sides obliquely narrowed 
from base to the tips, which are broadly truncate, and each with a 
small, obtuse tooth at the sutural and lateral angles ; surface strongly 
convex, densely punctate, the punctures becoming coarser and more 
confluent toward the bases, uniformly, sparsely clothed with short, 
erect, whitish hairs, and each elytron ornamented with two pairs 
of distinctly separated, elongate, eburneous spots, the outer spot 
of basal pair slightly shorter than the inner, and the inner spot of 
the median pair a little shorter than the outer one. 

Body beneath sparsely clothed with long, inconspicuous hairs. 
Prosternum more coarsely punctured than rest of underside. Middle 
and posterior femora bispinose, with the spines subequal in length. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the sides of the elytra 
parallel to near the apices, antenna only slightly longer than the 
body, with only the basal joint coarsely punctate, and joints 3 to 11 
nearly equal in length, pronotum with a small, obtuse, lateral tooth 
on each side at middle, and the underside of the body uniformly, 
finely punctate. 

Length, 16-20 mm. ; width, 5-6 mm. 

Type locality. — Cuba (Central Florida, Province of Camaguey). 

Other locality. — Baragua, Cuba. 

Type and aZZo^y/je.— U.S.N.M. No. 43710. 

Paratype. — In S. C. Bruner collection. 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES — FISHER 11 

Remarks. — Described from three examples, two males and one 
female: The type (male), collected at Central Florida (13 miles 
northeast of Camagiiey), Province of Camaguey, May 15, 1922, by 
J. Rutz ; the allotype, collected at Baragua, May 14, 1926, at light, by 
L. C. Scaramuzza (T. P. R. F. Ent. No. 3073) ; and one paratype, 
collected at Baragua, June 15, 1927, by C. F. Stahl and L. C. Scara- 
muzza. 

This species is distinguished from the other West Indian species 
of this genus by its short, robust form, uniform dark reddish-brown 
color, and by the absence of conspicuous pubescence on the upper 
surface. 

The paratype differs slightly from the type in having the eburn- 
eous spots of the basal pairs subequal in length, the median pairs 
of eburneous spots much shorter than the basal pairs, subequal in 
length, but with the inner spot of each median pair placed slightly 
in advance of the outer one, and the tips of the elytra broadly trun- 
cate, without a distinct spine at the suturai or lateral angles. 

EBURIA BAHAMICAE, new species 

Male. — Form elongate and similar to stigma Olivier. Above and 
beneath reddish brown, the color nearly concealed by whitish pube- 
scence, and each elytron ornamented with two pairs of eburneous 
spots. 

Head transverse in front, rather deeply, transversely grooved be- 
hind the epistoma, the grooves deeper on each side of middle, slightly 
concave between the antennal tubercles, which are slightly elevated 
and widely separated, surface slightly uneven, finely, rather densely 
punctate, and rather densely clothed with long, recumbent, yellowish- 
white pubescence ; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other 
on the top by about the width of the upper lobe. Antenna slender, 
about twice as long as the body, first joint slightly more coarsely 
punctured than the following joints, and all joints rather densely 
clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, with a few long 
hairs on the underside of basal joints ; first joint two-thirds as long 
as the third joint, robust, and rather strongly clavate; joints 3 to 10 
subequal in length ; eleventh joint slightly longer than tenth. 

Pronotum about as long as wide, and slightly narrower at apex 
than at base ; sides nearly parallel, sinuate, armed on each side with 
a large, acute spine, with a small glabrous callosity between the spine 
and apical angle; disk uneven, broadly, transversely flattened along 
anterior margin, a narrow, transverse (strongly angulated) groove 
near base, and ornamented with two round, dark brown tubercles in 
front of middle; surface coarsely punctate, more or less rugose, 
and densely clothed with recumbent, whitish pubescence, which con- 



12 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

ceals the surface. Scutellum triangular-curvilinear, and rather 
densely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence. 

Elytra at base wider than pronotum at middle ; humeri prominent 
and strongly elevated ; sides nearly parallel from base to apical fifth, 
then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are each bispinose, with 
the sutural spine much shorter than the lateral spine ; surface moder- 
ately convex, rather densely, coarsely punctate basally, the punctures 
becoming obsolete toward the apices, rather densely clothed with 
short, recumbent, whitish hairs, which do not conceal the surface; 
each elytron with two pairs of eburneous spots, the outer spot of the 
basal pair very small, round, and sometimes reduced to the merest 
trace, the outer spot of median pair longer than the inner one, and 
the two spots usually in close contact along their entire length, with 
and obtuse, longitudinal costa at middle of each elytron, causing a 
slight depression or channel between the costa and sutural margin, 
and a similar depression toward the lateral margin. 

Body beneath densely clothed with long, recumbent, whitish 
pubescence, which nearly conceals the surface, densely, finely punc- 
tate, except the presternum, which is sparsely coarsely punctured. 
Middle and posterior femora bispinose, with the inner spine nearly 
twice as long as the outer one. 

FeTTiale. — Differs from the male in having the antenna only 
slightly longer than the body, the eleventh joint not longer than 
the tenth, and the underside of the body uniformly, finely punctured. 

Length, 14r-20 mm.; width, 4-6 mm. 

Type locality. — ^Mangrove Cay, Andros Islands. 

Other localities. — Fresh Creek, Andros Islands ; and " Bahamas." 

Type^ allotype^ and paratypes. — In American Museum of Natural 
History. 

Paratypes.— \J.^.'^.'M. No. 43711. 

Remarks. — Described from 25 examples (one type) : The type, 
allotype, and 21 paratypes, received from the American Museum 
of Natural History, and collected at the type locality during May 
and June, 1917, by William M. Mann; one paratype, collected at 
Fresh Creek, Andros Islands, during May and June, 1917, by the 
same collector; and one paratype labeled "Bahamas." 

This species is closely allied to stigma Olivier, but stigma can be 
separated from it in being more elongate, the sutural margins of 
the elytra densely clothed with conspicuous white pubescence, the 
eburneous spots on the elytra usually longer, and with a glabrous, 
black, longitudinal area in front of and behind each spot. 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 13 

EBURIA CINEREOPILOSA, new species 

Female. — Form elongate and subcylindrical. Above and beneath 
black or dark brown (except the legs, which are reddish yellow), 
but the color is concealed by the dense cinereous pubescence, which 
gives the body a bluish tinge, and each elytron ornamented with 
two pairs of elongate, eburneous spots. 

Head transverse in front, broadly, transversely grooved behind the 
epistoma, narrowly, longitudinally grooved between the antennal 
tubercles, which are slightly elevated and widely separated, densely 
clothed with long, recumbent, whitish pubescence, which conceals the 
surface; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other on the 
top by twice the width of the upper lobe. Antennae broken, basal 
joint slightly more coarsely punctured than the following joints, 
which are rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, white pubes- 
cence; first joint robust, cylindrical, vaguely clavate, and about 
three-fourths as long as third joint, which is subequal in length to 
the fourth. 

Pronotum as long as wide, and slightly narrower at apex than 
at base ; sides nearly parallel, slightly narrowed anteriorly, broadly, 
arcuately constricted behind the lateral spines, armed on each side 
just behind the middle with a long, acute spine, and with a small, 
glabrous callosity between the spine and apical angle ; surface rather 
even, very densely clothed with long, recumbent, white pubescence, 
which conceals the surface, and the disk ornamented with two round, 
black tubercles in front of middle. Scutellum triangular-curvi- 
linear, and densely clothed with long, recumbent, white pubescence. 

Elytra at base distinctly wider than pronotum at middle ; humeri 

prominent and strongly elevated; sides nearly parallel from base 

to near apex, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are each 

bispinose, with the sutural spine much shorter than the lateral spine ; 

surface strongly convex, densely clothed with long, recumbent, white 

pubescence, which conceals the surface, except where it is narrowly 

glabrous around the eburneous spots ; each elytron ornamented with 

two pairs of elongate, eburneous spots, the spots of each pair in close 

contact along their entire length, basal spots about equal in length, 

and the inner spot of median pair slightly shorter than the outer 
spot. 

Body beneath densely clothed with long, recumbent, white pubes- 
cence, which conceals the surface; surface finely, densely punctate, 
slightly more coarsely on the prosternum. Middle and posterior 
femora bispinose, with the inner spine at least twice as long as the 
outer spine. 

Length, 20 mm. ; width, 5 mm. 

Type locality. — Guantanamo, Cuba. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. Collected on 
the San Carlos Estate, at light, April 24, 1914, by C. T. Kamsden. 

Remarks. — Described from the type, a female. 

This species resembles tetrastalacta White, but it can be distin- 
guished from that species by its more cylindrical form and the dense 
white pubescence, which entirely conceals the surface. 

EBURIA RAMSDENI, new species 

Female. — Form broadly elongate. Above and beneath brownish 
black, but the color is concealed by the dense brownish-yellow pu- 
bescence (except a glabrous area around the eburneous spots), which 
gives it a pale brownish tinge, and each elytron ornamented with 
two pairs of small, rounded, eburneous spots. 

Head transverse in front, deeply, transversely grooved behind the 
epistoma, narrowly, longitudinally grooved between the antennal 
tubercles, which are strongly elevated and widely separated; surface 
somewhat uneven, coarsely, irregularly punctate, densely, irregularly 
clothed with long, recumbent, brownish-yellow pubescence; eyes 
deeply emarginate, separated from each other on the top by about 
the width of the upper lobe. Antennae broken, basal joint scabrous, 
following joints finely, densely punctured, and rather densely clothed 
with short, recumbent, white pubescence, with numerous long, erect 
hairs on the underside of the joints; first joint robust, flattened on 
underside, slightly clavate, and one-half as long as the third joint, 
which is subequal in length to the fourth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex ; sides arcuately rounded, strongly constricted at base, 
broadly swollen at apical angles, and armed on each side with a long, 
acute spine; disk uneven, feebly, transversely depressed along base, 
broadly flattened along apical margin, with a deep depression on 
each side near apical angle, and ornamented with two round, acute, 
black tubercles in front of middle ; surface densely clothed with long, 
recumbent, brownish-yellow pubescence, which conceals the surface, 
except a very narrow, longitudinal, median line. Scutellum triangu- 
lar, culvilinear, and densely clothed with long, recumbent, whitish 
pubescence. 

Elytra at base about equal in width to pronotum at middle ; humeri 
prominent and strongly elevated; sides nearly parallel from base 
to near apex, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are each 
bispinose, with the sutural spine slightly shorter than the lateral 
spine; surface moderately convex, densely clothed with long, re- 
cumbent, brownish-yellow pubescence (slightly denser and paler 
alonar sutural jnar£»-ins), nearly concealing the surface, except for a 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 15 

broad area surrounding the eburneous spots, where the surface is 
nearly glabrous, and coarsely punctate, with a short, white hair 
arising from each puncture ; each elytron ornamented with two pairs 
of widely separated, rounded, eburneous spots, the inner spot of the 
basal pair slightly longer than the other spots. 

Abdomen beneath densely clothed with long, recumbent, brown- 
ish-yellow pubescence, which nearly conceals the surface; surface 
finely, densely punctate, more coarsely on the prosternum. Middle 
and posterior femora bispinose, with the two spines of each femur 
long and about equal in length. 

Length, 21.5 mm. ; width, 5.5 mm. 

Type locality. — Guantanamo, Cuba. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. Collected at 
light. May 25, 1911, by C. T. Ramsden. 

Remarks. — Described from the type, a female. 

This species can be separated from the other described species of 
this genus from the West Indies by having the apical angles of 
the pronotum strongly swollen, and by the small rounded eburneous 
spots on the elytra being broadly surrounded by a nearly glabrous 
blackish area. 

EBURIA PORTORICENSIS, new species 

Female. — Form rather broadly elongate. Above and beneath 
reddish brown, the legs and antennae slightly paler, surface nearly 
concealed by the dense, brownish-white pubescence, except around the 
eburneous spots, where it is nearly glabrous, and each elytron orna- 
mented with two pairs of small, oblong, eburneous spots. 

Head transverse in front, deeply, arcuately, transversely grooved 
behind the epistoma, narrowly, longitudinally grooved between the 
antennal tubercles, which are strongly elevated and Avidely separated, 
densely clothed with long, recumbent, yellowish-white pubescence, 
which conceals the surface; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from 
each other on the top by about the width of the upper lobe. Antenna 
slightly longer than the body, basal joint slightly more coarsely 
punctured than following joints, and all joints rather densely clothed 
with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, with numerous long, erect 
hairs on the underside of joints; first joint robust, strongly clavate, 
and one-half as long as the third joint, which is slightly longer than 
the fourth; joints 4 to 10 subequal in length; eleventh joint slightly 
longer than the tenth. 

Pronotum as long as wide, and slightly narrower at apex than at 
base; sides sinuate, parallel posteriorly, feebly, obliquely narrowed 
anteriorly, and armed on each side with a long, acute spine near 
middle, and a large, obtuse, glabrous callosity near the apical angle ; 



16 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

disk with a narrow, transverse depression in front of basal margin, 
apical third broadly, transversely concave, and ornamented with two 
small, round, black tubercles in front of middle; surface densely 
clothed with long, recumbent, brownish-white pubescence, which con- 
ceals the surface. Scutellum triangular, curvilinear, and densely 
clothed with long, recumbent, brownish-white pubescence. 

Elytra at base distinctly wider than pronotum at middle ; humeri 
prominent and strongly elevated ; sides nearly parallel from base to 
near apices, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are each 
bispinose, with the sutural spine distinctly shorter than the lateral 
spine ; surface moderately convex, densely clothed with long, recum- 
bent, whitish pubescence, which nearly conceals the surface, except 
a broad, nearly glabrous area surrounding the eburneous spots, where 
the surface is coarsely punctate, with a short, white hair arising from 
each puncture; each elytron ornamented with two pairs of small, 
oval, widely separated, eburneous spots, the outer spot of the median 
pair slightly in advance of the inner spot. 

Body beneath rather densely clothed with long, recumbent, white 
pubescence, not entirely concealing the surface, finely, densely punc- 
tate, with a few coarser punctures intermixed. Middle and posterior 
femora bispinose, with the inner spine slightly longer than the outer 
one. 

Length, 20 mm. ; width, 5 mm. 

Type locality. — Guayama, Porto Rico. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. Labeled 
"Aguirre Centr. (Guayama) P. E., April 15, 1930, Cornell Univ. 
Lot 795, sub. 31." 

Remarks. — Described from the type, a female. 

This species is allied to tetrastalacta White, but can be distin- 
guished from that species by the denser and longer whitish pubescence 
on the dorsal surface, the eburneous spots on the elytra widely 
separated, and the outer spot of each median pair placed in advance 
of the inner spot. 

EBURIA CUBAE, new species 

Male. — Form broadly elongate. Above and beneath uniformly 
brownish yellow, nearly glabrous, and each elytron ornamented with 
two pairs of small, oval, eburneous spots. 

Head transverse in front, deeply, transversely, triangularly de- 
pressed behind the epistoma, narrowly, longitudinally grooved 
between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated but 
scarcely elevated ; surface slightly uneven, densely, confluently punc- 
tate, more or less scabrous, and sparsely clothed with short, incon- 
spicuous, recumbent hairs; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHEEt 17 

each other on the top by about three times the width of the upper 
lobe. Antenna slender, about one and one-half times as long as the 
body, three or four basal joints sparsely punctate (first joint scab- 
rous) , sparsely clothed with short, white hairs, with numerous long, 
erect hairs intermixed, following joints finely, densely punctate, and 
densely clothed with very short, recumbent pubescence; first joint 
robust, slightly flattened on top, strongly clavate, and about one- 
half as long as the third joint, which is slightly longer than the 
fourth; joints 4 to 10 subequal in length; eleventh joint dis- 
tinctly longer than tenth. 

Pronotum vaguely wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex ; sides strongly sinuate, strongly, arcuately constricted 
near posterior angles, and armed on each side at middle with a 
vague, broadly obtuse tubercle of the same color as rest of surface, 
and a smaller callosity of the same color between the tubercle and 
the apical angle ; disk uneven, ornamented with two elongate, black 
tubercles in front of middle ; surface rather finely, confluently punc- 
tate or scabrous, and sparsely clothed with short, inconspicuous 
hairs. Scutellum broadly triangular, curvilinear, and sparsely 
clothed with short, inconspicuous hairs. 

Elytra at base slightly wider than pronotum at middle; humeri 
prominent and strongly elevated; sides nearly parallel from base 
to apical fourth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are 
separately, obliquely truncate, with a small spine at the sutural 
angle; surface rather strongly convex, rather coarsely, confluently 
punctate, with numerous distinct granular elevations in the sutural 
regions, and sparsely clothed with short, inconspicuous hairs; each 
elytron ornamented with two pairs of small, oval, widely separated, 
eburneous spots, inner spot of basal pair slightly wider and longer 
than outer one, and inner spot of median pair in advance of the 
outer spot. 

Body beneath finely, densely punctate, and densely clothed with 
moderately long, recumbent, inconspicuous hairs. Middle and 
posterior femora unispinose. 

Fevmle. — Differs from the male in having the antenna about as 
long as the body, the joints becoming gradually shorter toward the 
tip, and the eleventh joint subequal in length to the tenth. 

Length, 10-19 mm. ; width, 2.75-5 mm. 

T^jfe locality. — Baragua, Cuba. 

Other localities.— Central Constancia, Guantanamo, and Central 
Jaronu, Cuba. 

Type, allotype, and paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43712. 

Paratypes. — In American Museum of Natural History and in S. C. 
Bruner collection. 
97806—32 2 



18 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Remarks. — Described from 8 examples (one type): -The type, 
allotype, and 2 paratypes, collected at the type locality, at light, 
October 24, 1925, by C. F. Stahl (T. P. R. F. Ent. No. 229) ; 2 para- 
types collected at Central Constancia, May, 1914, by J. F. Merrill ; 1 
paratype, collected at Central Jaronu (north coast of Camaguey 
Province), April 4, 1926, by B. T. Barreto; and 1 paratype, col- 
lected at Guantanamo, at light, by C. T. Ramsden. 

This species can be easily separated from the other described West 
Indian species of this genus by its uniform brownish-yellow color, 
by the unispinose tips of the femora, and by the arrangement of 
the eburneous spots on the elytra. 

EBURIA ELONGATA, new species 

Female. — Form narrowly elongate, subcylindrical. Above and 
beneath uniformly black, strongly shining, each elytron ornamented 
with three or four eburneous spots. 

Head transverse in front, deeply, transversely, triangularly de- 
pressed behind the epistoma, narrowly, deeply, longitudinally 
grooved between the antennal tubercles, which are widely sepa- 
rated and moderately elevated; surface sparsely, irregularly punc- 
tate, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent, white pubescence; 
eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other on the top by 
nearly three times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna slender, 
about as long as the body, three or four basal joints sparsely, coarsely 
punctate, sparsely clothed with short, white hairs, with numerous 
long, erect hairs intermixed, following joints finely, densely punctate, 
and rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubes- 
cence; first joint robust, strongly clavate, and about two-thirds as 
long as the third joint, which is slightly longer than the fourth; 
joints 4 to 11 subequal in length. 

Pronotum as long as wide, and about equal in width at base and 
apex; sidcvS sinuate, slightly swollen at middle, but without a dis- 
tinct spine ; disk somewhat uneven, and ornamented with two round, 
feeble, glabrous callosities in front of middle, and a longitudinal, 
glabrous, median area; surface rather densely, coarsely, irregularly 
punctate, and rather densely, irregularly clothed with long, recum- 
bent, whitish pubescence, except on the median, glabrous area. 
Scutellum triangular, curvilinear, and densely clothed with recum- 
bent, whitish pubescence. 

Elytra at base distinctly wider than pronotum at middle ; humeri 
feebly elevated ; sides nearly parallel from base to near apices, then 
arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, obliquely trun- 
cate, with a distinct spine at lateral angle, and an obsolete spine 
at sutural angle ; surface moderately convex, coarsely, rather densely 



AET. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES — FISHER 19 

punctate on basal halves, but the punctures becoming more obsolete 
toward the apices, and narro^yly, densely clothed along the sutural 
margins with long, recumbent, white pubescence, the pubescent vittae 
becoming slightly broader toward the apices; each elytron orna- 
mented with two pairs of eburneous spots (outer spot of median pair 
missing in type), inner spot of basal pair at least twice as long as 
the outer one, and the two spots narrowly separated at base, outer 
spot of median pair (when present) much smaller than the inner 
one, and the two spots distinctly separated. 

Body beneath finely, densely punctate, except the prosternum, 
which is sparsely, coarsely punctured, and rather densely, irregu- 
larly clothed with long, recumbent, silvery-white pubescence. Mid- 
dle and posterior femora vaguely bispinose, with the inner spine 
short, and the outer one scarcely developed. 

Length, 1-1—15.5 mm. ; width, 3-3.5 mm. 

Type locality. — Guantanamo, Cuba. 

Type and paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Pam^ype.— U.s!n.M. No. 43713. 

Reiiiarhs. — Described from three examples (one type), probably 
all females, received from the American Museum of Natural His- 
tory: The type, collected June 1, 1908, by S. Cardos; and two para- 
types, labeled " Guantanamo, Rio Seco, May 31 and June 1, 1910, 
S. Cardos." 

This species is allied to decemriiaculata Fabricius, but it can be 
easily separated from that species in being more narrowly elongate 
and subcylindrical, and in the fact that the elytra have a distinct 
white pubescent vitta along the sutural margins. 

ELAPHmiON SPLENDmUM, new species 

Female. — Broadly elongate, moderately convex above, and similar 
in form to spinicorne Drury. Above and beneath uniformly red- 
dish brown, strongly shining, and irregularly clothed with recum- 
bent, white pubescence. 

Head sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, rather densely, ir- 
regularly clothed with moderately long, recumbent, white pubes- 
cence, front distinctly wider than long, nearly flat, with a narrow, 
longitudinal groove between the antennal tubercles, which are widely 
separated but not elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from 
each other on the top by nearly three times the width of the upper 
lobe. Antenna as long as the body, four or five basal joints coarsely 
punctate, sparsely clothed with moderately long, recumbent, white 
hairs, with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the joints, the 
following joints finely, densely punctate, rather densely clothed 
with short, recumbent, white pubescence, and joints 3 to 10 bispinose 



20 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

at apices; first joint robust, rather strongly clavate, and siibequal in 
length to the third joint, which is longer than the fourth, the fol- 
lowing joints becoming gradually shorter; eleventh joint subequal 
in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum wider than long, and feebly wider at base than at apex ; 
sides rather strongly, arcuately rounded ; disk nearly even, and orna- 
mented with distinct, smooth, glabrous spots as follows : A longitudi- 
nal, median spot, slightly expanded at middle, and extending from 
anterior margin to near base, and five or six rounded spots on each 
side; surface uniformly, densely clothed with moderately long, re- 
cumbent, white pubescence, which conceals the surface, except on the 
glabrous spots. Scutellum broadly triangular, curvilinear, and 
densely clothed with recumbent, white pubescence. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly 
wider than pronotum at middle; sides vaguely narrowed from base 
to near the tips, which are separately, broadly truncate, bispinose, 
with the lateral spine much longer than the sutural one; surface 
sparsely, irregularly, coarsely punctate, the punctures becoming 
smaller toward apices, and irregularly clothed with patches of mod- 
erately long, dense, recumbent, white hairs. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate at sides, smooth and 
glabrous at middle, densely clothed at the sides with long, recum- 
bent, white pubescence, with a few long, inconspicuous, erect hairs 
intermixed, a round, glabrous spot at the sides of each segment 
except the last, which is vaguely, broadly emarginate at apex. 
Prosternum smooth, glabrous at middle, and densely clothed with 
long, recumbent, white pubescence at the sides; prosternal process 
flat, broadly, arcuately expanded posteriorly, the apex rounded, and 
abruptly declivous. Mesosternum broad, and abruptly declivous in 
front. Femora slender, slightly clavate toward tips, the middle and 
posterior pairs bispinose at apices, with the inner spine slightly 
longer than the outer one. 

Mole. — Differs from the female in having the antenna slightly 
longer than the body, basal joints more coarsely punctured, the last 
joint subappendiculate, and armed with a minute spine on inner 
side at middle, prosternum rather densely, finely punctate, and pubes- 
cent at middle, and the last abdominal segment shorter, and more 
broadly rounded at apex. 

Length, 13.5-17 mm.; width, 3.6-4.8 mm. 

Ty'pe locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

Other localities. — Jeremie, Haiti; Sanchez, Dominican Republic; 
" Sto. Tomas, Peninsula de Zapata, Cuba." 

Type., allotype., and paratype. — U.S.N.M. No. 43714. 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHEB 21 

Paratypes. — In American Museum of Natural History and in 
Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

Remarks. — Described from 6 examples, 1 male and 5 females: 
The type (female), collected at Port au Prince, Haiti, March, 1925, 
by G. N. Wolcott (Ace. No. 262-25); allotype, collected at "Sto. 
Tomas, Peninsula de Zapata, Cuba," between May 5 and 9, 1927, by 
S. C. Bruner and J. Acuna; one paratype, collected at Jeremie, 
Haiti, April 11, 1917; two paratypes, received from the American 
Museum of Natural History, collected at Sanchez, Dominican Re- 
public, during June, 1915, by F. E. Watson; and one paratype, 
received from the Museum of Comparative Zoology, labeled " Hayti, 
P. R. Uhler." 

This species is closely allied to spinicome Drury, but it can be 
separated from that species by being more strongly shining and 
by the pubescence on the elytra being white and irregularly separated 
into distinct spots. 

ELAPHroiON MANNI, new species 

Female. — Broadly elongate, moderately convex above, and similar 
in form to spinicome Drury. Above and beneath uniformly dark 
reddish brown, moderately shining, and irregularly clothed with 
recumbent, gray pubescence. 

Head very si^arsely, coarsely punctate, longitudinally rugose, 
rather densely, irregularly clothed with moderately long, recumbent, 
grayish pubescence, front distinctly wider than long, nearly flat be- 
tween the antennal tubercles, wdiich are widely separated but not 
elevated ; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other on the 
top by twice the width of the upper lobe. Antenna not quite as 
long as the body, four basal joints coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed 
with moderately long, recumbent, white hairs, with a few long, 
erect hairs on the underside of the joints, the following joints finely, 
densely punctate, rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, white 
pubescence, and joints 3 to 10 bispinose at apices; first joint robust, 
strongly clavate, slightly flattened on top, and subequal in length to 
the third joint, which is slightly longer than the fourth, the follow- 
ing joints becoming gradually shorter; eleventh joint subequal in 
length to the tenth, and slightly expanded near apex. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex ; sides rather strongly, arcuately rounded ; disk uneven, 
and ornamented with five smooth, glabrous, elevated spots as fol- 
lows: A narrow, longitudinal, median spot, not extending to an- 
terior margin or base, and two spots on each side, a rounded one in 
front of middle, and a narrow, elongate one near base; surface 
coarsely, sparsely punctate, and rather densely clothed with long, 



22 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

wavy, recumbent, grayish pubescence, which does not quite conceal 
the surface. Scutellum broadly triangular, curvilinear, and densely 
clothed with recumbent, grayish pubescence. 

Elytra three and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
slightly wider than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base 
to near the tips, which are separately, broadly truncate, bispinose, 
with the lateral spine much longer than the sutural one; surface 
sparsely punctate, the punctures coarse on basal halves, but becom- 
ing more obsolete toward the apices, and rather densely, irregularly 
clothed with moderately long, recumbent, grayish pubescence, not 
concealing the surface, but giving it a variegated appearance. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, irregularly punctate, rather densely 
clothed with long, recumbent, white pubescence, with a few long, 
erect hairs intermixed, but the pubescence not concealing the sur- 
face ; last segment broadly rounded, and feebly emarginate at apex. 
Prosternum sparsely, coarsely punctate, rather densely clothed with 
long, recumbent, white pubescence ; prosternal process flat, obliquely 
expanded to apex, which is truncate, and abruptly declivous. Meso- 
sternum obliquely declivous in front. Femora slender, slightly 
clavate toward tips, and the middle and posterior pairs bispinose at 
apices, with the inner spine considerably longer than outer one. 

Length, 15 mm.; width, 4 mm. 

Type locality. — Fresh Creek, Andros Islands. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. Collected dur- 
in May-June, 1917, by William M. Mann. 

Reviarks. — Described from the type, a female. 

This species is closely allied to conspersum Newman, but it can be 
separated from that species in having the pronotum more uneven, 
the pubescence longer and more wavy, and the pubescence on the 
elytra gray and more uniformly distributed. 

ELAPHmiON BIDENS (Fabricius) 

Stenocorus didens Fabeicius, Mantissa insectoruiu, vol. 1, no. S, p. 143, 1787 

(not bidens Olivier, Newman, Chevrolat). 
Ceranihyx Mspinosus Gmelin, in Linnaeus, Systema naturae, ed. 13, vol. 1, pt. 

4, No. 322, p. 1859, 1700. 

This species was described by Fabricius (1787) from South Amer- 
ica, and Gmelin (1790) redescribed the same species under the name 
of bispinosus, citing hidens Fabricius (op. cit.). The species was 
included by Chevrolat (1862) in his Coleoptera of the island of 
Cuba, but his specimens were compared with the tj^pe of hidens 
Olivier, which is not the hidens described by Fabricius, but which 
is given by Aurivillius ^ as a synonym of irroratum Linnaeus. This 

» Catalogus Coleopterorum, pt. 39, p. 87, 1912. 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 23 

is a South American species and should not be included in lists of 
West Indian Coleoptera. 

ELAPHIDION ROTUNDIPENNE, new species 

Male. — Broadly elongate, moderately convex above, and similar in 
form to incertum Newman. Above and beneath uniformly dark 
reddish brown, feebly shining, and irregularly clothed with gray 
pubescence. 

Head sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, sparsely, irregularly 
clothed with long, recumbent, grayish pubescence, front distinctly 
wider than long, nearly flat, with a feeble, longitudinal groove 
between the antenna! tubercles, which are widely separated, and 
feebly elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other 
on the top by a little more than the width of the upper lobe. 
Antenna one and one-half times as long as the body, basal joints 
sparsely punctate, and sparsely clothed with short, recumbent hairs, 
with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the joints, apical 
joints finely, densely punctate, and densely clothed with short, re- 
cumbent, whitish pubescence, joints 3 and 4 unispinose at apices, 
the following joints bispinose, but the spines becoming very short 
on the apical joints; first joint robust, strongly clavate, subequal in 
length to the fourth joint, which is slightly shorter than the third, 
the following joints subequal in length to the third ; eleventh joint 
slightly longer than the tenth, and more or less flattened. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex; sides feebly, arcuately rounded; disk uneven, and 
ornamented with an elongate, irregular, median, glabrous space, 
and a rounded, irregular, glabrous space on each side in front of 
middle; surface sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, and 
sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent, gray pubescence. 
Scutellum broadly triangular, curvilinear, and densely clothed with 
recumbent, gray pubescence. 

Elytra not quite three times as long as pronotum, and at base 
about equal in width to pronotum at middle ; humeral angles broadly 
rounded; sides nearly parallel from base to apical sixth, then 
arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are broadly rounded, and not 
spinose; surface densely, irregularly punctate, the punctures coarse 
on basal halves, but becoming smaller toward apices, and irregularly 
clothed with patches of long, recumbent, gray pubescence, which does 
not conceal the surface. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, finely punctate, rather densely clothed 
with long, recum.bent, gray pubescence, with a fcAv long, erect hairs 
intermixed, but the pubescence not quite concealing the surface ; last 
segment broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum sparsely, coarsely 



24 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM tol. 80 

punctate, densely clothed with long, recumbent, gray pubescence, 
except on prosternal process and along anterior margin; prosternal 
process rather narrow, slightly expanded toward apex, which is 
truncate, and abruptly declivous. Mesosternum broad, depressed, 
and abruptly declivous in front. Legs rather densely clothed with 
long, recumbent and erect, grayish hairs intermixed; femora rather 
robust, strongly expanded at middle, but not spinose at apices. 

Length, 16 mm. ; width, 4 mm. 

Type locality. — Haine, Dominican Republic. 

j^/^je.— U.S.N.M. No. 43715. Collected in 1920, by G. N. Wolcott. 

Remarks. — Described from the type, a male. 

This species can be distinguished from the other described species 
of Elaphidion found in the West Indies by the following combina- 
tion of characters: Third and fourth antennal joints unispinose, 
prosternal process abruptly declivous at apex, elytra broadly rounded 
at apices and not spinose, and the femora not spinose at apices. 

ELAPHIDION CAYAMAE, new species 

Female. — Narrowly elongate, subcylindrical, strongly convex 
above, and similar in form to villosum, Fabricius. Above and be- 
neath uniformly dark reddish brown, feebly shining, and irregularly 
clothed with recumbent, gray pubescence. 

Head sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, longitudinally ru- 
gose, sparsely clothed with long, recumbent, yellowish-white pu- 
bescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed, front distinctly 
wider than long, feebly concave between the antennal tubercles, 
which are widely separated, and slightly elevated; eyes deeply 
emarginate, separated from each other on the top by twice the width 
of the upper lobe. Antenna not quite so long as the body, basal 
joints coarsely, irregularly punctate, sparsely clothed with long, 
recumbent, white pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on the 
underside of the joints, apical joints finely, densely punctate, and 
densely clothed with short, recumbent, white pubescence, joints 3 
to 7 unispinose at apices, the spines on joints 3 and 4 very long; 
first joint robust, rather strongly clavate, and slightly longer than 
the third joint; fourth joint about one-third as long as the third, 
following joints variable in length; eleventh joint nearly twice as 
long as the tenth, and slightly flattened. 

Pronotum as wide as long, and about equal in width at base and 
apex ; sides rather strongly, arcuately rounded ; disk strongly convex, 
even, and ornamented with four inconspicuous, glabrous spots, two 
at base, and two in front of middle; surface coarsely, irregularly, 
confluently punctate, sparsely clothed with long, recumbent, grayish 



ART. 22 NEW CEBAMBYCID BEETLES — FISHER 25 

pubescence, which is denser in some places. Scutellum broadly 
triangular, curvilinear, and rather densely clothed with recumbent, 
gray pubescence. 

Elytra three and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
slightly wider than pronotum at middle; humeral angles broadly 
rounded; sides vaguely narrowed from base to the tips, which are 
separately, broadly truncate, bispinose, with the outer spine much 
longer than the inner one ; surface rather densely, coarsely punctate, 
the punctures becoming smaller toward the apices, and irregularly 
clothed with long, recumbent, gray pubescence, which does not con- 
ceal the surface. 

Abdomen beneath finely, sparsely punctate at sides, smooth and 
nearly glabrous at middle, densely clothed at the sides with long, 
recumbent, white pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed ; 
last segment broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum very coarsely, 
confluently punctate, sparsely clothed with inconspicuous, erect hairs, 
except on the prosternal process and along anterior margin, where 
the surface is smooth and nearly glabrous ; prosternal process rather 
narrow, slightly expanded toward apex, which is subtruncate, and 
abruptly declivous. Mesosternum broad, flat, and strongly decli- 
vous in front. Legs rather densely, irregularly clothed with long, 
recumbent and erect, grayish hairs, causing the surface to have a 
mottled appearance; femora robust, slightly clavate toward apices, 
and the middle and posterior pairs bispinose at apices, with the 
inner spine considerably longer than the outer one. 

Length, 15-16 mm. ; width, 3.6^ mm. 

Type locality. — Cayamas, Cuba. 

Other locality. — Colon, Cuba. 

Ty^e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43716. Collected March 14, by E. A. 
Schwarz. 

Paratype. — Museum of Comparative Zoology. Collected May 9, 
1923, at Colon, Cuba, by Doctor Comas. 

Remarks. — Described from two females (type and paratype). 

This species can be distinguished from the other described species 
of this genus from the West Indies in having the fourth joint of the 
antenna very short, scarcely longer than the second joint, but armed 
with a very long spine. 

ELAPHroiON TUBERCULICOLLE, new species 

Male. — Kather broadly elongate, slightly flattened above, similar 
in form to guttiventre Chevrolat, only more narrowly elongate. 
Above and beneath uniformly brownish black, feebly shining, elytra 
more or less costate posteriorly, and clothed with white and brownish- 
yellow pubescence. 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Head sparsely, coarsely punctate, densely clothed with long, recum- 
bent, white and brownish-yellow hairs intermixed, which conceal the 
surface, front distinctly wider than long, with a longitudinal costa 
on vertex, broadly concave between the antennal tubercles, which are 
widely separated and slightly elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, 
separated from each other on the top by nearly three times the width 
of the upper lobe. Antenna one and one-half times as long as the 
body, basal joints sparsely, coarsely punctate, rather densely clothed 
with long, recumbent, white and brownish-yellow hairs intermixed, 
with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the joints, apical 
joints densely, finely punctate, and densely clothed with short, re- 
cumbent, white pubescence, joints 3 to 5 unispinose at apices; first 
joint robust, strongly clavate, subequal in length to the third joint, 
which is distinctly longer than the fourth, the following joints 
subequal in length to the third ; eleventh joint slender, and slightly 
longer than the tenth. 

Pronotum distinctly wider than long, and about equal in width 
at base and apex; sides feebly, arcuately rounded, and subtuber- 
culate at middle; disk somewhat uneven, and ornamented with 
glabrous spots as follows: A narrow, longitudinal, median vitta, 
extending from anterior margin to base, and three glabrous tuber- 
cles on each side, one at base, and two placed transversely in front 
of middle, of which the outer tubercle is the longest; surface 
coarsely, irregularly punctate, densely clothed with long, recumbent, 
white and brownish-yellow pubescence, which conceals the surface. 
Scutellum broadly triangular, curvilinear, glabrous at middle, and 
clothed at sides with long, recumbent hairs. 

Elytra four times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly wider 
than pronotum at middle; humeral angles broadly rounded; sides 
vaguely narrowed from base to the tips, which are separately, deeply 
emarginate, bispinose, with the lateral spine much longer than the 
sutural one; surface coarsely, confluently punctate, the punctures 
finer and distinctly separated toward the apices, rather densely 
clothed with moderately long, recumbent, brownish-yellow hairs, with 
numerous short, recumbent white hairs intermixed, and each elytron 
ornamented with a glabrous costa behind the middle, and an incon- 
spicuous, elongate spot of dense, white pubescence in front of middle. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, finely punctate, densely clothed with 
long, recumbent, brownish-yellow and white pubescence, with a few 
long, erect hairs intermixed, median part of segments more sparsely 
pubescent; last segment broadly rounded and vaguely emarginate at 
apex. Prosternum rather finely, densely pubescent, except on pro- 
sternal process and along anterior margin ; prosternal process rather 
broad, slightly expanded toward apex, which is truncate, and 



ART. 22 NEW CEKAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 27 

abruptly declivous. Mesosternum broad, flat, and abruptly declivous 
in front. Legs densely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent and 
erect, yellowish and whitish pubescence intermixed, causing the sur- 
face to have a mottled appearance ; femora robust, slightly expanded 
near middle, the middle and posterior pairs feebly bispinose at apices, 
with the inner spine slightly longer than the outer one. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antenna only slightly 
longer than the body, the eleventh joint broad, and subequal in length 
to the tenth, prosternum more coarsely punctured at middle, and the 
last abdominal segment broadly rounded at apex. 

Length, 12-18 mm. ; width, 2.8-4.8 mm. 

Tyye locality. — Cayamas, Cuba. 

Type, allotype, and paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43717. 

Paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Remarks. — Described from eight examples (one type), all collected 
at the type locality, during January, February, and March, by E. A. 
Schwarz. 

This species is easily distinguished from the other described West 
Indian species of this genus having the third and fourth joints of the 
antennae unispinose, and the prosternum abruptly declivous at the 
apex, by the distinct tubercles on the pronotum. 

The specimens examined vary considerable in size and show a 
slight variation in the white pubescent markings on the basal halves 
of the elytra ; in some examples this spot is quite distinct, whereas in 
others it is more or less obsolete. 

ELAPHIDION CUBAE, new species 

Female. — Short, rather narrowly elongate, moderately convex 
above, and similar in form to nanmn Fabricius. Above black, rather 
strongly shining, and irregularly clothed with whitish pubescence; 
beneath brownish black. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, longitudinally rugose, sparsely 
clothed with long, recumbent, yellowish-white pubescence, front 
distinctly wider than long, flat between the antennal tubercles, which 
are widely separated, but not elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, 
separated from each other on the top by twice the width of the upper 
lobe. Antenna not quite so long as the body, basal joints sparsely, 
coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed with long, recumbent, yellowish- 
white pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of 
the joints, apical joints broader, finely, densely punctate, and rather 
densely clothed with short, recumbent, yellowish-white pubescence; 
joints 3 to 10 unispinose at apices, the spines becoming very small on 
outer joints; first joint robust, feebly clavate, slightly longer than 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM TOL. 80 

the third joint, which is a little longer than the fourth, the following 
joints subequal in length. 

Pronotum about as wide as long, and about equal in width at base 
and apex; sides rather strongly, arcuately rounded; disk even, with 
an inconspicuous, glabrous, elongate, median vitta, not extending to 
base or anterior margin; surface coarsely, irregularlj^, confluently 
punctate, sparsely clothed with long, recumbent, whitish pubescence, 
which is denser in some places. Scutellum broadly triangular, cur- 
vilinear, and densely clothed with long, recumbent whitish pubescence. 

Elytra three and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
slightly wider than pronotum at middle; humeral angles broadly 
rounded; sides feebly narrowed from base to the tips, which are 
separately, deeply emarginate, bispinose, the spines subequal in length 
and not very widely separated ; surface rather densely punctate, the 
punctures coarse on basal regions, but becoming finer toward the 
apices, rather densely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent, 
whitish pubescence, with numerous long, erect hairs intermixed 
and with a more or less distinct, irregular, subglabrous spot on each 
elytron near middle, and a similar, but smaller, spot at basal fourth 
near the sutural margins. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, finely punctate, rather densely clothed 
at sides with long, recumbent and erect, white hairs, more sparsely 
clothed on median parts; last segment broadly rounded at apex. 
Prosternum coarsely, sparsely punctate, rather densely clothed with 
long, whitish pubescence, especially at the sides; prosternal process 
rather narrow, slightly expanded toward apex, which is broadly 
rounded, and abruptly declivous. Mesosternum broad, and obliquely 
declivous in front. Legs sparsely clothed with long, recumbent and 
erect, whitish hairs; femora robust, rather strongly clavate toward 
the tips, which are not spinose. 

Length, 10 mm.; width, 2.8 mm. 

Type locality. — Santiago, Cuba. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43718. A unique female collected October 
10, 1903, by Wirt Kobinson. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species resembles nanum Fabricius in a number of ways, but 
it can be easily separated from that species in being uniformly black 
above, third and fourth antennal joints armed with a long spine at 
their tips, each elytron bispinose at apex, and the prosternal process 
abruptly declivous at the apex. 

ELAPHmiON FASCIATUM, new species 

Male. — Broadly elongate, slightly flattened above, and similar in 
form to inerme Newman. Above and beneath reddish black, rather 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHEE 29 

strongly shining, legs and antennae slightly more reddish, and the 
elytra ornamented with a transverse, zigzag, white pubescent fascia. 

Head coarsely, densely, uniformly punctate, very sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent, white hairs, front wider tlian long, nearly flat, 
with a narrow, longitudinal groove between the antennal tubercles, 
which are widely separated and slightly elevated ; eyes deeply emar- 
ginate, separated from each other on the top by twice the width of 
the upper lobe. Antenna slightly longer than the body, basal joints 
coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed with long, recumbent, white pubes- 
cence, with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the joints, 
apical joints finely, densely punctate, rather densely clothed with 
short, recumbent pubescence; joints 3 and 4 unispinose at apices; 
joints 5 to 7 feebly bispinose, the following joints vaguely unispinose; 
first joint robust, strongly clavate, subequal in length to the third 
joint, and each of the following joints about equal in length to the 
third joint. 

Pronotum distinctly wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex; sides rather strongl}^, arcuately rounded; surface 
even, moderately convex, coarsely alveolate-punctate, with a minute 
hair at middle of each puncture, and clothed on each side along lateral 
margin with a narrow, dense, white pubescent vitta, which does not 
extend to anterior margin, but for a short distance on each side along 
base. Scutellum broadly triangular, curvilinear, and densely clothed 
with long, recumbent, white pubescence, except for a very narrow, 
longitudinal, glabrous line at middle. 

Elytra nearly four times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly 
wider than pronotum at middle; humeral angles broadly rounded; 
sides feebly narrowed from base to apical fifth, then arcuately 
narrowed to the tips, which are separately, deeply emarginate, bispi- 
nose, with the lateral spine much longer than the sutural one; 
surface rather densely punctate, the punctures coarse on basal halves, 
but becoming finer toward the apices, a short, semierect, white hair 
arising from each puncture, and each elytron ornamented with a 
spot of dense, white pubescence at humeral angle, and a narrow, 
transverse, zigzag fascia of similar pubescence at middle. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely finely punctate, and sparselj'- clothed 
with long, recumbent, whitish pubescence; last segment broadly 
rounded at apex. Prosternum coarsely, irregularly, confluently 
punctate, densely clothed with long, recumbent, white pubescence, 
except along the anterior margin; prosternal process very narrow, 
and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Mesosternum broad, flat be- 
tween the coxal cavities, and rather abruptly declivous in front. 
Legs sparsely clothed with long, recumbent and semierect, white 



30 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

pubescence; femora feebly expanded near middle, but not spinose 
at the tips. 

Length, 10-12 mm. ; width, 3.2-3.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Central Constancia, Cuba. 

Other locality. — Guantanamo, Cuba. 

T^y^e.— U.S.N.M No. 43719. Collected by J. F. Merrill. 

Paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. Collected 
at Guantanamo, Cuba, June 22, 1914, by C. T. Ramsden. 

Remarks. — Described from two males (type and paratype). 

This species is closely allied to transversum White, but it differs 
from that species in having the sides of the pronotum clothed with 
white pubescence, and the apical part of each elytron not ornamented 
with a gray pubescent spot. 

ELAPHIDION ALBOMACULATUM Champlain and KnuH 

ElapMdion alboniaculatum Champlain and Knull, Ent. News, vol. 33, p. 146, 
1922. 

This species was described from Miami, Fla., but among the 
material received from the American Museum of Natural History 
was a specimen collected at Holguim, Cuba, during June. There 
is another example in the United States National Museum, which 
was collected at Jarahueca, Province of Oriente, Cuba, between July 
14 and 18, 1927, by S. C. Bruner. These Cuban specimens are 
identical with specimens of albomaculatum from Florida. 

ELAPHIDION HISPANIOLAE, new species 

Female. — Broadly elongate, moderately convex above, and similar 
in form to guttiventre Chevrolat. Above and beneath uniformly 
dark reddish brown, subopaque, and irregularly clothed with gray 
pubescence. 

Head rather densely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, rather densely 
clothed with long, recumbent, gray pubescence, which does not 
entirely conceal the surface, front wider than long, nearly flat, with 
a narrow, longitudinal groove between the antennal tubercles, which 
are widely separated, and feebly elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, 
separated from each other on the top by about twice the width of 
the upper lobe. Antenna scarcely as long as the body, basal joints 
sparsely, irregularly punctate, sparsely, irregularly clothed with 
long, recumbent, gray pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on 
the underside of the joints, apical joints finely, densely punctate, 
rather densely clothed with short, recumbent pubescence; joints 3 
to 8 unispinose at apices; first joint robust, slightly clavate, sub- 
equal in length to the third joint, which is slightly longer than the 



ART. 22 ]SrEW CEKAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 31 

fourth, and each of the following joints equal in length to the 
third joint. 

Pronotum feebly wider than long, and equal in width at base 
and apex; sides feebly rounded or subparallel; surface somewhat 
uneven, coarseh^, irregularly, confluently punctate, sparsely, irregu- 
larl}^ clothed with long, recumbent, gray pubescence, with a few long, 
erect hairs intermixed, and with an irregular, inconspicuous, 
elongate, glabrous spot at middle. Scutellum broadly triangular, 
curvilinear, and densely clothed with long, recumbent, gray 
pubescence. 

El3d:ra three times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly wider 
than pronotum at middle; humeral angles broadly rounded; sides 
nearly parallel from base to apical sixth, then arcuately narrowed 
to the tips, which are separatelj^, broadly subtruncate, but not 
spinose; surface sparsely, irregularly punctate, the punctures coarse 
on basal halves, but becoming obsolete toward apices, rather densely, 
irregularly clothed with long, recumbent, grayish pubescence, and 
with numerous long, erect hairs of the same color intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath finely, obsoletely punctate, rather densely, 
irregularly clothed with long, recumbent, grayish pubescence, with 
numerous long, erect hairs of the same color intermixed; last visible 
sternite broadly sinuate at apex; last visible tergite elongate, 
strongly attenuate, and deeply, narrowly emarginate at apex. Pro- 
sternum sparsely, coarsely punctate, densely clothed with long, re- 
cumbent, grayish pubescence, which conceals the surface; prosternal 
process rather narrow, expanded behind the coxal cavities, and 
arcuately declivous posteriorly. Mesosternum broad, uneven be- 
tween the coxal cavities, and rather abruptly declivous in front. 
Legs sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent and erect, 
grayish hairs intermixed; femora strongly expanded near middle, 
but not spinose at the tips. 

Male. — Differing from the female in having the antennae slightly 
longer than the body, and the last abdominal segment broadly, 
arcuately rounded at apex. 

Length, 12-17 mm.; width, 3.8-5.6 mm. 

Tyj)e locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

Other localities. — L'Atalaye, Haiti; San Francisco Mountains, 
Dominican Republic. 

Type., allotype^ and paratypes.—U.S.^.M. No. 43720. 

Parafypes. — In American Museum of Natural History and in 
Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

Remarks. — Described from eight examples: The type, collected 
during September, 1924, by G. N. Wolcott (Ace. No. 191-24) ; allo- 
type, collected at the type locality by R. J. Crew; two paratypes. 



32 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

collected at L'Atalaye, Haiti, at light, February 28, 1928, and March 
3, 1928, by A. J. Poole ; one paratype, collected in the San Francisco 
Mountains, Dominican Republic, during September, 1905, by August 
Busck; two paratypes, received from the American Museum of 
Natural History, one collected at Port au Prince, Haiti, the other 
labeled " Santo Domingo," both collected by F. H. M, De Booy, and 
presented to the museum by the G. G. Heye Haitian Expedition; 
and one paratype received from the Museum of Comparative Zool- 
ogy and labeled " Santo Domingo." 

This species resembles guttiventre Chevrolat, but can be separated 
from that species in being subopaque, pronotum densely punctured, 
without distinct glabrous spots, and the last visible abdominal ter- 
gite elongate, strongly attenuate, and deeply, narrowl}'' emarginate 
at apex. 

ELAPHIDION CONFUSUM. new species 

Male. — Broadly elongate, moderately convex above, and similar 
in form to splendidum Fisher. Above and beneath uniformly red- 
dish brown, strongly shining, and irregularly clothed with white 
pubescence. 

Head sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, rather densely, irreg- 
ularly clothed with moderately long, recumbent, white pubescence, 
front distinctly wider than long, nearly flat between the antennal 
tubercles, which are widely separated, but not elevated; eyes deeply 
emarginate, separated from each other on the top by nearly three 
times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna slightly longer than 
the body, basal joints coarsely, sparsely j)unctate, sparsely clothed 
with long, recumbent and erect, white hairs, apical joints finely, 
densely punctate, densely clothed with short, recumbent pubescence; 
joints 3 and 4 strongly unispinose at apices; joints 5 to 10 more or 
less bispinose; first joint robust, moderately clavate, subequal in 
length to the fourth joint, which is considerably shorter than the 
third; eleventh joint subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum feebly wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex; sides strongly, arcuately rounded; disk nearly even, 
and ornamented with distinct, smooth, glabrous spots as follows: 
An elongate, median spot and a small, round spot on each side in 
front of middle, behind which is a narrow, longitudinal, arcuate spot 
(sometimes interrupted, and forming two spots) ; surface coarsely 
alveolate-punctate, and densely clothed with long, recumbent, white 
pubescence, which conceals the surface in well-preserved specimens. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly wider 
than pronotum at middle ; sides vaguely narrowed from base to near 
the tips, which are separately, broadly truncate, bispinose, with the 
lateral spine much longer than the sutural one; surface sparsely, 



ABT. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 33 

irregularly, coarsely punctate, the punctures becoming obsolete to- 
ward apices, irregularly clothed with patches of moderately long, 
dense, recumbent, white pubescence, with numerous long, erect hairs 
intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath finely, rather densely, vaguely punctate, smooth 
and somewhat glabrous at middle, densely clothed at the sides with 
long, recumbent, white pubescence, with numerous long, erect hairs 
intermixed ; last visible sternite broadly rounded at apex. Proster- 
num coarsely, confluently punctate, rather densely clothed with long, 
recumbent, white pubescence, which does not quite conceal the sur- 
face; prosternal process rather narrow, expanded behind the coxal 
cavities, and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Mesosternum broad, 
even between the coxal cavities, and rather abruptly declivous in 
front. Legs sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent and 
erect, white hairs intermixed; femora not spinose at apices, anterior 
and middle pairs strongly expanded near middle, posterior pair 
more slender. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antennae only about 
as long as the body. 

Length, 12-17 mm.; width, 3.6-4.4 mm. 

Type locality. — Hinclie, Haiti. 

Other localities. — Grosmorne and Manneville, Haiti. 

Type and allotype.— \].S.'^.M. No. 43721. 

Paratype. — In Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

Remarks. — Described from three examples: The type, collected at 
the type locality, August 26, 1924, by G. N. Wolcott (Ace. No. 163- 
24) ; allotype, collected at Grosmorne, Haiti, February 18, 1926, by 
E. C. Leonard ; paratype, received from the Museum of Comparative 
Zoology, collected at Manneville, Haiti, by William M. Mann. 

This species resembles splendidum Fisher very closely, but it can 
be distinguished from that species in having the third and fourth 
antennal joints unispinose at the tips, the prosternum arcuately 
declivous posteriorly, and the elytra clothed with long, erect hairs 
in addition to the recumbent, white, pubescent spots. 

ELAPHroiON PORTORICENSIS, new species 

Male. — Narrowly elongate, feebly convex above, and similar in 
form to alhomaculatum Champlain and KnuU, but slightly more 
slender. Above and beneath uniformly bright reddish brown, 
strongly shining, and ornamented with white pubescent spots. 

Head rather finely, longitudinally rugose, nearly glabrous, except 

around the eyes, where the surface is densely clothed with long, 

recumbent, white pubescence, front wider than long, flat between 

the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated, but not elevated ; 

97806—32 3 



34 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other on the top by 
nearly four times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna about as 
long as the body, sparsely punctate, sparsely clothed with short, 
recumbent pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on the underside 
of the basal joints; joints 3 to 6 strongly unispinose at apices; first 
joint robust, strongly clavate, slightly longer than the fourth joint, 
which is two-thirds as long as the third; eleventh joint subequal in 
length to the tenth. 

Pronotum distinctly longer than wide, subcylindrical, and equal 
in width at base and apex ; disk strongly convex, even ; sides nearly 
parallel, at most only vaguely rounded; surface coarsely, vaguely 
punctate, sparsely clothed along base with long, recumbent, incon- 
spicuous hairs, and ornamented with dense, white pubescent spots 
as follows : A small spot in front of scutellum, a small, round spot on 
each side near apical margin, and a transverse, irregular spot at the 
lateral margins near middle. Scutellum broadly triangular, cur- 
vilinear, and densely clothed with long, recumbent, white pubescence. 

Elytra nearly four times as long as pronotum, and at base dis- 
tinctly wider than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base 
to near the tips, which are separatelj^, broadly truncate, bispinose, 
the lateral spine long and acute, but the sutural one scarcely de- 
veloped; surface sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, the punc- 
tures becoming obsolete toward apices, clothed with a few long, erect 
hairs, and each elytron ornamented with dense, white pubescent 
spots as follows: An elongate spot a short distance behind base, 
a rather broad, irregular, transverse fascia in front of middle, not 
extending to the sutural margin, and a broad, irregular, transverse 
spot at apical fourth. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, sparsely punctate, very sparsely clothed 
with long, erect, whitish hairs, and ornamented with a dense, whitish 
pubescent spot at the sides of each segment, except the last visible 
sternite, which is broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum feebly, 
sparsely punctate, smooth along anterior margin, and sparsely 
clothed with inconspicuous, semierect hairs ; prosternal process very 
narrow, strongly expanded behind the coxal cavities, and arcuately 
declivous posteriorly. Mesosternum broad, even between the coxal 
cavities, and rather abruptly declivous in front. Legs clothed with 
a few long, erect hairs ; femora strongly clavate, middle and posterior 
pairs subspinose at the tips. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antennae shorter 
than the body, and the prosternum more densely pubescent. 

Length, 8-11 mm. ; width, 1.8-2 mm. 

Type locality. — Coamo Springs, Porto Rico. 

Other locality. — Yauco, Porto Rico. 



ABT.22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 35 

Type and allotype. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43722 and in Cornell University 
collection. 

Remarks. — Described from 4 examples, 1 male and 3 females : The 
type (male), allotype, and 1 paratype, received from the American 
Museum of Natural History, all collected at the type locality, the 
type between June 5 and 7, 1915, the 2 other examples labeled " Coamo 
Springs, P. R., April 4, and April 6, 1930, Cornell Univ., Lot 795, 
sub. 15 and 21 " ; 1 paratype, collected at Yauco, Porto Rico, March 
9, 1922, by G. N. Wolcott (Ace. No. 88-1922). 

This species resembles albomaculatum Champlain and Knull, but 
it differs from that species in being more narrowly elongate, antennae 
shorter, pronotum scarcely punctured, and each elytron ornamented 
with three white pubescent spots. 

ELAPHIDION COMPRESSIPENNE. new species 

Female. — Narrowly elongate, slightly flattened above, uniformly 
yellowish brown, legs and antennae slightly paler, subopaque, and 
uniformly clothed with inconspicuous gray pubescence. 

Head sparsely, irregularly punctate, somewhat rugose, sparsely, 
irregularly clothed with moderatelj^ long, recumbent, grayish pubes- 
cence, front distinctly wider than long, uneven, with a narrow, 
longitudinal groove between the antennal tubercles, which are widely 
separated, but not elevated ; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from 
each other on the top by twice the width of the upper lobe. Antenna 
considerably shorter than the body, finely, densely punctate, rather 
densely clothed with recumbent, grayish pubescence, the pubescence 
denser on the apical joints, and with a few long, erect hairs on the 
underside of the basal joints; joints not spinose at apices; first joint 
robust, arcuate, feebly clavate, slightly longer than the third joint, 
which is only feebly longer than the fourth; eleventh joint subequal 
in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum feebly wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex ; sides rather strongly, arcuately rounded ; disk slightly 
uneven, vaguely, transversely depressed in front of middle, and 
without glabrous spots ; surface rather densely, coarsely, irregularly 
punctate, and rather densely clothed with long, recumbent, inconspic- 
uous, gray pubescence. Scutellum small, broadly triangular, curvi- 
linear and sparsely pubescent. 

Elytra four times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly wider 
than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base to apical fifth, 
then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, broadly 
rounded, but not spinose ; disk feebly, broadly flattened along sutural 
margins ; surface coarsely, densely, uniformly punctate, and densely, 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

uniformly clothed with inconspicuous, recumbent and erect, grayish 
pubescence, which does not conceal the surface. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, finely punctate, sparsely clothed with 
long, recumbent and erect, whitish hairs; last segment broadly 
rounded at apex. Prosternum transversely depressed at middle and 
along anterior margin, coarsely punctate, more or less rugose, and 
sparsely clothed with long, recumbent and erect white hairs ; proster- 
nal process rather narrow, expanded behind the coxal cavities, and 
arcuately declivous posteriorly. Mesosternum broad, even between 
the coxal cavities, and abruptly declivous in front. Legs rather 
densely clothed with long, fine, recumbent and erect, white hairs 
intermixed; femora rather strongly expanded near middle, but not 
spinose at the tips. 

Length, 14 mm. ; width, 3.2 mm. 

Type locality. — Mariani, Haiti. 

ry;?e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43723. A unique female collected on March 
27, 1925, by W. A. Hoffman. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. This species can be sepa- 
rated from all the other described species of this genus found in the 
West Indies in having the antennal joints unarmed at the tips, the 
el5^ra broadly flattened along the sutural margins, and the surface 
uniformly clothed with very fine, erect and recumbent pubescence 
intermixed. 

ELAPHIDION INERME Newman 

Elaphidion inerme Newman, Entomologist, vol. 1, p. 29, 1840. 

This species was described by Newman from North America, but 
among the material received from the American Museum of Natural 
History were five examples, which are identical with specimens of 
inemie from Florida. One of these examples was collected on Man- 
grove Cay, Andros Islands, during May or June, 1904, by W. M. 
Wlieeler, two collected at the same locality, during May and June, 
1917, by William M. Mann, and two other examples simply labeled 
"Andros Islands, Bahamas." 

ELAPHIDION PILOSUM, new species 

Female. — Large, broadly elongate, moderately convex above, and 
similar in form to mutatum Gahan. Above and beneath uniformly 
dark reddish brown, feebly shining, and irregularly clothed with 
grayish and yellowish pubescence. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, rather densely clothed with 
long, recumbent and erect, yellowish pubescence, which does not 
conceal the surface, front distinctly wider than long, somewhat 
uneven, flat between the antennal tubercles, which are widely sepa- 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 37 

rated, but scarcely elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from 
each other on the top by about twice the width of the upper lobe. 
Antenna considerably shorter than the body, basal joints sparsely, 
coarsely punctate, sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent 
and erect, yellowish hairs, apical joints finely, densely punctate, 
densely clothed with short, recumbent pubescence; joint 3 strongly 
unispinose at apex; joints 4 to 8 more or less strongly bispinose; 
first joint robust, slightly clavate, subequal in length to the third 
joint, which is distinctly longer than the fourth; eleventh joint 
subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum feebly wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex ; sides nearly parallel, at most only vaguely rounded ; 
disk uneven, ornamented with a small, round, median, glabrous 
spot, and two glabrous spots on each side, a small round one in front 
of middle, and an elongate one beliind the middle, but slightly more 
exterior than the anterior one ; surface coarsely, confluently punctate, 
rather densely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent, yellowish 
pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed. Scutellum 
broadly triangular, curvilinear, and rather densely clothed with 
long, recumbent, grayish pubescence. 

Elytra three and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
slightly wider than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base 
to apical sixth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are sep- 
arately, deeply emarginate, bispinose, with the lateral spine slightly 
longer than the sutural one ; surface rather densely, coarsely, irregu- 
larly punctate, the punctures becoming sparser and finer posteriorly, 
sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent and erect, yellow- 
ish and grayish pubescence intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, finely punctate, densely clothed with 
long, recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence, which nearly con- 
ceals the surface; last segment rather narrowly rounded at apex. 
Prostemum sparsely, coarsely punctate, densely clothed with long, 
recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence, which nearly conceals the 
surface; prosternal process rather narrow, strongly expanded be- 
hind the coxal cavities, and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Meso- 
sternum broad, even between the coxal cavities, and rather abruptly 
declivous in front. Legs sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, 
recumbent and erect, whitish hairs; femora rather strongly clavate, 
but not spinose at the tips. 

Length, 20 mm.; width, 6 mm. 

Type locality, — Santo Domingo, Dominican Kepublic. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. A unique 
female, collected by F. H. M. De Booy, presented to the American 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Museum by the G. G. Heye Haitian Expedition, and labeled " Santo 
Domingo." 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species is closely allied to mutatum Gahan, but it can be 
distinguished from that species in having the elytra more uniformly 
pubescent and without glabrous spaces. 

ELAPHIDION DOZIERI, new species 

Male. — Small, narrowly elongate, rather strongly flattened above, 
uniformly dark reddish brown; pronotum subopaque, irregularly 
clothed with pale yellow pubescence ; elytra rather strongly shining, 
and irregularly clothed with white pubescence. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, sparsely clothed with incon- 
spicuous, semierect hairs, with a small, round spot of dense, yellowish 
pubescence behind each eye, front wider than long, flat between the 
antennal tubercles, which are widely separated, and vaguely elevated ; 
eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other on the top by 
nearly three times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna one and 
one-half times as long as the body, sparsely, coarsely punctate, 
sparsely clothed with long, recumbent and erect, yellowish hairs; 
joints feebly, longitudinally grooved, but not spinose at apices ; first 
joint robust, strongly clavate, subequal in length to the fourth joint, 
which is considerably shorter than the third; eleventh joint subequal 
in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum about as wide as long, and slightly narrower at base 
than at apex; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, nearly parallel in 
front of middle, strongly narrowed posteriorly; disk even, and nar- 
rowly, transversely constricted along apex, surface coarsely, deeply, 
confluently, ocellate-punctate, densely, irregularly clothed with long 
recumbent and erect, yellowish pubescence. Scutellum broadly tri- 
angular, curvilinear, and rather densely clothed with recumbent 
white pubescence. 

Elytra nearly three times as long as pronotum, and at base about 
as wide as pronotum at middle ; sides parallel from base to near the 
tips, which are separately rounded, but not spinose; surface rather 
densely, finely punctate, sparsely clothed with long, recumbent, white 
pubescence, which is denser in places, giving the surface a variegated 
appearance, and with numerous long, erect hairs intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath rather densely, coarsely punctate, very sparsely 
clothed with recumbent and erect, inconspicuous hairs; last segment 
broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum coarsely, densely punctate, 
transversely rugose anteriorly, and sparsely clothed with long, semi- 
erect, inconspicuous hairs; prosternal process very narrow, strongly 
expanded behind the coxal cavities, and arcuately declivous pos- 



AET. 



NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 39 



teriorly. Mesosternum rather narrow, even between the coxal cavi- 
ties, and rather abruptly declivous in front. Legs short, sparsely, 
irregularly clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish hairs 
intermixed ; femora strongly clavate, but not spinose at apices. 

Feirmle. — Differs from the male in having the antennae about as 
long as the body, and the pronotum slightly more rounded at the 
sides. 

Length, 6.6-8 mm. ; width, 1.8-2 mm. 

Tyfe locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

Other locality. — Manneville, Haiti. 

2^y^g._U.S.N.M. No. 43724. Male, collected March 28, 1930, by 
H. L. Dozier. 

Allotype. — In American Museum of Natural History. Collected at 
Manneville, between February 6 and 10, 1922. 

Retnarks. — Described from the type and allotype. 

This species resembles a small, short specimen of villosum 
Fabricius, but it differs from that species in having the joints of 
the antennae feebly, longitudinally grooved, but unarmed at the 
apices, elytra broadly rounded at the tips, the surface variegated 
with white pubescence, and the femora short and strongly clavate. 

ELAPHIDION COSTIPENNE. new species 

Female. — Small, narrowly elongate, slightly flattened above, 
brownish black, rather strongly shining, legs and antennae slightly 
more reddish, the elytra subcostate, and irregularly clothed with 
grayish pubescence. 

Head coarsely, irregularly punctate, longitudinally rugose, 
sparsely clothed with long, recumbent, grayish pubescence, with a 
few long, erect hairs intermixed, front wider than long, flat between 
the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated, and vaguely 
elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, separated from each other on the 
top by nearly three times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna not 
quite so long as the body, basal joints sparsely, coarsely punctate, 
sparsely clothed with long, recumbent and erect, grayish hairs, apical 
joints finely, densely punctate, rather densely clothed with short, 
recumbent pubescence; joints 3 to 7 more or less unispinose at apices; 
first joint robust, rather strongly clavate, subequal in length to the 
third joint, which is twice as long as the fourth; eleventh joint 
flattened and subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum vaguely wider than long, and about equal in width at 
base and apex; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, rather strongly 
constricted at base and anterior margin ; disk even, ornamented with 
a broad, glabrous median vitta, extending from base to anterior 
margin, and with a number of small, irregular, inconspicuous, glab- 



40 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

rous spots on each side; surface coarsely irregularly punctate, and 
rather densely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent, yellowish- 
white pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed. Scutel- 
lum broadly triangular, curvilinear, and rather densely clothed at 
the sides with long, recumbent, grayish pubescence. 

Elytra three and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
.slightly wider than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base to 
near the tips, which are separately, deeply emarginate, bispinose, 
with the lateral spine slightly longer than the sutural one; disk 
feebly, broadly flattened along the sutural margins ; surface coarsely, 
rather sparsely, irregularly punctate, the punctures more obsolete 
near apices, sparsely, irregularly clothed with long recumbent, gray- 
ish pubescence, and with a more or less distinct glabrous space on 
each elytron behind the middle. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, vaguely punctate, clothed with long, 
recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence, the pubescence dense at 
the sides, sparse on the median parts ; last segment broadly rounded 
at apex. Prosternum coarsely, sparsely punctate, and rather densely 
clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence; pro- 
sternal process rather narrow, sides nearly parallel, broadly rounded 
at apex, and abruptly declivous posteriorly. Mesosternum broad, 
even between the coxal cavities, and abruptly declivous in front. 
Legs sparsely clothed with recumbent, grayish pubescence, with a 
few long, erect hairs intermixed; femora rather strongly clavate, 
posterior pair armed with two obtuse spines at apices, anterior and 
middle pairs unarmed. 

Length, 9 mm. ; width, 2.4 mm. 

Type locality. — Fond Parisien, Haiti, which is on the south shore 
of Lake Assuei, about 10 miles on a straight line (across the lake) 
southeast of Manneville. This region would be arid except for irri- 
gation, and has an altitude of 60 feet. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. A unique fe- 
male collected at light between February 11 and 18, 1922, by F. E. 
Watson. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species resembles a small example of insulare Newman, but 
it differs from that species in having the elytra somewhat costate, 
causing the surface to be broadly flattened along the sutural mar- 
gins. 

ELAPHIDION JAMAICENSIS, new species 

Female. — Broadly elongate, feebly convex above, and similar in 
form to mucronatum Say. Above and beneath dark reddish brown, 
legs slightly paler, rather strongly shining, elytra slightly costate, 
and the grayish pubescence arranged in more or less distinct vittae. 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHEB 41 

Head sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, with a few fine 
punctures intermixed, rather densely, irregularly clothed with long, 
recumbent, yellowish- white pubescence, front wider than long, trans- 
versely grooved behind the epistoma, longitudinally grooved and 
broadly concave between the antennal tubercles, which are widely 
separated and slightly elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, separated 
from each other on the top by three times the width of the upper 
lobe. Antenna as long as the body, basal joints sparsely, coarsely 
punctate, more or less rugose, sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, 
recumbent, yellowish pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on the 
underside of the joints, apical joints finely, densely punctate, densely 
clothed with short, recumbent pubescence; joints 3 to 6 strongly 
unispinose at apices; first joint robust, strongly clavate, and sub- 
equal in length to the third and fourth joints united; third joint 
nearly twice as long as the fourth; eleventh joint subequal in length 
to the tenth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and equal in width at base 
and apex; sides strongly sinuate, subtuberculate ; disk uneven, and 
ornamented with an acute tubercle on each side at apical third, a 
longitudinal, median, glabrous spot, irregularly expanded at middle, 
extending from anterior margin to base, and a rather large, rounded, 
glabrous spot on each side at apical third; surface rather densely, 
coarsely, irregularly punctate, sparsely, irregularly clothed with 
long, recumbent, yellowish-white pubescence. Scutellum broadly 
triangular, curvilinear, median part glabrous, sides densely clothed 
with recumbent, yellowish pubescence. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly 
wider than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base to apical 
sixth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, 
deeply emarginate, bispinose, with the lateral spine much longer 
than the sutural one; surface rather densely, coarsely, irregularly 
punctate; each elytron with three broad, more or less distinct, longi- 
tudinal costae, and clothed between the costae with rows of sparse, 
recumbent, gray pubescence. 

Abdomen beneath finely, sparsely, irregularly punctate, sparsely, 
irregularly clothed with long, recumbent and erect, grayish pubes- 
cence, the pubescence sparser on median part; last segment broadly 
rounded at apex. Prosternum coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed 
with long, recumbent, grayish hairs at the sides, nearly glabrous and 
impunctate at middle and along anterior margin ; prosternal process 
rather wide, flat, expanded behind the coxal cavities, then attenuate 
to the tip, which is acute, but not declivous. Mesoternum deeply, 
triangularly emarginate, and concave in front for the insertion of 
the prosternal process. Legs sparsely, irregularly clothed with long. 



42 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. SO 

recumbent and semierect, grayish hairs intermixed; femora moder- 
ately clavate, the middle pair armed with an obtuse spine on inner 
side at apices, posterior pair with two obtuse spines at apices, the 
inner spine longer than the outer one. 

Length, 14-15 mm.; width, 4-4,4 mm. 

Type locality. — Mandeville, Manchester, Jamaica. 

Other locality. — Trelawney, Jamaica. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Paratype.—\].^:^M.. No. 43725. 

Ronarks. — Described from two females (one type) received from 
the American Museum of Natural History. The type collected at 
light, December 20, 1919, by F. E. Watson, and the paratype collected 
at Trelawney, Jamaica, March 17, 1931, by E. L. Bell (Ace. 31224). 

This species does not entirely agree with the other species of this 
genus, and differs from the other described West Indian species in 
having the prosternal process acutely rounded at the apex, and not 
declivous, and the mesosternum deeply, triangularly emarginate in 
front for the insertion of the prosternal process, 

ELAPHroiON ANTILLARUM, new species 

Female. — Narrowly elongate, subcylindrical, strongly convex above. 
Above and beneath uniformly dark reddish brown, strongly shining, 
antennae slightly paler, and the elytra irregularly ornamented with 
white pubescent spots. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, sparsely clothed with recum- 
bent, whitish hairs, with a small spot of dense, whitish pubescence be- 
hind each antennal tubercle, front slightly wider than long, flat 
between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated, and 
feebly elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, and separated from each 
other on the top by three times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna 
not quite so long as the body, rather coarsely sparsely punctate, 
sparsely clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish hairs inter- 
mixed, surface more finely punctate and more densely pubescent on 
apical joints; joints vaguely spinose; first joint robust, moderately 
clavate, subequal in length to the third joint, which is slightly longer 
than the fourth ; eleventh joint subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum vaguely wider than long, and subequal in width at base 
and apex; sides strongly, arcuately rounded; disk even, moderately 
convex; surface densely alveolate-punctate, the cells deep and elon- 
gate, a short, recumbent, whitish hair arising from each puncture, and 
clothed with a few long, erect hairs, Scutellum broadly triangular, 
curvilinear, and rather densely clothed with recumbent, whitish 
pubescence. 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES — FISHER 43 

Elytra two and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
feebly wider than pronotum at middle; sides feebly narrowed from 
base to near the tips, which are separately, feebly, broadly emarginate, 
but not spinose ; surface rather densely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, 
very sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish hairs, with a 
few very long, erect, whitish hairs intermixed, and each elytron 
ornamented with an irregular spot of moderately dense, white pubes- 
cence at middle, and a similar spot near apex. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, finely, irregularly punctate, vaguely 
granulose, and sparsely clothed with long, fine, semierect hairs ; last 
segment broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum sparsely, coarsely 
punctate, feebly, transversely rugose anteriorly, and sparsely clothed 
with recumbent, whitish pubescence; prosternal process very narrow, 
feebly expanded behind the coxal cavities, and arcuately declivous 
posteriorly. Mesosternum rather narrow between the coxal cavities, 
and feebly declivous in front. Legs rather long, sparsely, irregu- 
larly clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish hairs; femora 
strongly clavate, but not spinose at apices. 

Length, 6.4 mm. ; width, 1.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Source Matelas, Haiti. 

Tyfe and paratype.—U.S.l^M. No. 43726. 

Remarks. — Described from two females (one type) collected at 
Source Matelas, Haiti, at edge of the sea on " mangle " or mangrove, 
March 24, 1930, by H. L. Dozier. 

The paratype (broken) is larger than the type, 8.2 mm. long and 
2.2 mm. wide. This specimen differs slightly from the type in 
having the pronotum ornamented with a few irregular spots of 
whitish pubescence, and the white pubescent spots of the elytra more 
distinct than on the type. 

This species resembles dozieri Fisher, but differs from that species 
in being more slender, the pronotum more strongly rounded at the 
sides, and the surface with elongate, alveolate punctures, elytra with 
more or less distinct pubescent spots (not variegated as in dozieri)., 
with the tips emarginate, and the legs longer. 

ELAPHIDION GRACILIS, new species 

Male. — Narrowly elongate, subcylindrical, slightly flattened above. 
Above and beneath uniformly reddish brown, feebly shining, and 
rather densely, irregularly clothed with pale yellow and whitish 
pubescence intermixed. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, densely clothed with long, 
recumbent, whitish pubescence (yellowish on the occiput), which 
nearly conceals the surface, front wider than long, flat between the 



44 PEOCEEDIKGS OP THE NATIOiTAL MUSEUM tol. 80 

antennal tubercles, which are widely separated, and vaguely elevated ; 
eyes deeply emarginate, and separated from each other on the top 
by three times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna one and one- 
half times as long as the body, coarsely, sparsely punctate, sparsely 
clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish hairs intermixed, 
apical joints finely punctate, and densely clothed with short, recum- 
bent pubescence; joints unarmed at apices; first joint robust, slightly 
arcuate, moderately clavate, one-half as long as the third joint, 
which is considerably longer than the fourth; eleventh joint slightly 
longer than the tenth. 

Pronotum slightly longer than wide, and feebly narrower at base 
than at apex; sides subparallel (vaguely rounded at middle); disk 
even, and slightly flattened; surface densely, coarsely punctate, 
densely clothed with long, recumbent, whitish and pale yellow 
pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed, the pubescence 
nearly concealing the surface. Scutellum broadly triangular, curvi- 
linear, and rather densely clothed with recumbent, whitish 
pubescence. 

Elytra three times as long as the pronotum, and at base distinctly 
wider than pronotum at middle ; sides parallel from base to near the 
tips, which are conjointly, broadly rounded, but not spinose; surface 
rather densely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, densely clothed with 
long, recumbent, whitish and pale yellow pubescence, which partially 
conceals the surface, the whitish pubescence predominating, and with 
a few long, erect, white hairs intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath coarsely, sparsely punctate, rather densely 
clothed with long, recumbent and semierect, whitish pubescence; 
last segment broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum rather densely, 
finely punctate, transversely rugose .anteriorly, densely clothed with 
long, recumbent, whitish pubescence ; prosternal process very narrow, 
and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Mesosternum rather narrow, 
even between the coxal cavities, and scarcely declivous in front. 
Leps rather long, sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, recumbent 
and erect, whitish hairs; femora strongly clavate, but not spinose at 
apices. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antenna about as 
long as the body, eleventh joint subequal in length to the tenth, 
pronotum as wide as long, yellow pubescence not distinct on doi'sa] 
surface, and the femora not so strongly clavate. 

Length, 7-8 mm.; width 1.8-2 mm. 

Type locality. — Camaguey, Cuba. 

Other locality. — Cayamas, Cuba. 

Type., allotype., and paratype. — U.S.N.M. No. 43727. 

Paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. 



AET. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 45 

Remarks. — Described from 4 examples, 3 males and 1 female: 
The type, allotype, and one paratype, collected at the type locality 
during July, 1923, by J. Acuna ; and one paratype collected at Caya- 
mas, Cuba, May 11, by E. A. Schwarz. 

This species resembles dozieri Fisher very closely, but it differs 
from that species in being more slender, the pronotum distinctly 
narrower than the elytra, and the surface more sparsely punctured, 
elytra with the sides more parallel and the surface more densely 
pubescent (not variegated as in dozieri)., and the legs longer. 

ELAPHIDION NEWMANI Haldeman 

Elaphidion bidens Newman (not Fabricius), Entomologist, vol. 1, p. 25, 1840. 
Elaphidion netomauii Haldeman, Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc, vol. 4, p. 375, 1847. 

Newman (1840) recorded Elaphidion hidens Fabricius from Bra- 
zil, but this is not the species described by Fabricius under that name, 
so Haldeman (1847) gave hidens Newman (not Fabricius) the new 
name neiomanii {njumanii by typographical error). The species 
described by Fabricius from South America under hidens has the 
joints of the antennae bispinose, whereas the species described by 
Newman under the same name has the joints unispinose. 

This is a South American species and should be dropped from 
the West Indian lists. 

PROTOSPHAERION TESTACEUM, new species 

Rather narrowly elongate, feebly flattened above, strongly shin- 
ing, yellowish brown, and the legs slightly paler. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, the punctures deep, elongate, 
and a short, inconspicuous hair arising from each puncture, front 
wider than long, flat between the antennal tubercles, which are 
widely separated, but scarcely elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, 
separated from each other on the top by three times the width of 
the upper lobe. Antenna slightly longer than the body, rather 
fi.nely, sparsely punctate, sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, 
yellowish hairs, with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the 
joints; joints more or less flattened, vaguely, longitudinally grooved, 
and joints 3 to 7 more or less unispinose at apices; first joint robust, 
moderately clavatc, slightly longer than the fourth joint, which is 
one-half as long as the third; eleventh joint subequal in length to 
the tenth. 

Pronotum slightly longer than wide, and subequal in width at 
base and apex; sides feebly constricted near base and apex, rather 
strongly, arcuately rounded at middle; disk slightly convex, even; 
surface coarsely, irregularly punctate, the punctures dense at the 
sides, but becoming more irregular and distant toward the middle, 



46 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

and clothed with a few long, erect, inconspicuous hairs. Scutellum 
broad, broadly rounded at apex, and clothed with long, inconspicuous 
hairs. 

Elytra nearly three times as long as pronotum, and at base vaguely 
wider than pronotum at middle; sides nearly parallel from base to 
near the tips, which are narrowly, transversely truncate; surface 
densely, coarsely, uniformly punctate, the punctures becoming 
smaller and more distant toward the apices, and a long, fine, erect 
hair arising from some of the punctures. 

Abdomen beneath vaguely punctured and very sparsely clothed 
with a few inconspicuous, erect hairs ; last segment broadly rounded 
at apex. Prosternum sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, and 
clothed with a few inconspicuous hairs; prosternal process narrow 
between the coxal cavities. Legs rather short, sparsely, irregularly 
clothed with long, semierect hairs ; femora strongly clavate, unarmed 
at apices; tibiae not carinate. 

Length, 10 mm. ; width, 2.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Manneville, Haiti. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. A unique speci- 
men (sex not determined) received from the American Museum of 
Natural History, collected February 18, 1922. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species resembles Protosphaerion insulare White, described 
from Jamaica, but differs from that species in having the pronotum 
more sparsely and irregularly punctured, antennae flattened, and 
the joints vaguely, longitudinally grooved, and the tips of the elytra 
narrowly, transversely truncate. 

STIZOCERA VANZWALUWENBURGI. new species 

Male. — Narrowly elongate, subcylindrical, feebly flattened above, 
and strongly shining; above pale yellow, head slightly darker, and 
humeri black ; beneath brownish yellow, with the median part of the 
prosternum black. 

Head sparsely, vaguely punctate, and nearly glabrous, front wider 
than long, broadly, transversely depressed behind the epistoma, the 
depression deeper on each side, narrowly, longitudinally grooved 
between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated, but not 
elevated ; eyes deeply emarginate, and separated from each other on 
the top by three times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna nearly 
twice as long as the body, finely, sparsely punctate, sparsely clothed 
with short and long, semierect, yellowish hairs, joints cylindrical, 
not longitudinally grooved, and joints 3 to 8 strongly unispinose at 
apices ; first joint robust, slightly arcuate, feebly clavate, considerably 



AET. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 47 

shorter than the third joint, which is slightly longer than the fourth ; 
eleventh joint slightly longer than the tenth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and subequal in width at base 
and apex ; sides feebly constricted near base and apex, with an obtuse 
tubercle on each side at middle; disk uneven, with a round, feebly 
elevated tubercle at middle, and two similar tubercles arranged longi- 
tudinally on each side ; surface nearly impunctate, with a few long, 
inconspicuous, erect hairs. Scutellum triangular, curvilinear, and 
densely clothed with short, recumbent, white pubescence. 

Elytra four times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly wider 
than pronotum at middle; humeral angles broadly rounded; sides 
nearly parallel from base to near the tips, which are separately, 
broadly emarginate, strongly bispinose, with the lateral spine much 
longer than the sutural one; surface sparsely, finely, irregularly 
punctate, with a few coarser punctures intermixed, and clothed with 
a few long, rather stiff, erect, yellowish hairs. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, irregularly punctate, clothed with a 
few inconspicuous, semierect hairs; last segment broadly subtrun- 
cate at apex. Prosternum transversely, arcuately elevated anteriorly, 
median part sparsely, coarsely punctate, and sparsely clothed with 
whitish pubescence, sides and anterior third smooth and glabrous; 
prosternal process very narrow between the coxal cavities, and 
arcuately declivous posteriorly. Legs rather long, sparsely clothed 
with long, semierect, yellowish hairs. Femora rather strongly cla- 
vate; posterior pair obtusely bispinose at apices. Tibiae longitudi- 
nally carinate. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antennae about one 
and one-fourth times as long as the body, and the median part of the 
prosternum only feebly punctured. 

Length, 11.5-19 mm. ; width, 2.8-4 mm. 

Type locality. — Mayaguez, Porto Rico. 

Other localities. — San German and Coamo Springs, Porto Rico. 

Type and allotype. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43728 and in Cornell University collec- 
tion. 

RcTiiarks. — Described from 5 examples, 3 males and 2 females, 
received from the American Museum of Natural History: The 
type, collected at light October 15, 1916, by R. H. Van Zwaluwen- 
burg; allotype, collected at the type locality, December, 1930, by 
Dr. S. T. Danforth ; one paratype, collected at Coamo Springs, Porto 
Rico, August 4, 1930, labeled " Cornell Univ. Lot 795, Sub. 15," and 
two paratypes, collected at San German, April 16, 1930, labeled 
" Cornell Univ. Lot 795, Sub. 34." 



48 PEOCBEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

This species is allied to insulana Gahan, described from Jamaica, 
but it differs from that species in having the pronotum nearly im- 
punctate, the femora obtusely bispinose at apices, and the tibiae 
longitudinally carinate. 

This species is named in honor of R. H. Van Zwaluwenburg, who 
has very greatly increased our knowledge of the fauna of Porto 
Rico by his careful and energetic collecting and has carefully studied 
some of the difficult genera of the family Elateridae. 

HETERACHTES FULGENS, new species 

Narrowly elongate, subcylindrical, feebly flattened above, and 
strongly shining; elytra whitish yellow, and each elytron narrowly 
margined dark brown, prothorax slightly darker; antennae, legs, 
and underside of body (except the prosternum) reddish. 

Head very sparsely, irregularly punctate, vaguely rugose, glabrous, 
front short, strongly transverse, narrowly, deeply, transversely 
grooved behind the epistoma, the groove extending on each side along 
the inner margin of the eyes to near the antennal cavities, a narrow, 
longitudinal, median groove extending from epistoma to vertex, 
surface strongly, broadly concave between the antennal tubercules, 
which are rather strongly elevated; eyes deeply emarginate, and 
separated from each other on the top by four times the width of the 
upper lobe. Antenna twice as long as the body, sparsely punctate, 
sparsely clothed with short, whitish pubescence, with numerous long, 
erect hairs on underside of joints, which are unarmed at apices; 
basal joints flattened, and longitudinally carinate; first joint robust, 
moderately clavate, considerably shorter than the third joint, which 
is slightly longer than the fourth; eleventh joint slightly longer 
than the tenth. 

Pronotum considerably longer than wide, and subequal in width 
at base and apes ; sides parallel, sinuate, and feebly constricted near 
base and apex; disk vaguely uneven, broadly, feebly, transversely 
concave anteriorly, deeply transversely depressed near base; surface 
smooth and glabrous, except narrowly along the base, where it is 
finely, densely punctate, and sparsely clothed with fine, short, pubes- 
cence. Scutellum elongate, curvilinear, and densely clothed with 
recumbent, white pubescence. 

Elytra two and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
distinctly wider than pronotum at middle; humeri strongly elevated; 
sides nearly parallel from base to near the tips, which are separately, 
transversely truncate, with a moderately long, obtuse spine at lateral 
margin; surface smooth and glabrous, except for two longitudinal 
rows of very widely separated punctures on each elytron, and a long, 
stiff, erect, yellowish hair arising from each puncture. 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 49 

Abdomen beneath feebly, sparsely punctate, vaguely granulose, 
sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, with 
a few long, erect hairs intermixed ; last segment broadly subtruncate 
at apex. Prosternum transversely flattened on apical half, median 
part feebly, finely punctate, and sparsely clothed with short, incon- 
spicuous pubescence, sides and anterior half impunctate and gla- 
brous, the anterior part vaguely, transversely rugose ; prosternal 
process very narrow between the coxal cavities, strongly expanded 
and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Legs long; femora strongly 
clavate, unarmed at apices; tibiae longitudinally carinate. 

Length, 11.5 mm. ; width, 2.8 mm. 

Type locality — Dominica, Leeward Islands, West Indies. 

r2/?>6.— U.S.N.M. No. 43729. Collected by H. A. Ballou. 

Remarks. — Described from a single example (sex not determined). 

This species can be easily separated from the other described spe- 
cies of this genus found in the West Indies by its pale yellow color, 
and in having the upper surface strongly shining and nearly 
glabrous. 

CYLINDERA FASCIATA, new species 

Female. — Rather broadly elongate, moderately flattened above, 
strongly shining, uniformly dark reddish brown, tibiae and anten- 
nae slightly paler, and each elytron ornamented with a transverse, 
oblique, yellow fascia in front of middle, composed of two elongate 
spots connected to each other, the sutural spot slightly behind the 
lateral one. 

Head coarsely, irregularly punctate, coarsely rugose, and clothed 
with a few long, erect, white hairs, front strongly transverse, with 
a short, longitudinal, median groove between the antennal tubercles, 
which are widely separated, and scarcely elevated, surface broadly, 
transversely concave on vertex; eyes oblong, strongly convex, and 
feebly emarginate. Antenna about as long as the body, sparsely 
clothed with short, recumbent pubescence, with numerous long hairs 
on the underside of the joints, which are slightly flattened, but un- 
armed at apices; first joint robust, cylindrical, vaguely longer than 
the third joint, which is subequal in length to the fourth; eleventh 
joint subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and subequal in width at base 
and apex; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, slightly constricted at 
base, with an inconspicuous, obtuse tubercle, on each side at mid- 
dle ; disk strongly, regularly convex ; surface very sparsely, coarsely, 
irregularly punctate, and clothed with a few long, erect, rather 
stiff, white hairs. Scutellum transverse, broadly rounded at apex, 
and glabrous. 

97806—32 4 



50 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATION'AL MUSEUM vol.80 

Elytra three times as long as the pronotuin, and at base distinctly 
wider than pronotum at middle; humeri rather strongly elevated; 
sides nearly parallel from base to apical fourth, then feebly, arcu- 
ately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, broadly, trans- 
versely truncate, and vaguely emarginate; surface slightly flat- 
tened along sutural margins behind middle, coarsely, rather densely, 
irregularly punctate, the punctures becoming sparser toward apices, 
and sparsely clothed with long, erect, stiff, white hairs. 

Abdomen beneath very sparsely punctate, and a long, erect white 
hair arising from each puncture; last segment broadly rounded at 
apex. Prosternum strongly convex, narrowly, transversely de- 
pressed along anterior margin, very sparsely punctate, vaguely, 
transversely rugose, and clothed with a few long, erect white hairs ; 
prosternal process narrow between the coxal cavities, strongly ex- 
panded and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Legs rather long, 
sparsely clothed with long, semierect, white hairs ; femora strongly, 
abruptly clavate, petiolate at bases, not spinose at apices ; tibiae not 
longitudinally carinate. 

Length, 10 mm.; width, 3.6 mm. 

Tyye locality. — Guantanamo, Cuba. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43730. A unique female collected at light on 
the San Carlos Estate, June 10, 1915, by C. T. Ramsden. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species can be separated from -jiava Fabricius in having the 
upper surface dark reddish brown, and each elytron ornamented 
with a transversely oblique, yellow fascia. 

CYHNDEKA PUNCTICOLLIS, new species 

Female. — Small, rather narrowly elongate, slightly flattened above, 
uniformly dark reddish brown, antennae and legs vaguely paler; 
head and pronotum subopaque; eljrtra strongly shining, with a 
vague, aeneous reflection in certain lights. 

Head coarsely alveolate-punctate, and clothed with a few long, 
erect hairs, front strongly transverse, slightly concave between the 
antennal tubercles which are widely separated, and acutely elevated ; 
surface broadly, transversely concave on vertex ; eyes oblong, strongly 
convex, and feebly emarginate. Antenna broken, sparsely pubescent, 
with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the joints, which are 
cylindrical, slightly expanded but unarmed at apices; first joint ro- 
bust, cylindrical, slightly longer than the third joint, which is vaguely 
longer than the fourth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and subequal in width at 
base and apex; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, rather strongly 
constricted at base and apex ; disk rather strongly, regularly convex ; 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 51 

surface coarsely alveolate-punctate, the cells elongate and irregular 
in shape, a narrow, elongate, smooth, median space behind middle, 
but not extending to base, and clothed with a few long, inconspicuous, 
erect hairs. Scutellum oval, and glabrous. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly wider 
than pronotum at middle; humeri strongly elevated; sides nearly 
parallel from base to apical fifth, then arcuately narrowed to the 
tips, which are separately, narrowly rounded; disk feebly flattened; 
surface densely, coarsely, irregularly punctate on basal halves, the 
punctures becoming finer and sparser toward apices, and very 
sparsely clothed with long, erect, stiff, yellowish hairs. 

Abdomen beneath vaguely punctate, and clothed with a few long, 
erect, inconspicuous hairs; last segment broadly rounded at apex. 
Prosternum strongly convex, narrowly, transversely depressed along 
anterior margin, coarsely, vaguely punctate, and without distinct pu- 
bescence; prosternal process very narrow between the coxal cavities, 
strongly expanded and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Legs rather 
long, and sparsely clothed with long, recumbent and erect, yellowish 
hairs ; femora strongly, abruptly clavate, petiolate at bases, unarmed 
at apices; tibiae longitudinally carinate. 

Length, 7 mm.; width, 2.2 mm. 

Type locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

Type.—\JS.'^M. No. 43731. Female collected January 20, 1925, 
by G. N. Wolcott. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species can be separated from the other described species of 
this genus found in the West Indies in having the pronotum coarsely 
alveolate-punctate. 

CYLINDERA GLABRA, new species 

Small, elongate, strongly flattened above, and subopaque; head, 
pronotum, and underside of body reddish brown; elytra and legs 
yellowish brown, except the bases of the tibiae, which are darker. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, and glabrous, front strongly 
transverse, deeply, narrowly, transversely grooved behind the epis- 
toma, the groove not extending to the eyes, strongly, transversely, 
arcuately elevated between the antennal tubercles, which are widely 
separated, but not elevated; eyes small, oblong, strongly convex, 
but not emarginate. Antenna as long as the body, sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on the 
underside of the joints, which are cylindrical, and unarmed at apices; 
first joint robust, cylindrical, subequal in length to the fourth joint, 
which is twice as long as the third ; eleventh joint slightly longer than 
the tenth. 



52 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL. MUSEUM vol. 80 

Pronotum as wide as long, and subequal in width at base and 
apex; sides feebly, arcuately rounded at middle, more strongly 
rounded toward apex, and strongly, narrowly constricted at base; 
anterior margin broadly, arcuately rounded; disk rather strongly 
flattened; surface glabrous, finely, longitudinally rugose, the rugae 
narrow, strongly elevated, more or less irregular, and close together. 
Scutellum narrowly transverse, emarginate at apex, and glabrous. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base subequal in 
width to the pronotum at middle; humeri rather strongly elevated; 
sides nearly parallel from base to apical fifth, then arcuately nar- 
rowed to the tips, which are separately, narrowly rounded; disk 
feebly flattened; surface glabrous, coarsely, densely, uniformly 
punctate. 

Abdomen beneath glabrous, rather densely, coarsely, but not 
deeply, punctate; last segment broadly rounded at apex. Proster- 
num strongly convex, nearly glabrous, rather densely, coarsely, but 
not deeply, punctate; prosternal process very narrow between the 
coxal cavities, and arcuately declivous posteriorly. Legs rather 
short, sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, inconspicuous pubes- 
cence; femora gradually, strongly clavate, petiolate at bases, un- 
armed at apices; tibiae robust, expanded toward apices, but not 
longitudinally carinate. 

Length, 4.75 mm.; width, 1.4 mm. 

Ty^pe locality. — Cayamas, Cuba. 

Type. — ^U.S.N.M. No. 43732. A unique example (sex not deter- 
mined), collected January 19, by E. A. Schwarz. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This little species differs from all the other described species of 
this genus found in the West Indies in having the upper surface 
glabtous, and the pronotum finely, densely, longitudinally rugose. 
It does not quite agree generically with f.ava Fabricius, the type of 
the genus, but it is placed temporarily in this genus until more 
material is available for study. 

MEROSTENUS ASPERATUS, new species 

Male. — Narrow, elongate, subcylindrical, and similar in form to 
attenuatus Chevrolat. Above and beneath opaque, uniformly pale 
reddish brown, the antennae and legs feebly paler. 

Head densely, minutely alutaceous, glabrous, front wider than long, 
rather deeply, narrowly depressed behind the epistoma and along 
inner margin of eyes, with a vague, narrow, longitudinal, median 
groove, feebly, broadly concave between the antennal tubercles, which 
are slightly elevated; surface broadly, transversely concave on ver- 
tex; eyes large, strongly convex, moderately emarginate, and widely 



AET. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 53 

separated from each other at the top. Antenna one and one-half 
times as long as the body, joints feebly flattened, unarmed at apices, 
and sparsely clothed with short, inconspicuous, recumbent pubes- 
cence; first joint robust, feebly arcuate, slightly clavate, subequal in 
length to the fourth joint, which is slightly longer than the third; 
eleventh joint slightly longer than the tenth. 

Pronotum distinctly longer than wide, and subequal in width at 
base and apex ; sides obliquely diverging from apex to basal fourth, 
where they are arcuately expanded, then strongly, narrowly con- 
stricted at base ; disk even, narrowly, but not deeply, transversely de- 
pressed along base; surface glabrous, densely minutely alutaceous. 
Scutellum small, oval, and glabrous. 

Elytra slightly more than twice as long as pronotum, and at base 
feebly wider than pronotum at basal fourth ; humeri moderately ele- 
vated; sides nearly parallel from base to near the tips, which are 
separately, broadly rounded ; surface glabrous, finely, densely granu- 
lose, and uniformly, sparsely covered with small, inconspicuous 
asperities. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, feebly, punctate, and sparsely clothed 
with short, semierect, inconspicuous hairs; last segment broadly 
rounded and feebly emarginate at apex. Prosternum glabrous, finely 
alutaceous posteriorly, feebly, transversely rugose anteriorly; pro- 
sternal process very narrow between the coxal cavities, and arcuately 
declivous posteriorly. Legs rather long, sparsely clothed with short, 
recumbent, inconspicuous pubescence; femora strongly, abruptly cla- 
vate, slightly flattened, petiolate at bases, unarmed at apices ; tibiae 
slightly flattened, the anterior pair feebly arcuate. 

Length, 4.6-6.6 mm. ; width, 1-1.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Manneville, Haiti. 

Otliev locality. — Fond Parisien, Haiti. 

Type and paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Paratype.—U.^.'^.'K. No. 43733. 

Rerrmrhs. — Described from three examples received from the 
American Museum of Natural History, all collected at light by F. E. 
Watson : The type, collected February 18, 1922 ; and two paratypes, 
collected at Fond Parisien, Haiti, between February 11 and 18, 1922. 
Sexes not determined. 

This species is closely allied to attenuatus Chevrolat, described 
from Cuba, but it differs from that species in having the elytra 
opaque, densely granulose, and covered with small asperites. 

MEROSTENUS SIMILIS, new species 

Female. — Similar to asperatus Fisher, but differs from that species 
as follows : Front of head flat between the antennal tubercles, which 



54 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM VOL. 80 

are not elevated, antennae about as long as the body, and the joints 
cylindrical, pronotum shorter, the surface more finely alutaceous, and 
not transversely depressed along the base, elytra three times as long 
as the pronotum, and the surface coarsely, densely, and uniformly 
punctate, except the extreme tips. 

Length, 6.2-6.8 mm; width, 1.2-1.4 mm. 

Tyfe locality. — Antigua, West Indies. 

Ti/pe.— U.S.N.M. No. 43734. Collected in June. 

Paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. Labeled 
"Antigua, October 24, 1911," and donated to that museum by C. W. 
Leng. 

Remarks. — Described from the type and paratype. 

MEROSTENUS ELONGATUS, new species 

Female. — Narrow, subcylindrical, and slightly more slender than 
atteniuitus Chevrolat. Above and beneath feebly shining, yellowish 
brown, with the prosternum and underside of abdomen slightly 
darker. 

Head densely, coarsely punctate, rather densely clothed with short, 
recumbent, yellowish pubescence, front rather strongly constricted 
by the eyes, deeply, narrowly, transversely depressed behind the 
epistoma, with a vague, narrow, median, longitudinal groove, and 
feebly, broadly depressed on vertex, broadly concave between the 
antennal tubercles, which are slightly elevated ; eyes large, strongly 
convex, moderately emarginate, and widely separated from each 
other on the top. Antenna about as long as the body, joints cylin- 
drical, unarmed at apices, and sparsely clothed with short, recum- 
bent pubescence; first joint robust, feebly arcuate, slightly clavate, 
subequal in length to the fourth joint, which is slightly longer than 
the third; eleventh joint subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum distinctly longer than wide, and subequal in width at 
base and apex; sides feebly, obliquely diverging from apex to basal 
fourth, where they are broadly, arcuately expanded, then feebly, 
narrowly constricted at base; disk slightly uneven, with five vague 
callosities, one median, and two arranged longitudinally on each 
side; surface densely, finely punctate, and rather densely clothed 
with short, recumbent, inconspicuous pubescence. Scutellum small, 
elongate, and densely clothed with recumbent pubescence. 

Elytra nearly four times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly 
wider than pronotum at basal fourth ; humeri moderately elevated ; 
sides nearly parallel from base to apical sixth, then strongly nar- 
rowed to the tips, which are separately, acutely rounded; surface 
densely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, and sparsely clothed with 
short, recumbent, inconspicuous pubescence. 



AET. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES — FISHER 55 

Abdomen beneath feebly punctate and sparsely clothed with short, 
recumbent pubescence ; last segment broadly truncate at apex. Pro- 
sternum densely, coarsely punctate posteriorly, more sparsely punctate 
anteriorly, and sparsely clothed with short, inconspicuous hairs; 
prosternal process very narrow between coxal cavities, and strongly 
declivous posteriorly. Legs rather long, sparsely clothed with short, 
inconspicuous hairs; femora moderately clavate, unarmed at apices, 
posterior pair longer, slightly clavate, and feebly arcuate; tibiae 
slender, cylindrical, anterior pair feebly enlarged toward apices. 

Length, 7 mm ; width, 1.2 mm. 

Type locality. — Wajay, Habana, Cuba. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43735. A single female collected December 
15, 1930, by S. C. Bruner. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species differs from all the other described species of this 
genus found in the West Indies in being more slender and in having 
the upper surface densely, coarsely punctured, and clothed with 
short, recumbent pubescence. 

PENTOMACRUS PUNCTATUS, new specie! 

Male. — Broadly elongate, rather strongly flattened above, and 
feebly shining. Above and beneath pale yellow, with the head, tips 
of antennal joints, sides of sternum, tips of femora, numerous irreg- 
ular spots on pronotum, and three broad, transverse, zigzag fasciae 
on each elytron, black. 

Head coarsely, confluently punctate, glabrous, front rather strongly 
constricted by the eyes, with a narrow, longitudinal, median groove, 
broadly concave between the antennal tubercles, which are widely 
separated, and rather strongly elevated ; eyes large, strongly convex, 
feebly emarginate, and widely separated from each other on the top. 
Antenna about one and one-half times as long as the body, sparsely 
clothed with short, inconspicuous pubescence, with numerous long, 
erect hairs on the underside of the joints, which are slightly flat- 
tened, but unarmed at apices ; first joint robust, cylindrical, arcuate, 
slightly expanded toward apex, and one-half as long as the third 
joint, which is distinctly longer than the fourth; eleventh joint 
subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum distinctly longer than wide, and subequal in width at 
base and apex; sides feebly, arcuately rounded, slightly constricted 
at base; disk slightly uneven, and more or less flattened; surface 
glabrous, densely, coarsely, irregularly ocellate-punctate, irregularly 
scabrous, and ornamented with black or dark brown spots as follows : 
A narrow, longitudinal, median vitta, extending from anterior mar- 
gin to middle, where it is divided into two longitudinal vittae, which 



56 PEOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

extend to, or nearly to, the base, and from two to four round or elon- 
gate spots on each side. Scutellum transverse, broadly rounded at 
apex, and the surface glabrous. 

Elytra two and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
feebly wider than pronotum at middle; humeri rather strongly ele- 
vated; sides nearly parallel from base to near the tips, which are 
separately, rather narrowly rounded ; surface coarsely, densely punc- 
tate, scabrous in basal regions, with a very short, inconspicuous hair 
in the center of each puncture, each elytron ornamented with three 
broad, transverse, zigzag fasciae, one near base, one at middle, and 
the other one at apical fourth. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, sparsely punctate, and clothed with a 
few long, semierect hairs; last segment broadly rounded at apex. 
Prosternum broadly, transversely concave, glabrous, feebly, coarsely 
rugose ; prosternal process rather narrow between the coxal cavities, 
and strongly declivous posteriorly. Legs rather long, glabrous ; fem- 
ora strongly, abruptly clavate, petiolate at bases, and each femur 
armed with a short tooth on underside near the apex ; tibiae slightly 
flattened, and the anterior pair feebly arcuate. 

Female. — Differs from the male in having the antennae only 
slightly longer than the body, pronotum about as wide as long, and 
the surface coarsely, uniformly scabrous. 

Length, 5-10 mm. ; width, 1.4-2.8 mm. 

Type locality. — Santiago de las Vegas, Cuba. 

Type., allotype., and paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43736. 

Paratypes. — In American Museum of Natural History and in S. C. 
Bruner collection. 

Remarks. — Described from eight examples (one type). All these 
examples, labeled " No. 9399," emerged from some specimens of na- 
tive wood sent to the Department of Botany, Estacion Experimental 
Agronomica, at Santiago de las Vegas, Province of Habana, Cuba. 
Two of them were collected September 6 and 17, 1930, by A. Otero, 
and the other six were found dead in the Botanical Department, 
November 29, 1930, by J. Acuiia. 

This species is allied to femoratus Fabricius, but it differs from 
that species in having nearly all the antennal joints black at the tips, 
the pronotum ornamented with black spots (anterior part black in 
femoratus)., tips of the femora black, and each elytron ornamented 
with three transverse, zigzag, black fasciae. 

OPHISTOMIS INSULARIS, new species 

Female. — Elongate, strongly attenuate posteriorly, and subopaque. 
Black, except the underside of head, a transverse spot on upperside 
of head in front of antennae, pronotum, medium third of elytra, 



ART. 22 NEW CEKAMBYCID BEETLES FISHEE 57 

prosternum (except prosternal process and a spot in front of each 
coxa) 5 basal halves of femora, anterior and middle coxae, a transverse 
fascia on first abdominal segment, and the third and fourth abdom- 
inal segments, pale yellow. 

Head elongate, coarsely, densely, irregularly punctate, and densely 
clothed, especially on vertex, with fine, erect, inconspicuous pubes- 
cence, front broadly flattened behind epistoma, deeply, longitudi- 
nally grooved between the antennal tubercles, which are narrowly 
separated and strongly elevated, broadly flattened on vertex, and 
strongly constricted behind the eyes, which are large, strongly con- 
vex, and feebly emarginate. Antenna about one-half as long as 
body, joints cylindrical, and rather densely pubescent. 

Pronotum campanulate, wider at base than long, and twice as 
wide at base as at apex ; sides sinuate, strongly diverging from apex 
to posterior angles, which are prolonged and fitted closely to the 
elytra ; disk moderately convex, and strongly, transversely depressed 
near anterior margin; surface rather densely, feebly punctate, and 
rather densely clothed with long, semierect, yellow hairs. Scutellum 
elongate, acute at apex, and densely clothed with semierect, blackish 
hairs. 

Elytra strongly acuminate, four times as long as pronotum, and 
at base distinctly wider than pronotum; humeri strongly elevated; 
sides strongly, obliquely narrowed from base to the tips, which are 
separately, feebly, obliquely emarginate, with the lateral spine dis- 
tinctly longer than the sutural one; disk broadly flattened, with a 
distinct, broadly rounded costa on each elytron, extending from 
humerus to apex ; surface very densely, finely punctate, and densely 
clothed with long, semierect pubescence, which nearly conceals the 
surface. 

Abdomen beneath sparsely, finely punctate, and clothed with a 
few erect, inconspicuous hairs; last segment triangularly concave 
posteriorh?^, broadly subtruncate at apex, with a distinct tooth on 
each side. Prosternum smooth ; prosternal process very narrow be- 
tween the coxal cavities, and strongly, arcuately declivous pos- 
teriorly. Mesosternum broad, and gibbose between the coxal 
cavities. 

Length, 12 mm. : width, 4 mm. 

Type locality. — Dominica, Leeward Islands. 

ry^oe.— U.S.N.M. No. 43737. Collected by H. W. Foote, on the 
Yale Expedition to Dominica, during June and July, 1913. 

Paratype. — In American Museum of Natural History. Collected 
at Long Ditton, Dominica, British West Indies, June 21, 1911. 

Remarks. — Described from the type and paratype. 



58 PEOCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM VOL, 80 

The paratype differs slightly from the type in having the pos- 
terior coxae, median part of first abdominal segment, and the last 
abdominal segment (except the extreme tip) pale yellow. 

This species is very closely allied to thoradca Fleutiaux and Salle, 
described from Guadeloupe, but it differs from that species in being 
black, with pale yellow markings, pronotum entirely pale yellow, 
without a longitudinal, elevated, median line, scutellum black, and 
the femora black, with the basal halves yellow. This may prove 
to be only a color variety of thoradca^ when more material is avail- 
able for study. 

NEOCLYTUS PALLroiCORNIS. new species 

Female. — Small, elongate, rather robust, subcylindrical, uniformly 
black, except the antennae and tarsi, which are pale reddish yellow; 
elytra ornamented with white pubescent markings. 

Head coarsely, confluently ocellate-punctate, rather densely clothed 
with short, erect, white hairs, front as long as wide, flat between the 
antennal tubercles, which are vaguely elevated; eyes round, rather 
small, feebly emarginate, and moderately convex. Antenna extend- 
ing slightly beyond base of elytra, and the outer joints strongly 
enlarged; first joint long, cylindrical, slightly enlarged toward apex, 
as long as the third and fourth joints united, which are subequal 
in length. 

Pronotum distinctly wider than long, subequal in width at base 
and apex, and widest at middle; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, 
narrowly constricted at base; disk strongly convex, slightly uneven, 
with four strongly elevated, transverse, median ridges, the second 
ridge from anterior margin not quite so distinct as the other ridges ; 
surface densely, finely ocellate-punctate, anterior half sparsely 
clothed with short, recumbent, white hairs, which do not conceal the 
surface, basal half sparsely clothed with fine, erect, inconspicuous, 
black hairs. Scutellum triangular, broadly rounded at apex, and 
sparsely pubescent. 

Elytra two and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
subequal in width to the pronotum at middle ; sides feebly narrowed 
from base to apical fifth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which 
are conjointly, deeply, broadly, arcuately emarginate ; disk strongly 
convex; surface very finely, densely punctate, or granulose, rather 
densely clothed with very short, inconspicuous, black pubescence, 
and each elytron ornamented with short, recumbent, white pubes- 
cence as follows: A narrow fascia extending obliquely backward 
from the humerus to the sutural margin near middle, numerous ir- 
regularly distributed hairs between it and the scutellum, a V-shaped 
fascia at middle near lateral margin, a transverse fascia behind 



ABT. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 59 

middle, connected to a narrow vitta extending backward along the 
sutural margin, and covering the extreme apical part. (Example 
badly rubbed, but punctured area shows pubescent design.) 

Abdomen beneath partially destroyed; last segment broadly 
rounded at apex. Prosternum feebly, coarsely rugose at middle, 
coarsely ocellate-punctate at sides, sparsely clothed with rather 
broad, semierect, white hairs, with a few fine, erect hairs intermixed ; 
prosternal process rather broad, slightly expanded behind the coxal 
cavities, broadly, transversely truncate at apex. Legs robust, 
coarsely scabrous, sparsely clothed with long, stiff, erect, white hairs, 
posterior pair long; femora strongly, abruptly clavate, petiolate at 
bases, middle and posterior pairs bispinose at the tips, and the pos- 
terior pair extending slightly beyond the tips of the elytra; pos- 
terior tibiae long, subcylindrical. 

Length, 9 mm. ; width, 3.2 mm. 

Type locality. — La Vanneau, Haiti. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43738. A unique female collected June 19, 
1915, by W. A. Hoffman. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species resembles araneiformis Olivier, but it differs from 
that species in being entirely black, except the tarsi and antennae, 
which are pale reddish yellow, and in the pronotum having only a 
single median row of elevated ridges. 

NEOCLYTUS PUBICOLLIS. new species 

Small, elongate, subcylindrical, pale reddish brown, except the 
base of the pronotum, basal third of each elytron, mesosternum, and 
metasternum, which are dark brown ; elytra ornamented with whitish 
pubescent markings. 

Head coarsely, densely ocellate-punctate, sparsely clothed with 
semierect, whitish pubescence, front as long as wide, flat between the 
antennal tubercles, which are slightly elevated; eyes round, rather 
small, feebly emarginate, and moderately convex. Antenna extend- 
ing to basal third of elytra, and the outer joints considerably en- 
larged; first joint long, cylindrical, slightly enlarged toward apex, 
twice as long as the third joint, which is distinctly longer than the 
fourth. 

Pronotum distinctly wider than long, subequal in width at base and 
apex, and widest at middle; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, nar- 
rowly constricted at base; disk moderately convex, slightly uneven, 
with four strongly elevated, median ridges, the second ridge from 
the anterior margin divided into two small spots, the other three 
ridges transverse; surface densely granulose, densely clothed with 



60 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM VOL.80 

long, recumbent, yellowish-white pubescence, which conceals the 
surface. Scutellum transverse, broadly rounded at apex, and 
sparsely clothed with fine, black pubescence. 

Elytra two and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
subequal in width to the pronotum at middle; sides slightly nar- 
rowed from base to the tips, which are separately, obliquely truncate, 
bispinose, with the lateral spine much longer than the sutural one; 
disk strongly convex ; surface finely, confluently punctate, the punc- 
tures coarser in basal regions, rather densely clothed with short, semi- 
erect, inconspicuous pubescence, and each elytron ornamented with 
short, recumbent, whitish pubescence as follows: A transverse, more 
or less interrupted, broad fascia at middle, narrowly connected along 
sutural and lateral margins to a straight, broad, transverse fascia 
behind the middle, and a large spot covering the apical sixth. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed with 
long, fine, semierect hairs, with a spot of broader, white hairs at sides 
of basal segments ; last segment broadly subtruncate at apex. Pro- 
sternum finely, feebly rugose, rather densely clothed with short, broad, 
recumbent, white hairs, which are denser at the sides, and with a few 
long, erect, inconspicuous hairs intermixed ; prosternal process rather 
narrow, slightly expanded posteriorly, and truncate at apex. Legs 
robust, feebly rugose, sparsely clothed with short, stiff, semierect, 
black and white hairs ; posterior pair long ; femora strongly, abruptly 
clavate, petiolate at bases, middle and posterior pairs bispinose at 
tips, and the posterior pair extending slightly beyond the tips of the 
elytra; posterior tibiae long, and moderately expanded. 

Length, 7 mm. ; width, 2 mm. 

Tyfe locality. — Guantanamo, Cuba. 

Tyfe. — U.S.N.M. No. 43739. A unique example (sex not de- 
termined), received from S. C. Bruner, and collected June 3, 1916, 
by C. T. Ramsden. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. This species is allied to 
pallidicornis Fisher, but it differs from that species in coloration, 
in the different arrangement of the pubescent markings on the elytra, 
and in having the pronotum densely clothed with recumbent, yellow- 
ish-white pubescence. 

TILLOCLYTUS BRUNERI, new species 

Female. — Small, elongate, feebly shining, moderately convex 
above, except the basal third of elytra, which is slightly depressed. 
Above blue-black, each elytron with a narrow, transverse, whitish 
pubescent fascia in front of middle, which does not extend to the 
sutural margin; beneath dark reddish brown, with the tarsi paler; 
antennae brownish yellow, with the basal joint dark brown. 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCm BEETLES — FISHER 61 

Head vaguely granulose, coarsely, sparsely, feebly punctate, 
clothed with a few long, erect, inconspicuous hairs, front wider than 
long, flat between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated, 
and slightly elevated; eyes small, oblong, rather strongly convex, 
and not emarginate. Antenna slightly shorter than the body (in 
male as long as the body), sparsely clothed with moderately long, 
erect hairs, outer joints slightly flattened; joints 3 to 6 cylindrical, 
and slightly expanded at tips ; first joint long, feebly arcuate, cjdin- 
drical, slightly expanded toward apex, considerably longer than the 
third joint, which is slightly longer than the fourth. 

Pronotum nearly one-half longer than wide, distinctly narrower 
at base than at apex, and widest along apical half; sides nearly 
parallel from apex to middle, arcuately narrowed to basal third, 
where they are strongly constricted, then nearly parallel to the 
base; disk strongly convex anteriorly, strongly, transversely, ab- 
ruptly depressed on basal third; surface sparsely, finely granulose 
anteriorly, smooth posteriorly, and clothed with a few long, fine, 
erect, white hairs. Scutellum very small, elongate, and rather acute 
at apex. 

Elytra one and three-fourths times as long as pronotum, at base 
slightly wider than pronotum at apical third, and widest at apical 
third; sides slightly diverging from base to apical third, then ar- 
cuately narrowed to the tips, which are conjointly, broadly rounded; 
disk strongly convex posteriorly, slightly depressed on basal third; 
surface nearly glabrous, except in the scutellar regions, where it is 
coarsely, densely punctate, sparsely and irregularly clothed with long, 
rather stiff, erect, white hairs. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, sparsely punctate, sparsely clothed with 
short, recumbent, inconspicuous hairs ; last segment broadly rounded 
at apex. Prosternum feebly punctate, feebly, transversely rugose 
anteriorly, and clothed with a few inconspicuous, erect hairs; pro- 
sternal process very narrow between the coxal cavities, strongly ex- 
panded posteriorly, and truncate at apex. Mesosternum and meta- 
sternum with an elongate spot of dense, recumbent, white pubescence 
on each side. Legs rather long, and sparsely clothed with long, erect, 
white hairs ; femora strongly, abruptly clavate toward the tips, petio- 
late at bases ; tibiae long, and subcylindrical. 

Length, 6 mm. ; width, 1.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Sierra Maestra, Cuba. 

Other locality. — Pico Turquino, Cuba. 

Type, allotype, and paratype. — U.S.N.M. No. 43740. 

Paratype. — In S. C. Bruner collection. 

Remarks. — Described from four examples : The type and allotjq^e, 
collected at the type locality, at an altitude of between 1,100 and 1,300 
meters, between July 10 and 20, 1922, by C. H. Ballou and S. C. 



62 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Bruner; and two paratypes, collected at Pico Turquino, Cuba, July 
20, 1922, by the same collectors. 

This species is allied to nivicinctus Chevrolat, but it differs from 
that species in being uniformly bluish black above, and each elytron 
ornamented with a short, transverse, whitish pubescent fascia, which 
does not extend to the sutural margin. 

TILLOCLYTUS MINUTUS, new species 

Female. — Small, elongate, slightly depressed above, nearly gla- 
brous, and subopaque. Above bluish black, each elytron with a 
broad, transverse, white fascia at middle, the fascia arcuately emar- 
ginate in front at sutural margin, and connected posteriorly to a 
yellow vitta extending along the sutural margin to apex; antennae 
and underside of body dark brown, the legs and basal joints of 
antennae slightly paler. 

Head glabrous, rather coarsely, confluently punctate, front wider 
than long, flat between the antennal tubercles, which are widely sep- 
arated, but not elevated; eyes small, oblong, rather strongly convex, 
and not emarginate. Antenna extending to basal third of elytra, 
and the outer joints slightly enlarged; first joint long, feebly arcuate, 
cylindrical, slightly expanded toward apex, and subequal in length 
to the third and fourth joints united; third joint twice as long as the 
fourth, which is distinctly shorter than the fifth. 

Pronotum nearly one-half longer than wide, distinctly narrower 
at base than at apex, and widest near apical third; sides feebly, 
arcuately rounded from apex to behind middle, then strongly nar- 
rowed to the base ; disk rather strongly convex anteriorly, and trans- 
versely depressed on basal third ; surface coarsely, deeply alveolate- 
punctate, and clothed with a few long, erect, stiff, white hairs. 
Scutellum small, elongate, rounded at apex, and slightly pubescent. 

Elytra one and three-fourths times as long as pronotum, and at 
base slightly wider than pronotum at apical third ; sides nearly par- 
allel from base to behind middle, where they are feebly, arcuately 
expanded, then strongly, arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are 
conjointly, broadly rounded ; disk strongly flattened on basal halves, 
strongly convex on apical halves ; surface coarsely, deeply alveolate- 
punctate, with a few long, erect, stiff, white hairs posteriorly, and 
each elytron with a narrow vitta of short, recumbent, whitish hairs 
along the sutural margin near apex. 

Abdomen beneath smooth, shining, and nearly glabrous ; last seg- 
ment broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum very sparsely, feebly, 
coarsely punctate, and nearly glabrous ; prosternal process very nar- 
row between the coxal cavities, strongly expanded posteriorly, and 
truncate at apex. Metasternum and mesosternum with a small spot 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 63 

of dense, recumbent, white pubescence on each side. Legs rather 
long, smooth, and clothed with a few scattered, long, erect, white 
hairs; femora strongly, abruptly clavate toward tips, petiolate at 
bases; tibiae long, and subcylindrical. 

Length, 4.8 mm. ; width, 1 mm. 

Type locality. — Tallaboa, near Ponce, Porto Rico. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. 

Pffm^y/?^.— U.S.N.M. No. 43741. 

ReTTiarks. — Described from two females (one type) received from 
the American Museum of Natural History, which were collected by 
beating and sweeping, at the type locality, July 23, 1914, by H. G. 
Barber. 

This species can be easily separated from nivicinctus Chevrolat 
in having the upper surface bluish black, coarsely alveolate -punctate, 
nearly glabrous, and by the different markings on the elytra. 

TILLOCLYTUS CUBAE, new species 

Small, elongate, slightly depressed above, opaque, and the pro- 
notum pubescent. Above black, each elytron with a rather broad, 
transverse, feebly arcuate, white fascia near middle, the fascia wider 
at lateral margin than at sutural margin, posterior half of elytron 
yellow, the anterior margin of the yellow area extending obliquely 
backward from the white fascia at sutural margin to the lateral 
margin at apical third, inclosing a triangular, black spot behind the 
white fascia; beneath dark reddish brown, tarsi paler, last three 
abdominal segments pale yellow, and basal halves of the middle and 
posterior femora white ; antenna brownish yellow, with the basal and 
two apical joints dark brown. 

Head coarsely, densely ocellate-punctate, and rather densely clothed 
with long, recumbent, whitish p>ubescence, front distinctly wider 
than long, vaguely convex, flat between the antennal tubercles, 
which are widely separated, and slightly elevated; eyes small, ob- 
long, rather strongly convex, and slightly emarginate. Antenna 
slightly longer than the body, joints cylindrical, sparsely clothed 
with long, fine, erect hairs; joints 3 to 6 slightly enlarged at tips; 
first joint robust, cylindrical, feebly, gradually enlarged toward 
apex, slightly longer than the third joint, which is subequal in 
length to the fourth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, subequal in width at base and 
apex, and widest at middle ; sides strongly, arcuately rounded ; disk 
moderately convex, even ; surface densely, coarsely ocellate-punctate, 
and rather densely clothed with very long, fine, semierect, white 
hairs, which partially conceal the surface. Scutellum small, triangu- 
lar, and narrowly truncate at apex. 



64 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Elytra two and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
about as wide as pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base to 
near the tips, which are conjointly, broadly rounded; disk slightly 
flattened above; surface coarsely, confluently punctate, and clothed 
with a few erect, inconspicuous haii*s. 

Abdomen beneath vaguely granulose, sparsely, feebly punctate, 
and sparsely clothed with long, inconspicuous hairs; last segment 
broadly subtruncate at apex. Prosternum sparsely, coarsely punc- 
tate, and clothed with a few inconspicuous hairs ; prosternal process 
very narrow between the coxal cavities, not expanded posteriorly, 
and acute at apex. Legs long, sparsely clothed with long, erect 
hairs. Femora strongly, abruptly clavate toward tips, petiolate 
at bases ; anterior pair short, straight, and the clubs globose ; middle 
and anterior pairs long, arcuate, and the clubs elongate. Tibiae 
long, and subcylindrical. 

Length, 5.6 mm. ; width, 1.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Pinares, Oriente, Cuba. 

Type. — ^U.S.N.M. No. 43742. A unique example (sex not deter- 
mined) collected by William M. Mann. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species differs from the other species of this genus in having 
the pronotum wider than long, uniformly, arcuately rounded at 
the sides, and the antennae distinctly longer than the body. 

PENTANODES ALBOFASCIATUS. new species 

Male. — Small, elongate, slightl}^ depressed above, opaque, except 
basal halves of elytra, which are shining. Head, pronotum, sutural 
regions of elytra, and antennae (except joints 3 to 5, which are yel- 
lowish) reddish; body beneath yellowish, abdomen black, and the 
legs reddish. 

Head finely granulose, sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, 
sparsely clothed with moderately long, recumbent and erect, white 
hairs, front wider than long, even, flat between the antennal tubercles, 
which are widely separated, but not elevated; eyes round, slightly 
convex, and feebly emarginate. Antenna as long as the body, 
clothed with a few long, erect, white hairs, and joints 3 to 5 abnor- 
mally enlarged; first joint rather short, slightly robust, cylindrical, 
not enlarged toward apex, three-fifths as long as the third joint, 
which is strongly arcuate, slender at base, and strongly clavate 
toward apex; fourth joint one-half as long as the third, and globose; 
fifth joint slightly longer than the fourth, and narrowly oblong; 
following joint slender, cylindrical, and gradually diminishing in 
length toward tip of antenna. 

Pronotum one-fourth longer than wide, narrower at base than 
at apex, and widest at middle ; sides feebly, arcuately rounded from 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 65 

apex to basal sixth, where they are slightly constricted, then parallel 
to the base; disk rather strongly convex, vaguely, transversely 
depressed along basal sixth; surface vaguely, finely granulose, 
feebl}', sparsely, irregularly punctate, and sparsely clothed with long, 
erect, white hairs. Scutellum very small, broadly rounded at apex, 
and glabrous. 

Elytra twice as long as pronotum, and at base subequal in width 
to the pronotum at middle ; sides parallel from base to apical third, 
then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, narrowly 
subtruncate, or vaguely emarginate; disk slightly flattened above; 
surface shining, vaguely rugose, and punctate on basal halves, 
opaque, finely, densely punctate, with a few coarse punctures inter- 
mixed on apical halves, and each elytron ornamented with white 
pubescence as follows : A narrow, transverse fascia of dense, long, 
recumbent pubescence in front of middle, the fascia extending from 
lateral margin to sutural margin, in front of fascia are a few long, 
erect hairs, and the apical fourth sparsely clothed with long and 
short erect hairs. 

Abdomen beneath finely, vaguely punctate, and very sparsely, 
irregularly clothed with short, recumbent, inconspicuous pubescence, 
with a few long, erect, white hairs intermixed ; last segment broadly 
subtruncate at apex. Prosternum smooth and nearly glabrous; 
prosternal process very narrow between the coxal cavities, strongly 
expanded posteriorly, and truncate at apex. Legs rather long, 
sparsely clothed with long, erect, white hairs; femora petiolate at 
bases, rather strongly clavate toward tips, the clubs of posterior 
pair more elongate than those of the middle and anterior pairs; 
tibiae long, subcylindrical. 

Length, 5 mm. ; width, 1.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Cardenas, Cuba. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43743. A unique male collected by William 
M. Mann. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species resembles Tilloclytus nivicinctus Chevrolat very 
closely, but it differs from that species in having the pronotum very 
finely granulose, opaque, not abruptly constricted near base, basal 
halves of elytra vaguely punctured, shining, the surface not white 
under the transverse pubescent fascia, and by the male having the 
third, fourth, and fifth antennal joints abnormally expanded. 

CALLICLYTUS, new genus 

Head small, with the front vertical and wider than long. Mandi- 
bles very short, arcuate, and rather acute at apices. Ligula mem- 
branous. Palpi 3-jointed, very short, equal in length, and the apical 
97806—32 5 



66 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

joints triangular. Cheeks very short. Antenna shorter than body 
in both sexes, filiform, not spinose, nor ciliate beneath; first joint 
cylindrical, without a cicatrix at apex, and subequal in length to the 
third joint. Eyes large, finely granulated, and deeply emarginate. 
Pronotum about as long as wide, oval, strongly convex, unarmed at 
sides and on disk. Scutellum small, and triangular. Elytra elong- 
ate, expanded posteriorly, and subtruncate at apices. Abdomen 
globose, the segments unequal in length. Prosternal process rather 
narrow between the coxal cavities, arcuately declivous posteriorly. 
Anterior coxae moderately large, globose, not angulated externally, 
and the cavities closed posteriorly. Intermediate coxal cavities 
closed externally. Legs unequal in length ; tibiae not longitudinally 
carinate; femora petiolate at bases, strongly clavate and unarmed 
at apices; posterior tarsus with the first joint subequal in length to 
the following two joints united. Body slightly pubescent. 

Genotype. — Calliclytus scJiwarzi^ new species. 

This genus belongs to the tribe Tillomorphini and is allied to 
Tillomorpha Blanchard, but it differs from that genus in having 
the antennae distinctly shorter than the body, palpi very short, 
subequal in length, and the apical joints triangular, pronotum as 
wide as long, elytra with eburneous fasciae, and the abdomen globose. 

CALLICLYTUS SCHWARZI, new species 

Male. — Elongate, moderately convex above, strongly shining, red- 
dish brown, except the apical two-thirds of the elytra and abdomen, 
wliich are black, the posterior tibiae and femora brownish black, and 
each elytron ornamented with a transverse, eburneous fascia. 

Head with the front strongly transverse, even, flat between the an- 
tennal tubercles, which are small, very widely separated, and scarcely 
elevated, feebly, densely, coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed with 
moderately long, inconspicuous, erect and recumbent, whitish hairs; 
eyes separated from each other on the top by about five times the 
width of the upper lobe. Antenna (last two apical joints missing) 
distinctly shorter than body, basal joints clothed with a few long, 
erect, rather stiff, white hairs, apical joints rather densely clothed 
with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, the joint feebly expanded 
toward the tips; first joint robust, cylindrical, subequal in length to 
the third joint, which is twice as long as the second; joints 4 and 5 
each subequal in length to the third, and the following joints grad- 
ually diminishing in length. 

Pronotum as wide as long, slightly wider at apex than at base, 
widest at middle; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, narrowly con- 
stricted at base; disk even, uniformly, strongly convex; surface 
coarsely, closely, irregularly, longitudinally rugose, the rugae broken 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 67 

and forming more or less distinct elongate cells, and sparsely 
clothed with short, semierect, inconspicuous pubescence, with numer- 
ous long, erect, white hairs intermixed. Scutellum elongate-triangu- 
lar, glabrous, longitudinally concave, and rounded at apex. 

Elytra twice as long as pronotum, at base slightly narrower than 
pronotum at middle, and widest at apical third ; humeri not strongly 
developed; sides parallel near base, broadly, arcuately constricted 
at middle, broadly, arcuately expanded at apical third, and the tips 
broadly subtruncate ; disk broadly, transversely depressed at middle, 
strongly convex posteriorly, and strongly, broadly elevated along the 
sutural margins at basal fourth; surface densely, coarsely, deeply, 
irregularly punctate, sparsely, irregularly clothed with long, erect, 
white hairs of different lengths, the hairs denser on apical halves, 
and each elytron ornamented in front of middle with a narrow, 
transverse, eburneous fascia, extending from lateral margin to near 
the sutural margin. 

Abdomen beneath very sparsely, irregularly punctate, sparsely 
clothed with long, erect, white hairs, and the posterior margin of 
each segment narrowly yellow; first segment subequal in length to 
the following three segments united; last segment narrow, and 
broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum coarsely, deeply, irregularly 
punctate, and sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, white 
pubescence; prosternal process narrow, strongly expanded behind 
the coxal cavities, and feebly emarginate at apex. Legs sparsely 
clothed with long, erect, white hairs; anterior pair slightly shorter 
than middle and posterior pairs; tibiae straight and cylindrical. 

Length, 5 mm. ; width, 1.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Cayamas, Cuba. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43744. A unique male collected May 10, by 
E. A. Schwarz. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

LAMPROCLYTUS, new genus 

Head small, with the front vertical, and wider than long. 
Mandibles very short, arcuate, and acute at apices. Ligula mem- 
branous. Palpi 3-jointed, very short, subequal in length, the apical 
joints broadly elongate, parallel, and truncate at tips. Cheeks very 
short. Antenna 10-jointed, distinctly shorter than body, filiform, 
gradually expanded toward apex, but not clavate, not spinose, nor 
ciliate beneath; first joint cylindrical, without a cicatrix at apex, and 
longer than the third joint. Eyes large, finely granulated, and 
deeply emarginate. Pronotum longer than wide, strongly convex, 
unarmed at sides and on disk. Scutellum small and triangular. 



68 PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Elytra elongate, nearly parallel, and broadly rounded or subtruncate 
at apices. Abdomen elongate, and the segments unequal in length. 
Prosternal process rather narrow between the coxal cavities, and 
arcuately declivous posteriorly. Anterior coxae moderately large, 
globose, not angulated externally, and the cavities closed posteriorly. 
Intermediate coxal cavities closed externally. Legs unequal in 
length ; tibiae not longitudinally carinate ; femora petiolate at bases, 
strongly clavate and unarmed at apices ; posterior tarsus broad, with 
the first joint scarcely longer than the second. Body vaguely 
pubescent. 

Genotype. — Lamproclytus elegcms, new species. 

This genus belongs to the tribe Tillomorphini and is allied to TiUo- 
niarpha Blanchard, but it differs from that genus in having the an- 
tenna 10-jointed, distinctly shorter than the body, gradually expanded 
toAvard the tip, and the first joint short, palpi very short and sub- 
equal in length, elytra with eburneous fasciae, and the first joint of 
the posterior tarsus distinctly longer than the second joint. 

LAMPROCLYTUS ELEGANS, new species 

Feinale. — Elongate, nearly parallel, moderately convex above, 
strongly shining, black, except basal third of each el3i;ron, basal 
joint of antenna, mesosternum, metasternum, and basal halves of 
femora, which are brownish yellow, and each elytron ornamented 
with a transverse, eburneous fascia. 

Head with the front strongly transverse, even, flat between the an- 
tennal tubercles, which are small, very widely separated, and scarcely 
elevated, coarsely alveolate-punctate, sparsely clothed with moder- 
ately long, semierect, white hairs ; eyes separated from each other on 
the top by four times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna extend- 
ing just beyond base of elytron, basal joints cylindrical, feebly ex- 
panded toward tips, clothed with a few long, erect, white hairs, 
apical joints broader, slightly flattened, rather densely clothed with 
short, recumbent pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed ; 
first joint robust, cylindrical, two and one-half times as long as the 
second joint, which is two-thirds as long as the third; joints 4 and 
5 twice as long as the second; joints 6 and 7 subequal in length to 
the third joint, and subtriangular ; joints 8 and 9 subequal in length 
to the second joint, and as wide as long; tenth joint oval, subequal in 
length to the third, and acute at apex. 

Pronotum distinctly longer than wide, slightly wider at apex than 
at base, and widest at middle; sides strongly, arcuately rounded 
from apex to basal sixth, where they are strongly constricted, then 
parallel to the base; disk even, strongly convex, broadly, feebly, trans- 
versely depressed along apex, and strongly, transversely constricted 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 69 

at base; surface coarsely alveolate-punctate, sparsely clothed with 
long, erect, stiff, white hairs. Scutellum elongate-triangular, and 
sparsely clothed with short, recumbent pubescence. 

Elytra two and one-third times as long as pronotum, and at base 
feebly wider than pronotum at middle; humeri feebly developed; 
sides nearly parallel, feebly, very broadly, arcuately constricted at 
middle, the tips separately, broadly rounded or subtruncate; disk 
feebly, broadly, transversely depressed at middle, and vaguely, 
broadly elevated along sutural margins at basal fourth ; surface very 
coarsely, deeply, densely punctate, clothed with a few long, erect, 
stiff, white hairs, and each elytron ornamented behind the middle 
with a narrow, transverse, eburneous fascia, extending from lateral 
margin to near the sutural margin. 

Abdomen beneath very sparsely, feebly, coarselj^ punctate, and 
clothed wdth a few long, erect, white hairs; last segment broadly 
rounded at apex. Prosternum sparsely, coarsely punctate, feebly, 
transversely rugose, and clothed with a few erect, white hairs; pro- 
sternal process narrow, expanded behind the coxal cavities. Legs 
sparsely clothed with long, erect, stiff, white hairs, and the anterior 
pair slightly shorter than the middle and posterior pairs; tibiae 
straight and subcylindrical. 

Length, 3.8 mm. ; width, 1 mm. 

Type locality. — Bayamon, Porto Rico. 

ry;?£'.— U.S.N.M. No. 43745. A unique female collected by R. C. 
Shannon. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

TRICHROUS VITTATUS, new species 

Broadly elongate, subparallel, subopaque, and slightly flattened 
above. Front of head yellow, antennae and posterior part of head 
black, thorax red, with a distinct orange-yellow tinge, elytra black, 
and each elytron ornamented with a moderately broad, yellowish 
white, longitudinal vitta extending from middle of base to near the 
apex, underside of body yellowish brown, with the tarsi, upper side 
of tibiae, and spot near the tip of each femur, black. 

Head strongly transverse, and nearly flat in front, feebly concave 
between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated and 
feebly elevated, the surface nearly glabrous, sparsely, coarsely, ir- 
regularly punctate, the punctures denser on occiput; eyes large, 
strongly convex, deeply emarginate, and separated from each other 
on the top by three times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna as 
long as the body, rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, black 
pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the basal 
joints; joints 3 to 7 unispinose at apices; first joint rather short, 



70 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

robust, slightly clavate toward apex, five-eighths as long as the third 
joint, which is twice as long as the fourth; eleventh joint subequal in 
length to the tenth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, subequal in width at base and 
apex, and widest at middle; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, 
slightly more obliquely narrowed posteriorly; disk moderately, 
regularly convex ; ' surface glabrous, very coarsely, deeply, conflu- 
ently punctate. Scutellum triangular, rather acutely rounded at 
apex ; surface glabrous and longitudinally concave. 

Elytra three and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
distinctly wider than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base 
to near the tips, which are separately, broadly subtruncate, with a 
distinct, acute tooth at lateral angle ; disk moderately flattened above ; 
surface densely, deeply, uniformly punctate, the punctures coarse in 
basal regions, but becoming slightly finer toward apices, rather 
densely clothed with long, semierect, inconspicuous pubescence, which 
is denser and more conspicuous on the longitudinal pale vittae. 

Abdomen beneath coarsely, vaguely punctate, sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent, white pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs 
intermixed, the pubescence denser toward the sides and along the 
apical margins of the segments; last visible segment broadly sub- 
truncate or vaguely emarginate at apex. Prosternum sparsely, 
coarsely, feebly punctate, and nearly glabrous; prosternal process 
narrow between the coxal cavities, strongly declivous and expanded 
posteriorly, and truncate at apex. Legs long, sparsely clothed with 
semierect hairs ; anterior and middle femora rather strongly clavate 
toward apices, posterior pair feebly expanded; tibiae long and 
subcj^lindrical. 

Length, 9.5 mm.; width, 3 mm. 

Type locality. — Las Animas, Sierra Rangel, Cuba. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43746. A unique example (sex not deter- 
mined) collected by Brother Roberto, of the La Salle School, Habana, 
at Las Animas, Sierra Rangel, in the Province of Pinar del Rio, 
Cuba, during July, 1930, and labeled " Estacion Experimental 
Agronomica, Cuba, No. 9445." 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species is allied to lineolatus White, but it differs from that 
species in having the head yellow in front and black on the top, 
pronotum densely punctured, and the legs not entirely black. 

TRICHROUS BICOLOR. new species 

Fondle. — Broadly elongate, subopaque, moderately flattened above. 
Head, thorax, basal joints of antennae, basal two-thirds of elytra, 
underside of body, and femora, pale reddish brown; tibiae and tarsi 



AET. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 71 

dark reddish brown; antenna, except basal joint, and apical third 
of each elytron, black. 

Head strongly transverse and nearly flat in front, with a narrow, 
median, longitudinal groove, flat between the antennal tubercles, 
which are widely separated and feebly elevated, the surface coarsely, 
deeply, confluently punctate, and clothed with a few long, erect, in- 
conspicuous hairs; eyes large, strongly convex, deeply emarginate, 
and separated from each other on the top by four times the width of 
the upper lobe. Antenna not quite so long as the body, basal joints 
coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed with short, black pubescence, 
with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of the joints, outer 
joints more or less flattened, finely punctate, and densely clothed 
with short, recumbent pubescence; joints 3 to 7 unispinose at apices; 
first joint robust, cylindrical, feebly clavate toward apex, subequal 
in length to the third joint, which is twice as long as the fourth; 
eleventh joint subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum distinctly wider than long, subequal in width at base 
and apex, and widest at middle; sides strongly, arcuately rounded, 
slightly constricted at base and apex; disk regularly, strongly con- 
vex; surface coarsely, deeply alveolate-punctate, with a long, erect 
hair arising from the center of each puncture. Scutellum triangular, 
acutely rounded at apex, the surface longitudinally concave and 
feebly pubescent. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base distinctly 
wider than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base to apical 
fourth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, 
broadly truncate, and unarmed at lateral angle; disk moderately 
convex ; surface coarsely, rather densely, deeply, uniformly punctate, 
and sparsely, uniformly clothed with long, erect, inconspicuous hairs. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, sparsely punctate, sparsely clothed with 
semierect hairs ; last segment broadly rounded at apex. Presternum 
sparsely, feebly, irregularly punctate, clothed with a few erect hairs ; 
prosternal process narrow between the coxal cavities, strongly de- 
clivous and expanded posteriorly, and truncate at apex. Legs long, 
sparsely clothed with semierect hairs; anterior and middle femora 
rather strongly clavate toward apices, posterior pair feebly ex- 
panded; tibiae long and subcylindrical. 

Length, 12 mm. ; width, 4.4 mm. 

Type locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

r?//)e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43747. A unique female, collected in 1899 
by R. J. Crew. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species resembles Heterops dimidiata Chevrolat, but it differs 
from that species in having the femora clavate and unarmed at the 
tips, and joints 3 to 7 of the antennae distinctly spinose at the tips. 



72 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

HETEROPS HISPANIOLAE, new species 

Female. — Broadly elongate, subopaque, and moderately flattened 
above. Head and pronotum dull red, the latter with a median black 
spot; antennae black; elytra brownish black, more reddish on the 
basal halves, and each elytron ornamented with two pairs of elongate, 
eburneous spots ; beneath bright reddish brown, with the tarsi, tibiae, 
and bases of femora, dark reddish brown or blackish. 

Head strongly transverse, somewhat uneven, and transversely de- 
pressed in front, feebly concave and longitudinally grooved between 
the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated and feebly 
elevated, the surface coarsely, irregularly, confluently punctate, more 
or less rugose, and feebly pubescent; eyes large, strongly convex, 
deeply emarginate, and separated from each other on the top by four 
times the width of the upper lobe. Antenna one and one-fourth 
times as long as the body, rather densely clothed with short, recum- 
bent pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs on the underside of 
the basal joints; joints unarmed at apices; first joint robust, cylin- 
drical, moderately clavate toward apex, feebly shorter than the 
third joint, which is subequal in length to the fourth; eleventh joint 
subequal in length to the tenth. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, subequal in width at base and 
apex, and widest at middle; sides feebly, arcuately rounded; disk 
regularly, moderately convex; surface glabrous, coarsely, deeply, 
irregularly alveolate-punctate. Scutellum subtriangular, elongate, 
broadly rounded at apex, and the surface even and rather densely 
pubescent. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base distinctly wider 
than pronotum at middle; sides parallel from base to near the tips, 
which are separately, broadly subtruncate, feebly sinuate, with a 
more or less distinct tooth at lateral angle ; disk moderately convex ; 
surface finely, densely granulose, feebly, irregularly punctate in basal 
regions, densely clothed with short, recumbent pubescence, which 
nearly conceals the surface, and each elytron ornamented with two 
pairs of elongate, eburneous spots, the spots of each pair subequal in 
length, and in close contact along their entire length, the basal pair 
usually longer than the median pair. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, finely, irregularly punctate, and sparsely 
clothed with short, recumbent, inconspicuous pubescence; last seg- 
ment broadly subtruncate at apex. Prosternum broadly, transversely 
depressed in front, coarsely, irregularly rugose, and sparsely clothed 
with short, inconspicuous pubescence ; prosternai process broad be- 
tween the coxal cavities, feebly expanded posteriorly, and abruptly 
declivous at apex. Legs long, nearly glabrous; femora slender, 



AET. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCro BEETLES FISHER 73 

cylindrical, middle and posterior pairs bispinose at the tips; tibiae 
long cylindrical, but not longitudinally carinate. 

Male. — Differs from the female in having the antennae nearly twice 
as long as the body, and the prosternum deeply, coarsely, uniformly 
punctate. 

Length, 10-15 mm. ; width, 3.2-4.8 mm. 

Type locality. — Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. 

Other localities. — Sanchez, Dominican Republic; Port au Prince, 
Haiti. 

Type, allotype., and paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43748. 

Paratypes. — In American Museum of Natural History and in Mu- 
seum of Comparative Zoology. 

Remarks. — Described from 8 examples, 4 males and 4 females : The 
type (female) and allotype, collected at the type locality, June 22 
and July 6, 1907, by H. H. Keays ; one paratype, collected at Port au 
Prince, Haiti, in 1899, by R. J. Crew; one paratype, simply labeled 
" Port-au-Prince, Haiti " ; three paratypes, received from the Ameri- 
can Museum of Natural History, collected at Sanchez, Dominican 
Republic, between May 22 and June 22, 1915, by F. E. Watson ; and 
one paratype, received from the Museum of Comparative Zoology, 
simply labeled " Haiti, P. R. Uhler." 

This species shows considerable variation in size and color. In 
some of the examples examined the pronotum and elytra are almost 
entirely black, whereas in other examples the black color on the 
pronotum is reduced to a small spot in front of the scutellum. 

It is closely allied to lani-eri Chevrolat, with which it is confused 
in most collections, but differs from lanierl in having the posterior 
pair of eburneous spots on each elytron elongate, subequal in length, 
and in close contact along their entire length, whereas in lanieri these 
spots are rounded, distinctly separated, and the sutural spot of each 
median pair placed slightly in advance of the lateral spot. 

Subfamily Lamiinae 

ATAXIA HAITIENSIS, new species 

Female. — Elongate, parallel, brownish black, rather densely 
clothed with brownish-yellow pubescence, which partially conceals 
the surface, and irregularly variegated with whitish pubescence. 

Head in front strongly transverse, nearly flat, feebly, transversely 
depressed between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated 
and rather strongly elevated, finely, densely punctate, densely 
clothed with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow and whitish pu- 
bescence intermixed ; eyes moderately convex, deeply emarginate, and 
widely separated from each other on the top. Antenna about as long 



74 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

as the body, densely clothed with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow 
and whitish pubescence intermixed, with numerous long, erect, white 
hairs on the underside of the joints; outer joints annulated with 
white pubescence at bases; first joint robust, oblong, truncate at 
apex, with a distinct cicatrix, and three-fourths as long as the third 
joint, which is slightly shorter than the fourth, the following joints 
gradually diminishing in length. 

Pronotum about as wide as long, subequal in width at base and 
apex, and widest at apical third; sides arcuately rounded in front 
of middle, obliquely narrowed posteriorly, with an obsolete tubercle 
on each side at apical third ; disk moderately convex ; surface finely, 
densely punctate, with a few coarse punctures intermixed, densely 
clothed with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow pubescence, with a 
few short, white hairs intermixed, and ornamented with a narrow, 
longitudinal, median, white pubescent vitta, extending from anterior 
margin to base. Scutellum triangular, and broadly rounded at apex. 

Elytra nearly four times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly 
wider than pronotum at apical third; humeral angles broadly 
rounded ; sides nearly parallel from base to apical fifth, then feebly 
narrowed to the tips, which are separately, broadly, obliquely trun- 
cate, with the lateral angle rather acutely produced ; disk moderately 
convex, and each elytron with a vague, longitudinal costa near 
sutural margin; surface sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, 
densely clothed with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow and whitish 
pubescence, the white hairs more numerous on median parts, causing 
the surface to have a variegated appearance. 

Abdomen beneath vaguely, finely punctate, densely clothed with 
short, recumbent, brownish-yellow and whitish pubescence with a 
few long, inconspicuous, erect hairs intermixed ; last segment broadly 
subtruncate at the tip, with a broad, concave depression at the apex. 
Prosternum moderately declivous in front, narrow between the coxal 
cavities, arcuately declivous, and broadly, triangularly expanded 
posteriorly. Mesosternum obliquely declivous in front, and feebly 
elevated between the middle coxal cavities. Legs rather short, 
densely clothed with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow and whitish 
pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed ; femora strongly 
clavate toward the tips, the posterior pair not quite extending to 
third abdominal segment; tibiae subcylindrical, the posterior pair 
feebly arcuate. 

Length, 13 mm. ; width, 3.6 mm. 

Tyfe locality, — Hinche, Haiti. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43749. A unique female collected May 
20, 1925, by W. A. Hoffmann. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 



ART. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 75 

This species is allied to spinicauda Schaeffer, but it differs from 
that species in having the pronotiim ornamented with a longitudinal, 
median, white, pubescent vitta, and the tips of the elytra not acutely 
spinose at their outer angles. 

ACREProOPTERUM PILOSUM, new species 

Elongate, rather narrow, and subparallel ; above and beneath red- 
dish brown, rather densely clothed with brownish-yellow pubescence, 
with a few paler hairs intermixed, and the elytra ornamented with 
dark-brown pubescent markings. 

Head in front nearly twice as wide as long, slightly convex, 
broadly concave between the antennal tubercles, which are widely 
separated and strongly elevated, coarsely, sparsely, irregularly punc- 
tate, densely clothed with long, recumbent, brownish-yellow pubes- 
cence, with numerous long, erect, hairs intermixed; eyes small, 
coarsely granulated, deeply emarginate, and separated from each 
other on the top by one and one-half times the width of the upper 
lobe. Antenna slightly longer than the body, pale yellow, joints 
slightly darker at apices, sparsely clothed with short, recumbent and 
erect, whitish pubescence, and moderately ciliate beneath; first joint 
robust, short, oblong, without a cicatrix at apex, slightly longer 
than the third joint, which is distinctly shorter than the fourth, the 
following joints gradually diminishing in length. 

Pronotum feebly wider than long, subequal in width at base and 
apex, and widest at middle; sides arcuately rounded; disk even, 
moderately convex; surface rather densely, coarsely punctate, with 
a small, smooth, glabrous, medium spot, rather densely clothed with 
short, recumbent, brownish-yellow and whitish pubescence, with a 
few long, erect, hairs intermixed. Scutellum as wide as long, tri- 
angular, narrowly rounded at apex, densely clothed with pale yellow 
pubescence, except the middle, which is glabrous. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base slightly 
wider than pronotum at middle; sides nearly parallel to behind 
middle, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, 
narrowly rounded; disk feebly, broadly, transversely concave in 
front of middle, with a feebly elevated gibbosity on each elytron near 
the base; surface rather densely, irregularly punctate, the punctures 
coarse on basal halves, but becoming finer and more distant toward 
the apices, densely clothed with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow 
and whitish pubescence, with numerous long, erect hairs inter- 
mixed, and each elytron ornamented with dark brown pubes- 
cence as follows: A short, narrow, oblique fascia behind humerus, 
extending from basal gibbosity to sutural margin, a very broad, 
oblique fascia at middle, extending from sutural margin to the 



76 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

exterior elytral declivity, and a few small spots along the sutural 
margin at apical fourth. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate, with a few coarse 
punctures intermixed, densely clothed with short, recumbent, yel- 
lowish-white pubescence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed; 
last segment broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum very coarsely, 
sj)arsely punctate; prosternal process narrow, arcuately declivous in 
front and behind, and triangularly expanded behind the coxae. 
Legs rather long, densely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish 
pubescence, and with numerous long, erect hairs intermixed ; femora 
strongly clavate toward the tips; tibiae subcylindrical, slightly 
enlarged toward the tips. 

Length, 4.2 mm. ; with, 1.4 mm. 

Type locality. — San Cristobal, Dominican Republic. 

Type. — U. S. N. M. No. 43750. A unique example (sex not de- 
termined) collected at Blanton mine, north of San Cristobal, Domin- 
ican Republic, July 26, 1917 (No. 376), by Harold Morrison. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species is closely allied to tiiinutum Fisher, but it differs from 
that species in having the legs and upper surface of the body clothed 
with long, erect hairs, and in the different arrangement of the dark- 
brown pubescent markings on the elytra. 

ECYRUS INSULARIS, new species 

Male. — Elongate, robust, strongly convex above, uniformly 
brownish black, densely clothed with whitish and brownish pubes- 
cense, which conceals the surface, giving it a mottled appearance, 
the pronotum ornamented with two elongate, yellow, pubescent 
spots, and each elytron with four tufts of erect hairs, and two yellow 
pubescent vittae. 

Head in front longer than wide, slightly wider at bottom than at 
top, flat, strongly, angularly depressed between the antennal tuber- 
cles, which are narrowly separated and strongly elevated, densely 
clothed with rather short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, which 
conceals jthe surface, and with a longitudinal carina extending from 
epistoma to occiput; eyes coarsely granulated, deeply emarginate, 
and nearly contiguous on the top. Antenna considerably longer than 
body, tips of the joints annulated with brown, surface rather densely 
clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, except the first 
joint, which is mottled with brown pubescence, and all the joints 
densely ciliate beneath; first joint robust, short, reversed cone-shaped, 
one-half as long as the fourth joint, which is distincjtly longer than 
the third; fifth joint subequal in length to the first joint, the follow- 
ing joints shorter, and gradually diminishing in length. 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 77 

Pronotum feebly wider than long, subequal in widjth at base and 
apex ; sides parallel and rather strongly sinuate ; disk uneven, trans- 
versely flattened along base and apex, and armed with two acute 
tubercles, placed transversely at middle; surface concealed by the 
short, dense, recumbent, white and dark brown pubescence, and 
ornamented with a large, elongate, pale yellow, pubescent spot on 
each side of middle, extending from anterior margin to basal third. 
Scutellum transversely subtriangular, and broadly subtruncate at 
apex. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base one-third 
wider than pronotum at middle; sides gradually narrowed from 
base to apical fourth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which 
are separately, transversely truncate; disk uneven, and each elytron 
with three longitudinal costae; surface coarsely punctate, the punc- 
tures arranged in double rows between the costae, densely clothed 
with short, recumbent, whitish, yellowish, and dark brown pubescence 
intermixed, with a few long, erect, white hairs, and each elytron 
ornamented with four tufts of long, erect hairs, three placed longi- 
tudinally near middle, the other one near humerus, and the two me- 
dian costae densely clothed posteriorly with pale yellow pubescence. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate, and densely clothed 
with long, recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence; last segment 
broadly rounded at apex. Prosternum arcuately declivous in front 
and behind, and rather narrow between the coxal cavities. Legs 
rather short, mottled with short, recumbent, whitish and brownish 
pubescence, with numerous long, erect, white hairs intermixed; 
femora strongly clavate toward tips ; tibiae slender, straight, and 
subcylindrical. 

Length, 6-10 mm. ; width, 2.6-4 mm. 

Type locality. — Baragua, Cuba. 

Other locality. — " Central Jaronu," Cuba. 

Tyfe and paratype. — U.S.N.M. No. 43751. 

Paratype. — In S. C. Bruner collection. 

Remarks. — Described from three males: The type, collected at 
light. May 6, 1928, by L. C. Scaramuzza, labeled " T. P. R. F. Ent. 
No. 3418 " ; and two paratypes, from " Central Jaronu," north coast 
of Camaguey Province, Cuba, collected May 8, 1926, and June 20, 
1926, by B. T. Barreto. 

This species is closely allied to hirtipes Gahan, but it differs from 
that species in having two distinct yellow pubescent spots on the 
pronotum, four tufts of erect hairs and two narrow yellow pubescent 
vittae on each elytron, the punctures on the elytra much coarser, 
and without small, black asperities on the pronotum. 



78 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

ECYRUS HOFFMANNI, new species 

Male. — Elongate, robust, strongly convex above, uniformly red- 
dish brown, densely clothed with whitish, brownish, and yellowish 
pubescence, which nearly conceals the surface, and each elytron orna- 
mented with a tuft of brown hairs near the base. 

Head in front longer than wide, subequal in width at bottom and 
top, flat, strongly, angularly depressed between the antennal tuber- 
cles, which are narrowly separated and strongly elevated, sparsely, 
coarsely punctate, densely clothed with rather short, recumbent, 
whitish pubescence, which nearly conceals the surface, and with a 
longitudinal carina extending from occiput to middle of front ; eyes 
coarsely granulated, deeply emarginate, and very narrowly separated 
from each other on the top. Antenna longer than the body (broken) , 
tips of the joints feebly annulated with brown, surface rather densely 
clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, except the first 
joint, which is clothed with whitish and brownish pubescence, and 
all the joints densely ciliate beneath; first joint robust, short, 
reversed cone-shaped, one-half as long as the fourth joint, which is 
distinctly longer than the third; fifth joint subequal in length to the 
first joint, the following joints shorter, and gradually diminishing 
in length. 

Pronotum as wide as long, and subequal in width at base and apex ; 
sides parallel, and rather strongly sinuate ; disk uneven, transversely 
flattened along base and apex, transversely grooved at basal fourth, 
and armed with two acute tubercles placed transversely in front of 
middle; surface sparsely, coarsely punctate, rather densely clothed 
with moderately long, recumbent, whitish pubescence, which nearly 
conceals the surface, and ornamented with pale yellow pubescence 
around the tubercles. Scutellum subtriangular, broadly rounded at 
apex, and broadly, deeply concave at base. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base one-third wider 
than pronotum at middle; sides feebly, gradually narrowed from 
base to apical fourth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are 
separately, feebly, obliquely truncate ; disk uneven, and each elytron 
with three longitudinal costae; surface coarsely, deeply punctate, 
the punctures widely separated from each other, and arranged in 
double rows between the costae, densely clothed with short, recum- 
bent, whitish, yellowish, and brownish pubescence, the white pubes- 
cence forming a broad, obsolete, transverse fascia at middle, bordered 
anteriorly by a narrow, oblique fascia of dark brown pubescence, 
with numerous irregular spaces of pale yellow pubescence, and each 
elytron ornamented near base with a large tuft of dark brown hairs. 
Abdomen beneath feebly, finely, rather sparsely punctate, densely 
clothed with long, recumbent, whitish pubescence, with a few long, 



ART. 22 jS^EW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 79 

erect hairs intermixed; last segment broadly subtruncate at apex. 
Prosternum arcuately declivous in front and behind, rather broad 
and longitudinally concave between the coxal cavities. Legs short, 
densely clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence ; 
femora strongly clavate toward tips; tibiae slender, straight, and 
subcylindrical. 

Length, 8 mm. ; width, 3.6 mm. 

Type locality. — Hinche, Haiti. 

Type.— U.S. N.M. No. 43752. A unique male collected May 17, 
1925, by W. A. Hoffmann. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species is allied to hirtipes Gahan and insularis Fisher. 
From the former it differs in not having any asperities on the 
pronotum, and from insularis in having only one tuft of erect hairs 
on each elytron near the base. 

ECYRUS NANUS, new species 

Female. — Rather short, robust, strongly convex above, uniformly 
reddish brown, densely clothed with whitish, brownish, and yellow- 
ish pubescence, which nearly conceals the surface, and each elytron 
ornamented with a rather inconspicuous tuft of erect hairs near the 
base. 

Head in front about as wide as long, slightly wider at bottom than 
at top, flat, strongly, angularly depressed between the antennal 
tubercles, which are narrowly separated and strongly elevated, 
sparsely, coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, 
yellowish-white pubescence, and with a longitudinal carina extending 
from occiput to middle of front; eyes coarsely granulated, deeply 
emarginate, and nearly contiguous on the top. Antenna about as 
long as the body, uniformly pale reddish brown, sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, except the first joint, which 
is mottled with brown pubescence, and all the joints densely ciliate 
beneath; first joint robust, short, reversed cone-shaped, one-half as 
long as the fourth joint, which is distinctly longer than the third; 
fifth joint subequal in length to the first joint, the following joints 
shorter, and gradually diminishing in length. 

Pronotum as wide as long, and subequal in width at base and apex ; 
sides parallel, and rather strongly sinuate ; disk uneven, transversely 
flattened along base and apex, feebly, transversely grooved at basal 
fourth, and armed with two obtuse tubercles, placed transversely at 
middle ; surface with numerous small, black asperities, rather densely, 
irregularly clothed with whitish and brownish-yellow pubescence, 
the pubescence with a vague greenish tinge in certain lights. 

* Scutellum transversely subtriangular, broadly subtruncate at apex, 

t and vaguely concave at base. 



80 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Elytra three times as long as pronotiim, and at base one-half wider 
than pronotum at middle; sides nearly parallel from base to apical 
third, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, 
feebly, obliquely truncate ; disk uneven, and each elytron with three 
longitudinal costae; surface coarsely, deeply punctate, the punctures 
widely separated from each other, and arranged in double rows 
between the costae, densely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish, 
yellowish, and brownish pubescence, with a vague greenish tinge in 
certain lights, the white pubescence forming a broad, obsolete, 
obliquely transverse fascia at middle, bordered anteriorly by a 
narrow, oblique fascia of dark brown pubescence, with numerous 
irregular spaces of pale yellow pubescence, and each elytron orna- 
mented near base with a tuft of pale brownish hairs. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate, densely clothed with 
long, recumbent, whitish pubescence, with a few long, erect, white 
hairs intermixed; last segment broadly rounded at apex. Pro- 
sternum arcuately declivous in front and behind, rather narrow and 
densely pubescent between the coxal cavities. Legs short, densely 
clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence ; femora 
feebly arcuate, and strongly clavate toward tips; tibiae slender, 
straight, and subcylindrical. 

Length, 6 mm. ; width, 2.8 mm. 

Type locality. — Boqueron, Porto Rico. 

Other locality. — Mayaguez, Porto Rico. 

Tijfe. — In American Museum of Natural History. Female, col- 
lected February 18, 1930, by C. W. Leng. 

P<zra%/?e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43753. Female, collected at Mayaguez, 
Porto Rico, by R. H. Van Zwaluwenburg. 

Remarks. — Described from type and paratype. 

This species is closely allied to hoffmanni Fisher, but it differs 
from that species in being shorter, and in the pronotum having 
numerous small round, black asperities. 

ECYRUS FLAVUS, new species 

Female. — Elongate, robust, strongly convex above, uniformly pale 
reddish brown, rather densely clothed with short whitish and yellow- 
ish pubescence, which partially conceals the surface, and each elytron 
ornamented with a large tuft of long, erect, brownish-yellow hairs 
near base, and an indistinct tuft of similar hairs behind the middle. 

Head in front about as wide as long, wider at bottom than at top, 
flat, strongly, angularly depressed between the antennal tubercles, 
which are narrowly separated and strongly elevated, sparsely, 
coarsely punctate, sparsely clothed with rather short, recumbent, 
yellowish-white pubescence, and with a longitudinal carina extending 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES^ FISHER 81 

from occiput to middle of front; eyes coarsely granulated, deeply 
emarginate, and very narrowlj'^ separated from each other on the 
top. Antenna as long as the body, uniformly pale reddish brown, 
sparsely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence, and all 
the joints densely ciliate beneath; first joint robust, short, reversed 
cone shaped, one-half as long as the fourth joint, which is distinctly 
longer than the third; fifth joint subequal in length to the first, the 
following joints shorter and gradually diminishing in length. 

Pronotum slightly wider than long, and subequal in width at base 
and apex: sides parallel, and rather strongly sinuate; disk uneven, 
transversely flattened along base and apex, feebly, transversely 
grooved at basal fourth, and armed with two acute tubercles placed 
transversely slightly in front of middle; surface with numerous 
small asperities, rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, brown- 
ish-white pubescence. Scutellum subtriangular, and broadly sub- 
truncate at apex. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, and at base one-third wider 
than pronotum at middle; sides nearly parallel from base to apical 
third, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, 
transversely truncate; disk uneven, each elytron with three longi- 
tudinal costae; surface coarsely, deeply punctate, the punctures 
widely separated from each other, and arranged in double rows be- 
tween the costae, rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, whit- 
ish and yellowish pubescence, and each elytron ornamented with 
a narrow, inconspicuous, obliquely transverse fascia of dark brown 
pubescence in front of middle, a large tuft of brownish-yellow hairs 
near base, and an inconspicuous tuft of similar hairs behind the 
middle. 

Abdomen beneath densely clothed with long, recumbent, whitish 
pubescence, which conceals the surface, and with a few long, erect 
hairs intermixed; last segment broadly rounded at apex. Proster- 
num arcuately declivous in front and behind, rather broad and 
densely pubescent between the coxal cavities. Legs short, densely 
clothed with long, recumbent and erect, whitish pubescence; femora 
feebly arcuate, and strongly clavate toward tips; tibiae slender, 
straight, and subcylindrical. 

Length, 8.5 mm. ; width, 3.8 mm. 

Type locality. — Mayaguez, Porto Rico. 

Type. — In American Museum of Natural History. A unique 
female collected August 12, 1925, by R. H. Van Zwaluwenburg. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species is allied to in^ularis Fisher, but it differs from that 
species in being pale reddish brown, with numerous small, round 
97806--32 6 



82 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

asperities on the pronotum, but without very conspicuous pubescent 
markings on the elytra. 

DORCASTA GRACILIS, new species 

Elongate, very narrow, subcylindrical, and similar in form to 
Eippopsis leTTiniscatus Fabricius. Above and beneath brownish 
black, feebly shining, and the upper surface ornamented with 
longitudinal, yellowish-white pubescent vittae. 

Head in front very long, and inflexed, feebly convex, antennal 
tubercles approximate at base, and moderately elevated, surface 
rather densely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, rather densely 
clothed with moderately long, recumbent, whitish pubescence, with 
a few long, erect, black setae intermixed, and ornamented on each 
side behind the eyes with two obsolete, longitudinal, pale yellow, 
pubescent vittae; eyes very small, round, and feebly emarginate. 
Antenna as long as the body, robust, uniformly black, densely 
clothed with short, recumbent pubescence, and rather densely clothed 
beneath with very long, erect, black hairs; first joint cylindrical, 
subequal in length to the fourth joint, which is slightly longer than 
the third, the following joints gradually diminishing in length. 

Pronotum cylindrical, slightly longer than wide, and subequal 
in width at base and apex; sides parallel; disk strongly convex; 
surface coarsely, rather densely, deeply punctate, sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent, inconspicuous pubescence, with numerous 
long, erect, black setae, and ornamented on each side with two 
narrow, longitudinal, pale yellow pubescent vittae. Scutellum 
small, triangular, and broadly rounded at apex. 

Elytra four times as long as pronotum, widest at apical fourth, 
and at base subequal in width to the pronotum; sides feebly di- 
verging from base to apical fourth, then arcuately narrowed to the 
tips which are conjointly, very deeply, arcuately emarginate, forming 
a long, acute tooth at lateral angle of each elytron; disk strongly 
convex; surface vaguely rugose, coarsely, deeply punctate, the 
punctures arranged in rows and distinctly separated, sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent, inconspicuous pubescence, with numerous 
long, erect, black setae, and each elytron ornamented with two 
narrow, longitudinal, pale yellow pubescent vittae, alternating with 
two similar vittae of sparsely placed, whitish hairs. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate, or granulose, and 
rather densely clothed with long, recumbent, whitish pubescence; 
last segment broadly subtruncate at apex. Prosternum coarsely, 
densely punctate, sparsely clothed with recumbent, whitish pubes- 



ABT. 22 NEW CEKAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 83 

cence; prosternal process rather narrow, and strongly, triangu- 
larly expanded behind the coxae. Legs very short; femora robust. 

Length, 5.6-8 nun.; width, 1-1.4 mm. 

Type locality. — Fourgu, Haiti. 

Other locality. — Diquini, Haiti. 

Type and paratype. — U.S.N.M. No. 43754. 

Paratypes. — In Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

Remarks. — Described from six examples (sexes not determined). 
The type, collected March 12, 1930, by H. L. Dozier ; and five para- 
types, received from the Museum of Comparative Zoology, collected 
at Diquini, Haiti, by William M. Mann. 

This species resembles Hippopsis lemniscatus Fabricius very 
closely, but it differs from that species in having the antennae 
robust, not longer than the body, and the upper surface of the body 
clothed with numerous long, erect, black setae. 

LEPTOSTYLUS MILLERI, new species 

Strongly robust, and moderately convex above, uniformly dark 
reddish brown above, slightly paler beneath, rather densely clothed 
with greenish yellow, scalelike pubescence, and mottled with darker 
and paler areas; mandibles black; palpi dark brown, with the tips 
paler. 

Head quadrate in front of the antennal tubercles, narrower at 
top than at bottom, feebly convex, deeply, angularly depressed be- 
tween the antennal tubercles, which are not very widely separated, 
but strongly elevated, finely, densely punctate, rather densely, 
irregularly clothed with short, recumbent, yellowish pubescence, giv- 
ing the surface a mottled appearance, and with a narrow, longi- 
tudinal groove extending from the epistoma to occiput; eyes small, 
rather coarsely granulated, deeply emarginate, and separated from 
each other on the top by twice the width of the upper lobe. Antenna 
slightly longer than the body, mottled with whitish and brownish 
pubescence, the joints annulated with dark brown at their bases 
and apices; first joint slender, subcylindrical, gradually expanded 
toward the apex, extending to middle of pronotum, and subequal 
in length to the third joint, which is slightly longer than the fourth. 

Pronotum three-fourths wider than long, subequal in width at 
base and apex, and widest at middle; sides nearly parallel, feebly 
constricted near base and apex, and arcuately tumid on each side 
at middle; disk uneven, narrowly, transversely depressed near base 
and apex, and with seven obtusely rounded tubercles, arranged trans- 
versely in two rows, the five median ones strongly elevated, of which 
the two anterior ones are the largest; surface coarsely, irregularly 
punctate, with a distinct row of deeper punctures in the basal and 
apical depressions, rather densely clothed with recumbent, brownish 



84 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

and yellowish pubescence, giving the surface a mottled appearance, 
the pubescence with a greenish tinge in certain lights. Scutellum 
broadly triangular, and broadly rounded at apex. 

Elytra four times as long as pronotum, and slightly wider than 
pronotum at middle ; humeri strongly developed and elevated ; sides 
nearly parallel from base to apical third, then strongly, arcuately 
narrowed to the tips, which are separately, narrowly, obliquely 
truncate; disk uneven, broadly, feebly depressed at basal third, with 
numerous irregularly distributed tubercles, those on the basal 
regions more strongly developed; surface coarsely, rather densely, 
irregularly punctate, the punctures becoming finer and more obso- 
lete toward the apices, rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, 
pale yellow pubescence, variegated with brownish pubescence, but 
not forming distinct designs, except for an obsolete, narrow, trans- 
verse, zigzag, white fascia on each elytron behind the middle, and 
the tubercles clothed with dark brown hairs. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, finely, densely punctate, and rather 
densely clothed with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence; last seg- 
ment elongate, strongly attenuate posteriorly, and arcuately emargi- 
nate at apex. Prosternum feebly, arcuately elevated between the 
coxae; prosternal process about two-thirds as wide as the coxal 
cavities. Legs mottled with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence; 
femora feebly arcuate, and strongly, abruptly clavate toward the 
apices ; tibiae subcylindrical. 

Length, 8 mm. ; width, 3.6 mm. 

Type locality. — ^Rio San Juan, Dominican Republic. 

Type. — U.S.N.M. No. 43755. A unique example (sex not deter- 
mined) collected in March, 1928, by G. S. Miller, jr. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. This species resembles 
crhtatvs Fisher, but it differs from that species in having the tips 
of the elytra obliquely truncate, without a basal crest on each elytron, 
and by the different pubescent markings. 

LEIOPUS INFUSCATUS, new species 

Elongate, subparallel, and rather strongly flattened above, uni- 
formly brownish yellow, densely clothed with brownish- white, scale- 
like pubescence, and ornamented with dark-brown pubescent mark- 
ings; mandibles reddish, with the tips black; palpi brown, with the 

tips yellow. 

Head quadrate in front of antennal tubercles, subequal in width at 
top and bottom, feebly convex, rather deeply, triangularly depressed 
between the antennal tubercles, which are rather widely separated 
and strongly elevated, finely, densely punctate, densely clothed with 
short, recumbent, brownish and whitish pubescence, giving the sur- 
face a mottled appearance, and with a narrow, longitudinal groove 



ART. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 85 

extending from the epistoma to occiput ; eyes small, not very coarsely 
granulated, deeply emarginate, and separated from each other on 
the top by one and one-half times the width of the upper lobe. An- 
tenna about one and one-half times as long as the body, first four 
joints mottled with whitish and brownish pubescence, the following 
joints clothed with whitish pubescence, and annulated with brown 
at their bases and tips; first joint moderately robust, subcylindrical, 
gradually expanded toward apex, extending to basal third of pro- 
notum, and slightly shorter than the fourth joint, which is feebly 
shorter than the third. 

Pronotum nearly twice as wide as long, subequal in width at base 
and apex, and widest at basal third ; sides obliquely expanded from 
apex to basal third, where they are obtusely angulated, then nar- 
rowly, strongly, abruptly constricted; disk even, and feebly, nar- 
rowly, transversely depressed along the base and apex; surface 
sparsely, irregularly punctate, with a row of more distinct punctures 
in the basal and apical depressions, densely clothed with short, recum- 
bent, brownish-yellow and whitish-yellow pubescence, which conceals 
the surface, and ornamented with dark brown pubescent spots as 
follows : Two small, round spots arranged transversely in front of 
middle, and a short, longitudinal vitta in front of scutellum. Scutel- 
lum broadly triangular, broadly rounded at apex, and clothed with 
dark brown pubescence. 

'Elytra, four times as long as pronotum, and distinctly wider than 
pronotum at basal third; humeri strongly developed and elevated; 
sides nearly parallel from base to apical third, then strongly arc- 
uately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, narrowly, obliquely 
truncate; disk slightly uneven, with numerous irregularly arranged 
asperities; surface rather coarsely, densely punctate, densely clothed 
with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow and whitish pubescence, 
which nearly conceals the surface, and each elytron ornamented with 
dark brown pubescent markings as follows : A more or less distinct 
vitta extending along the sutural margin from scutellum to apical 
third, then obliquely outward to the lateral margin at apical fourth 
(the oblique part more obsolete), a large broad spot extending along 
lateral margin from humerus to middle, and with small, round spots 
on the asperities. 

Abdomen beneath feebly, finely, densely punctate, rather densely 
clothed with moderately short, recumbent, whitish pubescence; last 
segment strongly attenuate posteriorly, and feebly, arcuately emargi- 
nate at apex. Prosternum nearly flat between the coxae ; prosternal 
process about one-third as wide as the coxal cavities. Legs mottled 
with whitish and yellowish pubescence; femora feebly arcuate, and 
strongly, abruptly clavate toward the tips ; tibiae subcylindrical, and 
darker toward the tips. 



86 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Length, 5.6 mm. ; width, 2.2 mm. 

Type locality. — Samana, Dominican Republic. 

Other locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

Type and paratypes. — U.S.N.M. No. 43756. 

Remarks. — Described from three examples (sexes not determined) : 
The type and one paratype, collected at the type locality, March 11, 
1928, by G. S. Miller, jr.; and one paratype, collected at Port au 
Prince, Haiti, in 1899, by R. J. Crew. 

This species is very closely allied to variabilis Fisher, described 
from Cuba, but it differs from that species in being more brownish 
in color, the pubescence on the elytra sparser and shorter, and the 
brown pubescent markings more distinct. 

The pubescent markings on the three examples examined show a 
slight variation ; on one of the paratypes the brown vitta is confined 
to the sutural margins, whereas in the other paratype it is reduced 
to a small spot on each elytron at apical third. 

LEIOPUS DOZIERI, new species 

Shorter and more strongly convex above than poeyi Fisher, uni- 
formly dark reddish brown, densely clothed with brownish-yellow 
pubescence, and mottled with whitish and blackish areas ; mandibles 
black ; palpi dark brown, with the tips paler. 

Head quadrate in front of antennal tubercles, feebly narrower at 
top than at bottom, flat, broadly concave between the antennal tuber- 
cles, which are widely separated and slightly elevated, finely, densely 
punctate, densely clothed with moderately long, recumbent, brownish- 
white pubescence, which conceals the surface; eyes small, not very 
coarsely granulated, deeply emarginate, and separated from each 
other on the top by twice the width of the upper lobe. Antenna 
nearly one and one-half times as long as the body, first five joints 
mottled with whitish and brownish pubescence, the following joints 
clothed with whitish pubescence, and annulated with brown at their 
bases and apices; first joint slender, subcylindrical, gradually 
expanded toward the apex, extending to basal third of pronotum, 
and subequal in length to the fourth joint, which is slightly shorter 
than the third. 

Pronotum nearly twice as wide as long, subequal in width at base 
and apex, and widest just behind the middle; sides vaguely con- 
stricted at apex, obliquely expanded from apex to behind middle, 
then narrowly, strongly, abruptly constricted; disk rather even, 
feebly, narrowly, transversely depressed along apex and base; sur- 
face sparsely, irregularly punctate, densely clothed with short, re- 
cumbent, whitish and brownish-yellow pubescence, which conceals 
the surface, and ornamented with dark brown pubescent markings as 



AKT. 22 NEW CEEAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 87 

follows : Three small spots along apical margin, a short, longitudinal 
vitta in front of scutellum, and a large spot on each side at basal 
constriction. Scutellum broadly triangular, and broadly rounded 
at apex. 

Elytra four times as long as pronotum, and slightly wider than 
pronotum at middle; humeri moderately developed and feebly ele- 
vated ; sides nearly parallel from base to apical third, then strongly, 
arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are separately, narrowly 
rounded, or vaguely, obliquely subtruncate; disk uneven, feebly, 
obliquely depressed at basal third, longitudinally depressed along 
sutural margins behind middle, and with numerous irregularly dis- 
tributed tubercles; surface rather densely, finely punctate, densely 
clothed with short, recumbent, brownish-yellow and whitish pubes- 
cence, which conceals the surface, and each elytron ornamented with 
a more or less conspicuous, irregular, whitish pubescent spot near 
middle, and with numerous, irregularly distributed, black pubescent 
markings on the tubercles and behind the middle. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate, densely clothed with 
moderately long, recumbent, whitish pubescence; last segment 
strongly attenuate posteriorly, and broadly subtruncate, or feebly, 
arcuately emarginate at apex. Prosternum nearly flat between the 
coxae; prosternal process about one-third as wide as the coxal cav- 
ities. Legs mottled with whitish and brownish pubescence; femora 
feebly arcuate, and strongly, abruptly clavate toward the tips ; tibiae 
subcylindrical, and each annulated with brown pubescence near 
middle and at apex. 

Length, 6.5 mm.; width, 2.8 mm. 

Type locality. — Port au Prince, Haiti. 

Other locality. — Cape Haitien, Haiti. 

ry;>e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43757. Collected at light, March 25, 1930, 
by H. L. Dozier. 

Paratype. — In Museum of Comparative Zoology. Collected at 
Cape Haitien, Haiti, by William M. Mann. 

Remarks. — Described from the type and paratype (sexes not deter- 
mined). 

This species resembles variabilis Fisher, but it differs from that 
species in being shorter and more robust, and without a dark brown 
pubescent spot on each side of the elytra behind the humerus. 

PROBATIUS UNICOLOR, new species 

Female. — Broadly elongate, and moderately convex above, uni- 
formly reddish brown, and sparsely, irregularly clothed with whit- 
ish pubescence, which has a tendency to form vague, narrow vittae 



88 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

toward the side of each elytron; mandibles black, more reddish 
toward bases ; palpi brownish yellow. 

Head quadrate in front of antennal tubercles, subequal in width 
at top and bottom, feebly convex, broadly but not deeply depressed 
between the antennal tubercles, which are widely separated and 
strongly elevated, finely, densely punctate, rather densely clothed 
with long, recumbent, whitish pubescence, which nearly conceals 
the surface, and with a narrow, longitudinal groove extending from 
epistoma to occiput; eyes large, deeply emarginate, and separated 
from each other on the top by one and one-half times the width of 
the upper lobe. Antenna slightly longer than the body (eleventh 
joint missing), rather densely clothed with short, recumbent, whit- 
ish pubescence, with a few long, erect, stiff black hairs intermixed, 
the joints annulated at bases with denser, white pubescence; first 
joint slender, subcylindrical, feebly expanded toward apex, extend- 
ing nearly to base of pronotum, subequal in length to the third joint, 
which is slightly longer than the fourth. 

Pronotum twice as wide as long, subequal in width at base and 
apex, and widest at middle; sides nearly parallel, feebly sinuate, 
and with a large, obtuse tubercle on each side just behind the middle; 
disk moderately convex, rather even, and rather broadly, transversely 
depressed along base; surface feebly, finely, densely punctate, with 
a row of coarse punctures along basal depression, and rather densely, 
irregularly clothed with moderately long, recumbent, whitish pubes- 
cence. Scutellum broadly triangular, broadly rounded at apex, and 
rather densely pubescent. 

Elytra four and one-half times as long as pronotum, and at base 
slightly wider than pronotum at middle ; humeri rather strongly de- 
veloped; sides parallel to just behind the middle, then arcuately 
narrowed to the tips, which are conjointly, deeply, arcuately emar- 
ginate, and acutely produced at lateral margin of each elytron ; disk 
strongly convex, and each elytron vaguely gibbose near base; sur- 
face coarsely, deeply, irregularly punctate, the punctures dense in 
basal regions, but becoming sparser toward apices, sparsely clothed 
with short, recumbent, whitish pubescence (forming inconspicuous 
narrow, longitudinal vittae toward the sides), and with numerous 
long, erect, black setae intermixed. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate, and rather densely 
clothed with long, recumbent, white pubescence, which nearly con- 
ceals the surface; last segment broadly, but not deeply, arcuately 
emarginate at apex. Prosternal process three-fourths as wide as 
coxal cavities, and strongly, arcuately declivous in front and behind. 
Mesosternum broadly triangular between the coxae, abruptly, arcu- 



AST. 22 NEW CERAMBYCID BEETLES FISHER 89 

ately declivous in front, and broadly subtrnncate posteriorly. 
Femora feebly arcuate, and strongly clavate toward apices. 

Length, 8.5 mm. ; width, 4.4 mm. 

Type locality. — Furcy, Haiti. 

ry;?^.— U.S.N.M. No. 43758. Female, collected by William M. 
Mann. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species is allied to umbraticus Jacquelin-Duval, but it differs 
from that species in being rather uniformly clothed with whitish 
pubescence, but not forming distinct markings. 

CALOCOSMUS MAGNIFICUS, new sp«cies 

Female. — Elongate, robust, subparallel, above and beneath orange- 
yellow, except tips of mandibles, antennae, small spot on head, three 
small spots on pronotum, scutellum, humerus and three spots on each 
elytron, sides of metasternum and mesosternum, small spot on each 
side of apical segments of the abdomen, tibiae, and part of the tarsi, 
which are black. 

Head in front strongly transverse, flat between the antennal tuber- 
cles, which are very widely separated and feebly elevated, sparsely, 
coarsely, irregularly punctate, densely clothed with a fine, scalelike, 
orange-yellow pubescence, with a few long, erect, black hairs inter- 
mixed, and with a narrow longitudinal groove extending from epis- 
toma to occiput; eyes large, finely granulated, nearly divided, and 
separated from each other on the top by six times the width of the 
upper lobe. Antenna not quite so long as the body, rather robust, 
uniformly black, densely clothed with short, recumbent, black pubes- 
cence, with a few long, erect hairs intermixed; first joint robust, 
gradually expanded toward apex, subequal in length to the fourth 
joint, which is two-thirds as long as the third, the following joints 
gradually diminishing in length. 

Pronotum nearly one-half wider than long, slightly narrower at 
base than at apex, widest at middle; sides nearly parallel, strongly 
sinuate, obtusely tumid at middle; disk strongly convex, feebly, 
transversely depressed along base, vaguely tumid in front of scu- 
tellum; surface sparsely, coarsely, irregularly punctate, densely 
clothed with minute, scalelike, orange-yellow pubescence, with a few 
long, erect, inconspicuous, black hairs intermixed, and ornamented 
with three small, black spots, one at middle and one on each side near 
the lateral callosity. Scutellum transversely triangular, broadly 
rounded at apex. 

Elytra three times as long as pronotum, widest at base, distinctly 
wider than pronotum at middle; humeri strongly developed; sides 
strongly deflexed anteriorly, feebly narrowed from base to apical 



90 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

fourth, then arcuately narrowed to the tips, which are conjointly, 
broadly rounded; disk moderately convex, feebly uneven on basal 
third; surface finely, sparsely punctate on basal two-thirds, densely 
clothed with minute, scalelike, orange-yellow pubescence (except on 
the dark spot, where the pubescence is black, and the spots obsoletely 
bordered by whitish scalelike pubescence), with a few inconspicuous, 
erect, black hairs intermixed, and each elytron ornamented with 
black markings as follows : A small spot at humerus, a small, irregu- 
lar, transverse spot at basal third, a rather broad, irregular, trans- 
verse fascia behind the middle, the fascia extending from lateral 
margin to near the sutural margin, and strongly constricted at middle 
and a narrow spot along apical margin. 

Abdomen beneath finely, densely punctate, densely clothed with 
short, recumbent, whitish pubescence; last segment broadly rounded 
and feebly, angularly emarginate at apex. Prosternum arcuately 
declivous in front and behind, and narrow between the coxal cavities. 
Legs rather long; femora robust, subcylindrical, slightly flattened; 
tibiae slender, slightly enlarged toward the apices. 

Length, 13.5 mm.; width, 5.2 mm. 

Type locality. — Labeled " Valley Riviere Froide, Haiti." 

ry;?^.— U.S.N.M. No. 43759. A unique female collected April 20, 
1925, by W. A. Hoffmann. 

Remarks. — Described from the type. 

This species is allied to venustus Chevrolat, but it differs from that 
species in having the pronotum ornamented with three black spots, 
each elytron with three black spots and a transverse, constricted, 
black fascia behind the middle, and the upper surface of the body 
densely clothed with minute, scalelike pubescence. 



INDEX 



[Valid names appear in Roman type, synonyms in italic, and the generic names 
associated with species names are given in parentheses] 



Acrepidopterum Fisher, 75. 
minutum Fisher, 76. 
pilosum, new species, 75. 
albofasciatus, new species (Penta- 

uodes), 64. 
albomaculatum Champlain and KnuU 

(Elaphidion), 30, 33, 35. 
antillarum, new species (Elaphidion), 

42. 
araneiformis Olivier (Neoclytus), 59. 
asperatus, new species (Merostenus), 

52, 53. 
Ataxia Haldeman, 73. 

haitieusis, new species, 73. 
spinicauda Scliaeffer, 75. 
atratus, new species (Monodesmus), 3. 
attenuatus Chevrolat (Merostenus), 
52, 53, 54. 

bahamicae, new species (Eburia), 11. 
Batocera Castelnau, 3. 

rubus Linnaeus, 3. 
bicolor, new species (Trichrous), 70. 
bidens Fabricius (Elaphidion), 22. 
bidens Fabricius (Stenocorus), 22. 
Mdens Newman (Elaphidion), 45. 
Mspinosus Gmelin (Cerambyx), 22 
Brittonella, new genus, 7. 

chardoni, new species, 8, 
bruneri, new species (Tilloclytus), 60. 

Calliclytus, new genus, 65. 
schwarzi, new species, 66. 

callidioides Serville (Monodesmus), 4. 

Calocosmus Chevrolat, 89. 

magnificus, new species, 89. 
venustus Chevrolat, 90. 

cayamae, new species (Elaphidion), 
24. 

Cerambycinae, 4. 

Cerambyx Linnaeus, 22. 
bispinosus Gmelin, 22. 

chardoni, new species (Brittonella), 8. 

cinereopilosa, new species (Eburia), 
13. 

compressipenne, new species (Ela- 
phidion), 35. 

confusum, new species (Elaphidion), 
32. 

conspersum Newman (Elaphidion), 
22. 

9780&— 32 



costatus Montrouzier (Xixuthrus), 2. 
costipenne, new species (Elaphidion), 

39. 
cristatus Fisher (Leptostylus), 84. 
cubae, new species (Eburia), 16. 
cubae, new species (Elaphidion), 27. 
cubae, new species (Tilloclytus), 63. 
Cylindera Newman, 49. 

fasciata, new species, 49. 

flava Fabricius, 50, 52. 

glabra, new species, 51. 

puucticollis, new species, 50. 

decemmaculata Fabricius (Eburia), 
19. 

dimidiata Chevrolat (Heterops), 71. 

domiugoensis, new species (Xixuth- 
rus), 1. 

Dorcasta Pascoe, 82. 

gracilis, new species, 82. 

dozieri, new species (Elaphidion), 38, 
43, 45. 

dozieri, new species (Leiopus), 86. 

Eburia Serville, 9. 

babamica, new species, 11. 

cinereopilosa, new species, 13. 

cubae, new species, 16. 

decemmaculata Fabricius, 19. 

elongata, new species, 18. 

longicornis, new species, 9. 

portoricensis, new species, 15. 

ramsdeni, new species, 14. 

stigma Olivier, 11, 12. 

tetrastalacta White, 14, 16. 
Ecyrus LeConte, 76. 

flavus, new species, 80. 

hirtipes Gahan, 77, 79. 

hoffmanni, new species, 78, 80. 

insularis, new species, 76, 79, 81. 

nanus, new species, 79. 
Elaphidion Serville, 19. 

albomaculatum Champlain and 
Knull, 30, 33, 35. 

antillarum, new species, 42. 

bidens Fabricius, 22. 

bidens Newman, 45. 

cayamae, new species, 24. 

compressipenne, new species, 35. 

confusum, new species, 32. 

conspersum Newman, 22. 

01 



92 



PEOCEEDIlSrGS OF THE ISTATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



Elaphidion costipenne, new species, 39. 

cubae, new species, 27. 

dozieri, new species, 38, 43, 45. 

fasciatum, new species, 28. 

gracilis, new species, 43. 

guttiventre Chievrolat, 25, 30, 32. 

liispaniolae, new species, 30. 

incertum Newman, 23. 

inerme Newman, 28, 36. 

insulare Newman, 40. 

irroratum Linnaeus, 22. 

jamaicensis, new species, 40. 

manni, new species, 21. 

mucronatum Say, 40. 

mutatum Galian, 36, 38. 

nanum Fabricius, 27, 28. 

newmani Haldeman, 45. 

pilosum, new species, 36. 

portoricensis, new species, 33. 

rotundipenne, new species, 23. 

spinicorne Drury, 19, 21. 

splendidum, new species, 19, 32, 
33. 

transversum White, 30. 

tuberculicolle. new species, 25. 

villosum Fabricius, 24, 39. 
elegans, new species (Lamproclytus), 

68. 
elongata, new species (Eburia), 18. 
elongatus, new species (Merostenus), 
54. 

fasciata, new species (Cylindera), 49. 
fasciatum, new species (Elaphidion), 

28. 
femoratus Fabricius (Pentomacrus), 

flava Fabricius (Cylindera), 50, 52. 
flavus, new species (Ecyrus), 80. 
fulgens, new species (Heterachtes), 

glabra, new species (Cylindera), 51. 
gracilis, new species (Dorcasta), 82. 
gracilis, new species (Elaphidion), 43. 
guttiventre Chevrolat (Elaphidion). 
25, 30, 32. 

haitiensis, new species (Ataxia), 73. 
Hesperophanes Mulsant, 8. 
Hesperophanini, 8. 
Heterachtes Newman, 48. 

fulgens, new species, 48. 
Heterops Blanchard, 72. 

dimidiata Chevrolat, 71. 

hispaniolae, new species, 72. 

lanieri Chevrolat, 73. 
Hlppopsis Serville, 82. 

lemniscatus Fabricius, 82, 83. 
hirtlpes Gahan (Ecyrus), 77, 79. 
hispaniolae, new species (Elaphidion), 

30. 
hispaniolae, new species (Heterops), 

72. 
hoffmanni, new species (Ecyrus), 78, 
80. 



incertum Newman (Elaphidion), 23. 
inerme Newman (Elaphidion), 28, 36. 
infuscatus, new species (Leiopus), 84. 
insulana Gahan (Stizocera), 48. 
insulare Newman (Elaphidion), 40. 
insulare White (Protosphaerion), 46. 
insularis, new species (Ecyrus), 76, 

79, 81. 
insularis, new species (Ophistomis), 

56. 
irroratum Linnaeus (Elaphidion), 22. 

jamaicensis, new species (Elaphidion). 
40. 



Lamiinae, 73. 

Lamproclytus, new genus, 67. 

elegans, new species, 68. 
lanieri Chevrolat (Heterops), 73. 
Leiopus Serville, 84. 

dozieri, new species, 86. 

infuscatus, new species, 84. 

variabilis Fisher, 86, 87. 
lemniscatus Fabricius (Hippopsis), 82, 

83. 
Leptostylus LeConte, 83. 

cristatus Fisher, 84. 

milleri, new species, 83. 
lineolatus White (Trichrous), 70. 
longicornis, new species (Eburia), 9. 

magniflcus, new species (Calocosmus), 

89. 
manni, new species (Elaphidion), 21. 
Merostenus White, 52. 

asperatus, new species, 52, 53. 

attenuatus Chevrolat, 52, 53, 54. 

elongatus, new species, 54. 

similis, new species, 53. 
Methia Newman, 6. 

necydalea Fabricius, 7. 

pallida, new species, 6. 
milleri, new species (Leptostylus). 83. 
minutum Fisher (Acrepidopterum), 

76. 
minutus, new species (Tilloclytus), 62. 
Monodesmus Serville, 3. 

atratus, new species, 3. 

callidioides Serville, 4. 
mucronatum Say (Elaphidion), 40. 
mutatum Gahan (Elaphidion), 36, 38. 

nanum Fabricius (Elaphidion), 27, 28. 
nanus, new species (Ecyrus), 79. 
necydalea Fabricius (Methia), 7. 
Neoclytus Thomson, 58. 

araneiformis Olivier, 59. 

pallidicornis, new species, 58, 60. 

pubicollis, new species, 59. 
newmani Haldeman (Elaphidion), 45. 
nivicinctus Chevrolat (Tilloclytus), 
62, 63, 65. 

Oeme Newman, 4. 
Gemini, 4. 



ART. 22 



INDEX 



93 



Ophistomis Thomson, 56. 

insiilaris. new species. 56. 
thoracica Fleutiaux and Sall6, 58. 

pallida, new species (Methia), 6. 
pallidicornis, new species ( Needy tus), 

58, 60. 
Peutanodes Schaeffer, 64. 

albofasciatus, new species, 64. 
Pentomaerus White, 55. 

femora tus Fabricius, 56. 
punctatus, new species. 55. 
pilosum, new species (Acrepidop- 

terum), 75. 
pilo.sum, new species (Elaphidion), 

36. 
poeyi Fisher (Leiopus), 86. 
poolei, new species (Pseudoeme), 4, 5. 
portoricensis, new species (Eburia), 

15. 
portoricensis, new species (Elaphid- 
ion), 33. 
Priouinae, 1. 
Probatius Thomson, 87. 

umbraticus Jacquelin-Duval, 89. 
unicolor, new species, 87. 
Protosphaerion Gounelle, 45. 
insulare White, 46. 
testaceum, new species, 45. 
Pseudoeme, new genus. 4. 

poolei, new species, 4, 5. 
pubicoUis, new species (Neoclytus), 

59. 
punctatus, new species (Pentomaerus), 

55. 
puncticollis, new species (Cylindera), 
50. 

ramsdeni, new species (Eburia), 14. 
rotundipenne, new species (Elaphid- 
ion), 23. 
rubus Linnaeus (Batocera), 3. 

schwarzi, new species (Calliclytus), 

66. 
simills, new species (Merostenus), 53. 
spiuicauda Schaeffer (Ataxia), 75. 



spinicorne Drury (Elaphidion), 19, 21. 
splendidum, new species (Elaphidion), 

19, 32, 33. 
Stenocorus Fabricius, 22. 

bidens Fabricius, 22. 
stigma Olivier (Eburia), 11, 12. 
Stizocera Serville, 46. 

insulana Gahan, 48. 

vanzwaluwenburgi, new species, 
46. 

testaceum. new species (Protosphae- 

I'ion), 45. 
tetrastalacta White (Eburia), 14, 16. 
thoracica Fleutiaux and Salle (Oph- 
istomis), 58. 
Tilloclytus Bates, 60. 

bruueri, new species, 60. 

cubae, new species, 63. 

minutus. new species, 62. 

nivicinctus Chevrolat, 62, 63, 65. 
Tillomorpha Blauchard, 66, 68. 
Tillomorphini, 66, 68. 
transversum W^hite (Elaphidion), 30. 
Trichrous Chevrolat, 69. 

bicolor, new species, 70. 

lineolatus White, 70. 

vittatus, new species, 69. 
tuberculicolle, new species (Elaphid- 
ion), 25. 

umbraticus Jacquelin-Duval (Pro- 

batius), 89. 
unicolor, new species (Probatius), 87. 

vanzwaluwenburgi, new species (Sti- 
zocera), 46. 

variabilis Fisher (Leiopus), 86, 87. 

venustus Chevrolat (Calocosmus), 90. 

villosum Fabricius (Elaphidion), 24, 
39. 

vittatus, new species (Trichrous), 69. 

Xixuthri, 3. 
Xixuthrus Thomson, 1. 

costatus Montrouzier, 2. 

domingoensis, new species, 1. 



o 



REVISION OF THE NEARCTIC ICHNEUMON-FLIES 
BELONGING TO THE GENUS MACROCENTRUS 



By C. F. W. MuESEBECK 

Senior Entomologist, Bureau of Entomology, United States Department of 

Agriculture 



During the past several years species of the braconid genus 
Macrocentrus Curtis have been rather abundantly reared from the 
larvae of certain injurious Lepidoptera, especially from the intro- 
duced oriental fruit moth {Laspeyresia molesta Busck) and the Euro- 
pean corn borer {Pyrausta nubilalis Hiibner). The numerous re- 
quests for identification of specimens of Maci'ocentrus that have come 
to the taxonomic unit of the Bureau of Entomology, combined with 
the difficulties in making such identifications owing to the unworked 
condition of the group, resulted in a demand for a revision of the 
species occurring in the United States and Canada, Accordingly, I 
was requested to undertake a study of Macrocentms^ the results of 
which, presented in this paper, represent a joint contribution from the 
division of forest insects (gipsy moth and brown-tail moth investiga- 
tions) and the taxonomic unit of the Bureau of Entomology. 

For the opportunity of examining material in their custody I am 
indebted to Dr. E. T. Cresson, jr., of the Philadelphia Academy of 
Natural Sciences; to C. W. Johnson, of the Boston Society of Nat- 
ural History; and Dr. W. E. Britton, of the Connecticut Agricul- 
tural Experiment Station. I wish also to acknowledge my appre- 
ciation of helpful suggestions given by A. B. Gahan and R. A. 
Cushman, of the taxonomic staff of the Bureau of Entomology. 
Finally, I am indebted to C. W. Collins, in charge of the gipsy 
moth and brown-tail moth investigations of the division of forest 
insects, and to Dr. Harold Morrison, in charge of the taxonomic 
unit, whose cooperation has made the study possible. 

Although, as noted above, certain material in other institutions 
has been examined, the present revision is based primarily on the 
collections of Macrocentrus in the United States National Museum, 
which consist in large part of specimens reared in the Bureau of 
Entomology in the course of studies relating to the life history and 

No. 2923.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum. Vol. 80, Art. 23. 

98306—32 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

control of various injurious species of Lepidoptera. The types of 
most of the previously described species of Macrocentrus have been 
examined. I have not, however, seen the type of nigHdorsis Viereck, 
which is in the Canadian National Collection at Ottawa; that of 
iridescens French, the location of which is unknown to me ; or those 
of the four species described by Provancher, namely, unifonnis, 
pectoralis, mellipes, and longicornis, which are in the Museum of 
Public Instruction at Quebec, although notes made several years 
ago by S. A. Rohwer on the types of the Provancher species have 
aided materially in the identification of some of these. It has been 
found impossible to identify nigrido7'si8, iridescens, and pectoralis 
with certainty, but the apparent position and relationships of each 
of these will be discussed. 

Owing to the little taxonomic attention that has been given this 
genus in recent years, it has become necessary to describe 20 new 
species in connection with this revision. The types of 19 of these are 
in the United States National Museum, while that of one species is 
in the collection of the Boston Society of Natural History. 

Family BRACONIDAE 
Subfamily Macrocentrinae 
Genus MACROCENTRUS Curtis 

Macrocentrus Cubtis, Ent. Mag., vol. 1, p. 187, 1833. (Genotype, Macrocentrus 
bicolor Curtis= Macrocentrus thoracicus (Nees).) 

Amicroplus Foebste31, Verb, naturh. Ver. preuss. Rheinlands, vol. 19, p. 256, 
1862. (Genotype, Rogas collaris (Spinola) Nees.) 

Fhogra Cameron, Trans. New Zealand Inst., vol. 33, p. 104, 1901. (Genotype, 
Fhogra ruhromaculata Cameron.) (New synonymy.) 

DoUchozele Viereck, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 40, p. 182, 1911. (Genotype, 
DoUchozele koebelei Viereck.) (New synonymy.) 

Metapleurodon Endebuein, Arch. Naturg., vol. 84A, pt. 11. p. 213, 1920. (Geno- 
type, Metaplourodon ceylonicus Enderlein.) (New synonymy.) 

Paniscozele Enderlein, Arch. Naturg., vol. 84A, pt. 11, p. 214, 1920. (Geno- 
type, Paniscozele sumatrana Enderlein.) (New synonymy.) 

Most workers in the Braconidae have recognized the close relation- 
ship between M acrocentr'us and Zele, and since the publication of 
Foerster's classification ^ in 1862 the two genera have constituted the 
basis of a distinct major division of the Braconidae. Ashmead ^ 
divided his subfamily Macrocentrinae, which corresponds to the 
Macrocentroidae of Foerster and the Macrocentrides of Marshall,^ 
into two tribes, the Macrocentrini and the Zelini, with Macrocen- 
trus and Zele, respectively, the typical genera. And although they 

»Verh. naturh. Ver. preuss. Rheinlands, vol. 19, p. 256, 1862. 
» Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 23, p. 118, 1900. 
' Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1885, p. 10. 



ABT. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 

are obviously closely related, the two groups exhibit well-defined dif- 
ferences, which under some systems of classification may be consid- 
ered of tribal value. Macrocentrus has the occiput entirely immar- 
gined, eyes not at all emarginate, first segment of flagellum nearly 
always much longer than the scape, pronotum medially above flat 
and always without anteriorly converging keels, the insertion of the 
abdomen entirely above the upper level of the insertion of the pos- 
terior coxae, the medius always more or less curved backward near 
the middle, trochanters usually armed with short teeth at apex on 
the outer side, longer calcarium of posterior tibia rarely more than 
half as long as basitarsus, and the ovipositor usually long. Zele, on 
the other hand, has the occiput distinctly margined, eyes slightly 
emarginate, first flagellar segment usually no longer than scape, the 
dorsum of pronotum always with two prominent keels medially that 
converge anteriorly and set off a small triangular area just in front 
of the prescutum, the insertion of the abdomen not completely above 
the upper level of the insertion of hind coxae, medius straight, not 
at all curved backward near the middle, trochanters always without 
the apical teeth usually found in Macrocentrus, longer calcarium of 
posterior tibia always more than half as long as basitarsus, and the 
ovipositor always very short. 

In addition to Macrocentrus Ashmead included in his tribe Macro- 
centrini the following genera : Dicranoneura Kriechbaumer, which 
was proposed for an African species and apparently does not occur 
in North America; Microtypus Ratzeburg, which is more closely 
related to the Blacinae than to the Macrocentrinae and should be 
definitely excluded from the latter group ;^ Amicoplidea Ashmead, 
based upon Phylax fdlliv&ntris Provancher, which appears from the 
original description, and from notes made by S. A. Rohwer on an 
examination of the type in 1915, to be an exothecine rather than a 
macrocentrine ; and Amicroplus Foerster, which, as indicated by 
Lyle,"^ must be synonymized with Macrocentrus. 

In 1920 Enderlein erected Paniscozele for a group of seven new 
species from the Oriental, Ethiopian, and Neotropical regions. 
Viereck in 1911, however, had proposed Dolichozele for a South 
American species, which is clearly congeneric. Several years ago 
I had the opportunity of examining the genotype of Pofniscozele, 
which is in the Pomeranian Museum of Natural History at Stettin, 
and a comparison of my notes on P. sumatrana Enderlein with the 
genotype of Dolichozele, which is in the United States National 
Museum, has shown conclusively that Paniscozele must be sup- 

* Szepligeti, Ann. Mus. Nat. Hungarlci, vol. 6, p. 426, 1908, has proposed the subfamily 
Microtypinae for this genus. 

^ Entomologist, vol. 47, p. 257, 1914. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

pressed as a synonym of DoUchozele. And the latter name, in my 
opinion, must in turn fall as a synonym of Macrocenti^us. Apart 
from the very short ovipositor, the long calcaria of the posterior 
tibiae, and the long acute metapleural tooth, Dolichozele does not 
differ from normal Maci'ocentrus^ and these differences are appar- 
ently only comparative. Paniscozele atreitarsis, one of Enderlein's 
originally included species, was described as havin,g an ovipositor 
nearly as long as the body; while the metapleural tooth, though 
usually less prominent and acute, occurs in nearly all species of 
Macrocentnis, and the long tibial calcaria are found in some. Accord- 
ingly, since it has seemed impossible to distinguish clearly between 
Dolichozele and Macrocemtrus^ I have placed the former, and its 
synonym Paniscozele^ in synonymy under Macrocentrus. 

I have also seen the type of Fhogra i^romaculata Cameron, 
which is in the British Museum, and that of Metapleurodon ceyloni- 
eus Enderlein, which is in the Pomeranian Museum of Natural His- 
tory, the genotypic species, respectively, of Fhogra Cameron and 
Meta'pl&ufrodon. Enderlein. In my opinion both belong in 
Macrocentrus. 

Apparently all species of Macroceivtrus are internal parasites of 
lepidopterous larvae, and at least in most cases the host larvae live 
more or less concealed, principally as leaf rollers or as borers. Most 
of the species seem to be solitary parasites, but some are gregarious, 
and in the case of the latter type it has been frequently observed that 
all adults obtained from a single gi'oup of cocoons are usually of one 
sex. This naturally has suggested the probable occurrence of poly- 
embryony, and recently Parker ^ has shown that this method of repro- 
duction does occur in Macrocentrus gifuensis Ashmead, a gregarious 
parasite of the European corn borer {Pyrausta nuhilalis Hiibner). 
No doubt it is common to many species of the genus. 

Species of MacTOcentrus appear to be rather less specific in host 
selection than those of many other groups of Braconidae, and the 
same host species may be attacked by several different forms. Four 
species of Maci^ocenti^us^ for example, are known to parasitize the 
larvae of La^^'peyvesia inolesta Busck, the introduced oriental fruit 
moth ; while 9 different host species have been recorded for M. ancyli- 
voinis and 12 for M. delicatus. A list of the hosts of Macrocenti^ns 
recorded in this paper is given on pages 53-54. 

Owing to the extent of variation occurring within species, it has 
seemed desirable to make the key rather full and to give detailed 
descriptions of the species. 

« U. S. Dept. Agr. Tech. Bull. 230, 63 pp., Illus., 1931. 



ABT. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTEUS — MUESEBECK O 

KEY TO THE NBABC11C SPECIES OF MACROCHNTBUS ' 

1. Maxillary palpi short, not distinctly longer than height of head ; 

labial palpi very short, shorter than the face, even the apical 
segment but little longer than thick ; antennae 24 to 40 seg- 
mented ; head always black ; small species, normally measur- 
ing 3 to 4.5 mm. in length 2 

Maxillary palpi u.sually much longer than height of head; very 
rarely not distinctly so, but then head is not black ; labial 
palpi rarely shorter than face, the apical segment usually 
three or more times as long as thick ; antennae normally 
40 to 60 segmented 5 

2. Second intercubitus lacking ; nervellus inclivous, much longer 

than lower abscissa of basella, the latter hardly one-fourth 
as long as mediella ; antennae 24 to 30 segmented ; ovipositor 
sheaths a little longer than abdomen, but much shorter than 
body ; thorax and abdomen mostly piceous or blackish, with 

prothorax and mesothorax paler 1. incompletus, new species 

Second intercubitus distinct though often hyaline ; nervellus at 
least no longer than lower abscissa of basella, the latter less 
than one-third mediella ; antennae usually 30 to 40 segmented ; 
ovipositor sheaths at least as long as the body 3 

3. Legs short and rather stout ; anterior basitarsus not distinctly 

half as long as anterior tibia ; apical segment of anterior 
tarsus as long as the second ; longer calcarium of posterior 
tibia half as long as basitarsus; antennae distinctly shorter 
than the body, second flagellar segment only twice as long as 

thick; thorax and abdomen black 2. crassipes, new sijecies 

Legs very slender ; anterior basitarsus more than half as long as 
anterior tibia ; apical segment of anterior tarsus much shorter 
than the second ; longer calcarium of posterior tibia much less 
than half as long as basitarsus; antennae longer than the 
body, second flagellar segment more than three times as long 
as thick; thorax and abdomen usually more or les.s yellowish 4 

4. Eyes small ; cheeks broad and strongly convex in both sexes ; 

female antennae normally 32 to 35 segmented, flagellum 
mostly brownish piceous except three or four basal segments. 
which are yellowish; male thorax more or less blackish or 
piceous, mesonotum and sometimes entire thorax blackish. 

3. crambivorus Viereck 
Eyes not especially small; cheeks gradually receding; female 
antennae normally 37 to 39 segmented, flagellum yellowish 
with apical half somewhat fuscous; thorax in both sexes 
yellow, with pronotum and propodeum dusky or blackish. 

4, crambi (Ashmead) 



» In the key, as well as in the descriptions and discussions that follow, much use has 
been made of venational differences. The terminology employed is that proposed by 
Rohwer and Gahan, Morismology of the hymenopterous wing, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, 
vol. 18, pp. 20-76, 1916. 



6 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

5. Submedian cell always closely hairy, never glabrous at apex; 

apical teeth of trochanters, especially of anterior legs, very 
weak, indistinct ; mediella not, or hardly, more than twice as 
long as lower abscissa of basella, the latter longer than ner- 
vellus, usually much longer; scutellum usually not distinctly 
half the median length of propodeum ; stigma never uniformly 
pale yellow; small, slender species that are apparently all 

gregarious parasites 

Submedian cell weakly hairy apically, usually with a distinct 
hairless area at apex, rarely uniformly hairy, but then medi- 
ella about three times as long as lower abscissa of basella with 
the latter not longer than nervellus, and the apical teeth of 
trochanters distinct, or the stigma uniformly pale yellow ; 
scutellum usually more than half the median length of pro- 
podeum ; apparently aU solitary parasites 13 

6. Head entirely black ; face broader, usually much broader, than 

long to base of clypeus; ocell-ocular line twice as long as 
diameter of a lateral ocellus; thorax varying from entirely 
black to entirely yellow, but usually at least pronotum more or 

less dusky or blackish 7 

Head varying from yellow to mostly black, the face never en- 
tirely black, at most reddish brown, blackish above and 
medially, and then face not distinctly broader than long to 
base of clypeus and ocell-ocular line distinctly less than 
twice the diameter of a lateral ocellus; at least pronotum 
and venter of thorax pale, even in the darkest specimens 12 

7. Metapleurum completely rugulose and subopaque ; mesopleurum 

below and anteriorly as well as prepectus usually punctato- 
rugulose; face nearly twice as broad as long to clypeus; 
malar space about as long as clypeus ; three basal abdominal 
tergites testaceous, thorax usually black or blackish, with 

metanotum and propodeum often ferruginous 5. terminalis (Ashmead) 

Metapleurum smooth at least basally ; basal abdominal tergites 
usually black or blackish ; otherwise not combining all the 
above characters 8 

8. First, second, and more or less of third abdominal tergites 

closely longitudinally aciculate; nervulus distinctly a little 
postfurcal; stigma usually without a distinct pale spot at 

base; ovipositor sheaths at least as long as the body 9 

Only the first and second abdominal tergites sculptured and the 
second usually smooth apically ; nervulus interstitial ; stigma 
brown with a conspicuous yellow spot at base ; ovipositor 
sheaths not longer than abdomen 6. longicomis Provancher 

9. Radial cell unusually short, measured on wing margin only a 

little longer than stigma and about one and one-half times as 
long as its greatest width ; nervellus nearly as long as lower 
abscissa of basella ; abdomen entirely black or blackish above 
and below; posterior tibiae black except at base; all tarsi 

blackish 7. peroneae, new species 

Radial cell normal, about twice as long, measured on wing mar- 
gin, as its greatest width ; nervellus much shorter than lower 
abscissa of basella ; three basal abdominal sternites usually 
pale; usually more or less of third tergite, sometimes more 
or less of the three basal tergites, reddish yellow 10 



AET. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 7 

10. Malar space about as long as clypeus ; level of lower eye mar- 

gins not distinctly below base of clypeus ; dorsum of abdomen 
entirely black except sometimes on apex of third tergite; 

thorax black 8. harrisi De Gant 

Malar space much shorter than clypeus ; level of lower eye 
margins distinctly below base of clypeus; abdomen with at 
least most of the third tergite, often with more or less of first 
and second tergites also, testaceous ; thorax varying from en- 
tirely black to entirely testaceous 11 

11. Thorax entirely black or piceous ; mandibles crossing at 

tips 9. pyraustae Viereck 

Thorax varying from entirely testaceous to mostly blackish ; at 
least the venter of thorax, and nearly always the prescutum, 
yellowish ; mandibles barely meeting at tips, the teeth un- 
usually .short 10. gifuensis Ashmead 

12. Stigma brown with a large pale spot at base, the apex also nar- 

rowly, and usually the anterior margin, pale; nervulus dis- 
tinctly a little postfurcal ; mandibles strongly crossing at tips, 

the teeth well developed 11. amicroploides Viereck 

Stigma entirely brown ; nervulus interstitial ; mandibles very 
short, hardly meeting at tips, the teeth very short. 

12. crocidophorae, new species 

13. First abdominal tergite more or less distinctly impressed or 

excavated medially at base in front of spiracles ; spiracles of 
first tergite usually farther from each other than from base 
of tergite ; stigma variable ; longer calcarium of posterior 

tibia never more than half as long as metatarsus 14 

First abdominal tergite not impressed or excavated medially at 
base in front of spiracles ; spiracles near end of basal third 
and farther from base of tergite than from each other ; occa- 
sionally in uniformis the first tergite faintly, very shallowly, 
impressed at base, but then longer calcarium of posterior tibia 
much more than half as long as basitarsus ; stigma long, lance- 
olate, always entirely yellow, with radius arising from beyond 
its middle 33 

14. Extreme length of first discoidal cell not, or .scarcely, greater 

than that of first cubital ; second abscissa of cubitus more, 
usually much more, than half as long as recurrent vein ; ba- 
sella usually interstitial with transverse abscissa of sub- 

costella ; radius arising from well beyond middle of stigma 23 

Extreme length of first discoidal cell much greater than that of 
first cubital ; second abscissa of cubitus not more, usually 
much less, than half as long as recurrent vein ; basella very 
rarely interstitial with transverse abscissa of subcostella 15 

15. Lower abscissa of basella half, or more than half, as long as 

mediella and distinctly longer than nervellus ; face conspicu- 
ously impressed medially above ; longest segment of maxil- 
lary palpus much longer than second segment of antennal 
flagellum ; stigma unicolorous, yellow or brown, radius aris- 
ing from much beyond its middle ; radial cell ending con- 
siderably before wing apex 16 

Lower abscissa of basella much less than half as long as 
mediella and not distinctly longer than nervellus; otherwise 
not combining the above characters 17 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

16. Head and abdomen black ; thorax black above ; stigma brown ; 

antennae, including scape, blackish 13. atratus, new species 

Head, thorax, and abdomen uniformly yellow ; stigma entirely 

yellow 14. impressus, new species 

17. Metapleurum completely punctato-rugulose ; propodeum strongly 

rugoso-reticulate ; lower part of mesopleurum depressed and 
confluently punctate ; prepectus sculptured ; first tergite about 
three times as long as wide at apex, ruguloso-striate, the 
spiracles situated beyond basal fourth of tergite; posterior 
femora longer than their coxae and trochanters combined. 

15. reticulatus, new species 
Metapleurum mostly smooth ; propodeum finely, usually more 
or less transversely, sculptured ; posterior femora not longer 
than their coxae and trochanters combined 18 

18. Apex of radial cell much before wing apex; metacarpus ex- 

tending length of second intercubitus beyond apex of radial 
cell; stigma brown, with a conspicuous pale spot at base: 
nervulus postfurcal by not more than half its length ; third 
abdominal tergite mostly aciculate, the lateral depressed mar- 
gins of second tergite not wider at base than at middle 

of tergite 19 

Radial cell more nearly attaining apex of wing; metacarpus 
not extending conspicuously beyond apex of radial oell ; 
color of stigma, origin of nervulus, and sculpture of third 
abdominal tergite not combined as above 20 

19. Antennae normally 45 to 50 segmented ; nervellus distinctly a 

little longer than lower abscissa of basella, the latter but 
little longer than upper abscissa of basella ; spiracles of first 
tergite usually before end of basal fourth of tergite; length 

usually 4.5 to 5 mm 16. canarsiae, new species 

Antennae normally 52 to 54 segmented ; nervellus not distinctly 
longer than lower abscissa of basella, the latter nearly twice 
the upper abscissa ; spiracles of first tergite usually distinctly 
a little beyond basal fourth of tergite; length usually 6.5 to 
7 mm 17. insularis, new species 

20. Clypeus very weakly convex and unusually broad, broader than 

length of second segment of antennal flagellum ; distance be- 
tween cl}T)eal foveae fully as long as face; mandibles large, 
stout; eyes not prominent, extending but little beyond outer 
margins of temples ; face nearly twice as broad as long to base 

of clypeus 18. clypeatus, new species 

Clypeus normal, convex, much narrower than length of second 
flagellar segment ; interfoveal line shorter ; eyes prominent ; 
face much less than twice as broad as long 21 

21. Maxillary palpus with longest segment not distinctly longer than 

second segment of antennal flagellum ; stigma brown with a 
conspicuous pale spot at base, or yellow with a distinct cloud 
in apical half ; nervulus never postfurcal by as much as its 
length ; abdomen varying from entirely testaceous to more or 
less blackish at base and apex, but second and third tergites 
always entirely pale; second tergite not distinctly longer 
than broad at apex, usually smooth apically ; male scape not 
swollen ^ - 22 



AET. 23 REVISION OF MACEOCENTRUS MUESEBECK 9 

Maxillary palpus with longest segment usually longer than sec- 
ond segment of autennal flagellum ; stigma most frequently 
uniformly brown or yellow; nervulus usually postf ureal by 
about its own length ; usually second and third tergites more 
or less blackish as well as the first and sometimes the follow- 
ing in part ; second tergite most frequently longer than broad 
and usually completely aciculate; male scape swollen 24 

22. First abdominal tergite unusually stout, usually not more than 

one and one-half times as long as broad at apex ; distance be- 
tween spiracles of first tergite at least half the basal width of 
propodeum; antennae normally 50 to 54 segmented; clypeus 
about as broad as length of scape and broadly strongly emar- 

ginate at apex 19. robustus, new species 

First tergite not esiiecially stout, usually twice as long as broad 
at apex ; distance between spiracles of first tergite much less 
than half the basal width of propodeum ; antennae normally 
42 to 48 segmented ; clypeus not so broad as length of scape 23 

23. Mesonotal lobes, and mesosternum posteriorly, black; sec- 

ond abdominal tergite usually completely finely aciculate, 
the third more weakly so on basal half ; ocell-ocular line twice 
as long as diameter of a lateral ocellus ; mes^opleurum closely 

punctate and subopaque below 20. nigripectus, new species 

Mesonotal lobes and mesosternum never black ; second abdomi- 
nal tergite usually smooth apically, the third rarely with dis- 
tinct aciculations ; ocell-ocular line not twice the diameter of 
a median ocellus; mosopleurum smooth and shining. 

21. ancylivorus Rohwer 

24. Face, viewed from in front, only very little, often indistinctly, 

broader than long; antennae usually 45 to 50 segmented; 
stigma usually uniformly brown, occasionally entirely pale yel- 
low ; mesoscutum posteriorly sharply emarginate, the scutellar 
furrow scarcely transverse ; dorsum of thorax and abdomen 
most frequently largely blackish or piceous, though rarely 
almost entirely yellow ; length normally 4 to 5 mm. 

22. instabilis, new species 
Face much broader than long ; antennae usually more than 50- 
segmented ; mesoscutum not so sharply emarginate at apex, 
the scutellar furrow strongly transverse ; length usually 6 
to 7.5 mm ^ 

25. Second abdominal tergite completely aciculate and usually dis- 

tinctly longer than broad at apex, the depressed lateral 
margins not much broadened at base of tergite ; third tergite 
aciculate on basal half; prescutum prominently elevated, de- 
scending almost vertically in front ; head thin, cheeks not 
wider than temples, as viewed from side ; rather uniformly 
yellowish ferruginous, mesonotal lobes not blackish. 

23. utilis, new species 
Second abdominal tergite usually mostly smooth apically and 
usually hardly as long as broad at apex, the depressed lateral 
margins much broadened at base of tergite; third tergite 
usually not, or only indistinctly, aciculate; prescutum not 
strongly convex, descending more gradually in front; cheeks 

98306—32 2 



10 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

a little wider than temples ; mesdnotal lobes nearly always 
more or less black or dusky medially ; metanotum, propodeum, 
and basal abdominal tergites usually more or less blackish. 

24. laspeyxesiae, new species 

26. Head, thorax and abdomen black, the lower part of pleura and 

the mesosternum sometimes ferruginous 27 

Ferruginous or testaceous, often varied with black; abdomen 
very rarely entirely black, and then head and thorax fer- 
ruginous 28 

27. Legs, including posterior tibiae, honey-yellow ; third abdominal 

tergite completely smooth ; nervulus postfurcal by more than 

half its length 25. mellipes Provancher 

Posterior tibiae black, pale only at base ; third abdominal tergite 
usually distinctly finely aciculate on basal half; nervulus 
usually postfurcal by less than half its length 26. aegeriae Rohwer 

28. First and second abdominal tergites incompletely aciculate, 

the second only weakly so at base; third tergite entirely 
smooth ; second suture indistinct, the second and third ter- 
gites not, or indistinctly, separated; radiella not sinuate, the 
radiellan cell not broadening from middle to apex ; wings 
clear hyaline, with no suggestion of duskiness; posterior 
coxae completely polished, with no transverse aciculation or 

lineolation 29 

First, second, and most of third, tergites longitudinally acic- 
ulate ; second and third tergites separated by a fine but dis- 
tinct suture ; radiella more or less sinuate, the radiellan cell 
broadening a little from middle to apex; wings often a little 
dusky ; posterior coxae usually delicately transversely acic- 
ulate or lineolate toward apex 31 

29. Eyes rather small, not prominent, not or scarcely extending 

beyond outer margins of temples; clypeus short and broad, 
nearly flat; face nearly twice as broad as long to base of 
clypeus ; mesopleura and metapleura impunctate. 

27. pulchripennis, new species 
Eyes large, prominent, extending much beyond outer margins 
of temples ; clypeus strongly convex ; face only a little 
broader than long; mesopleura and metapleura uniformly 
punctate 30 

30. Abdomen entirely black, including sternites; legs infuscated ; 

hind tibiae black 28. seminiger, new species 

Abdomen brownish ferruginous, black at apex ; legs testaceous, 

including hind tibiae 29. affinis, new species 

31. Abdomen short, not distinctly longer than head and thorax 

combined ; eyes very small, not prominent ; face about twice 
as broad as long to base of clypeus ; interfoveal line of clypeus 

hardly as long as foveo-ocular line 30. fuscipennis, new species 

Abdomen more elongate, distinctly longer than head and thorax 
combined ; eyes prominent, extending much beyond outer 
margins of temples; face much less than twice as broad as 
long; interfoveal line longer than foveo-ocular line 32 



ART. 23 REVISION OP MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 11 

32. Antennae normally 44 to 50 segmented; longest segment of 

maxillaiy palpus usually shorter than second segment of 
antennal flagellum ; nervulus usually interstitial ; stigma 
usually brown, paler at base ; palpi and tarsi usually more or 
less fuscous or blackish ; head varying from entirely testa- 
ceous to entirely black, more or less of occiput and vertex 
usually blackish ; thorax varying from entirely yellow to 

mostly black; apex of abdomen often black 31. pallisteri De Gant 

Antennae normally 50 to 55 segmented; longest segment of 
maxillary palpus at least as long as second flagellar segment 
of antenna, usually longer ; nervulus usually a little post- 
furcal; stigma uniformly yellow or yellowish ferruginous; 
palpi and tarsi pale yellow; head, thorax, and abdomen en- 
tirely ferruginous or testaceous, without blackish markings. 

32. cerasivoranae Viereck 

33. First, second, and more or less of third abdominal tergites 

closely longitudinally aciculate or delicately ruguloso-acicu- 
late ; longer calcarium of posterior tibia never more than half 
as long as basitarsus, usually distinctly less ; metapleural 
tooth rounded or truncate; second abscissa of cubitus most 
frequently less than half as long as recurrent vein ; vertex 

either entirely yellow or with a blackish transver.se band 34 

Three basal abdominal tergites mostly smooth ; longer cal- 
carium of posterior tibia distinctly more than half as long 
as basitarsus ; metapleural tooth acute, very prominent ; sec- 
ond abscissa of cubitus much more than half as long, some- 
times fully as long, as recurrent vein ; vertex always with a 
broad blackish transverse band extending to the eyes 35 

34. First abdominal tergite not distinctly three times as long as 

broad at apex ; second tergite only a little, or not, longer than 
broad; third not longer than broad; nervulus postfurcal by 
nearly, or quite, its own length ; radiellan cell widening slightly 

at apex; head, including vertex, entirely pale 33. delicatus Cresson 

First abdominal tergite very slender, more than three times as 
long as broad at apex ; second tergite about twice as long as 
broad ; third much longer than broad ; nervulus only slightly 
postfurcal ; radiellan cell not widening at apex ; vertex with 
a broad blackish transverse band extending to the eyes, or 
nearly 34. nuperus Cresson 

35. Ovipositor sheaths as long as the body ; eyes large, very promi- 

nent, not divergent below; temples and cheeks strongly re- 
ceding ; longest segment of maxillary palpus hardly as long 
as first segment of antennal flagellum ; first abdominal tergite 
narrowing from spiracles to base; radiella only weakly 
sinuate; nervulus postfurcal by more than half its length. 

35. texanus, new species 
Ovipositor sheaths shorter than height of apical truncature of 
abdomen; eyes a little divergent below; temples and cheeks 
rather full, convex ; longest segment of maxillary palpus 
distinctly longer than first segment of antennal flagellum ; first 
abdominal tergite not narrowing from spiracles to base, the 
spiracles very prominent; radiella strongly sinuate, radiellan 
cell very narrow at middle ; nervulus usually only very weakly 
postfurcal 36. uniformis Provancher 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

1. MACROCENTRUS INCOMPLETUS, new species 

In the short maxillary palpi, the unusually short and broad face, 
the strongly convex vertex, the broad temples and cheeks, the non- 
prominent eyes, and the absence of distinct teeth on the outer apical 
margins of the trochanters, this species most closely resembles ci'as- 
sipes, but it is at once distinguished from all other known North 
American species of Maerocentrvis by the absence of the second inter- 
cubitus, the strongly inclivous nervellus, the unusually short lovs^er 
abscissa of basella, and the small number of segments in the anten- 
nae; from crassipes it differs further in having very slender legs 
and in the much smoother thorax and abdomen. 

Female. — Length 3.5 mm. Head less transverse than is usual in 
Macroce7itriis^ the temples conspicuously broad and bulging; eyes 
small and not extending beyond the outer limits of the temples, but 
situated low so that malar space is short and the vertex broad and 
strongly convex; face more than twice as broad as long; mandibles 
long; clypeus fully three times as broad at apex as long, the anterior 
margin truncate; interfoveal line twice the length of clypeus; 
maxillary palpi scarcely as long as height of head, the longest seg- 
ment much shorter than the scape ; face, clypeus, f rons, temples, and 
cheeks smooth and polished; ocelli small, ocell-ocular line nearly 
three times the diameter of an ocellus ; antennae very nearly as long 
as the body, 27-segmented in type. 

Thorax rather stout; middle lobe of mesoscutum elevated a little 
above the level of lateral lobes; mesopleura polished; metapleura 
smooth; propodeum mostly smooth, weakly roughened down the 
middle and at apex; legs very slender; trochanters without teeth 
outwardly at apex ; longer calcarium of posterior tibia less than one- 
third the basitarsus ; anterior wing with second intercubitus wanting ; 
the radius usually not distinctly divided into three abscissae; first 
discoidal cell much longer than first cubital ; veins in apical third of 
wing faint ; nervulus very weakly postf ureal ; submedian cell closely 
hairy ; posterior wing with nervellus strongly inclivous, usually about 
twice as long as lower abscissa of basella, the latter hardly one-fourth 
the mediella ; radiella faint. 

Abdomen as long as head and thorax combined, somewhat com- 
pressed at apex, smooth and polished, with only very faint sugges- 
tion of sculpture on first tergite; first tergite more than twice as 
long as broad at apex; ovipositor sheaths longer than the abdomen 
but distinctly shorter than the thorax and abdomen combined. 

Head black; clypeus, and the mandibles except at apex, ferrugi- 
nous ; antennae piceous to blackish ; thorax yellow-ferruginous, with 
the metanotum, propodeum, and more or less of the pleura piceous 
to blackish; abdomen piceous, blackish at apex; legs entirely testa- 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACEOCENTRUS MUESEBECK 13 

ceous; wings whitish hyaline, veins and stigma brownish, the latter 
with a pale yellow spot at base. 

Male. — Essentially as in the female except that antennae are a 
little more slender at apex and the legs a little tinged with piceous ; 
antennae of allotype 28-segmented. 

Type.—V.S.'^M. No. 43489. 

Type locality. — Garden City, Kans. 

Host. — " Cutworm larva." 

Remarks. — Described from two females and one male reared 
May 8, 1914, by F. B. Milliken in the Bureau of Entomology under 
Chittenden No. 2508, and four females collected on wheat at Guy- 
mon, Okla., April 24, 1930, by W. E. Jackson and C. F. Stiles. The 
National Museum has 20 additional specimens, which are not in- 
cluded in the type series, from Colorado (C. F. Baker collection), 
one from "Wellington, Kans. (E. G. Kelly), and one from McCook, 
Nebr. This material shows the number of segments in the antennae 
to range from 25 to 30 ; there is also considerable variation in the ex- 
tent of the piceous coloring of the thorax, but the pronotum and 
mesoscutum are usually somewhat paler than the remainder of the 
thorax. 

2. MACROCENTRUS CRASSIPES, new species 

Exceedingly similar to the European infi'rmus (Nees), as repre- 
sented by two specimens so determined in the United States National 
Museum, but apparently differing in the longer calcaria of posterior 
tibiae, in the slightly more transverse head, and in the nervellus 
being perpendicular to the mediella. It is possible that the two are 
identical, but with so little material of either form available I am 
unable definitely to identify as infirmus the species here described. 

Female. — Length 4.5 mm. Head only a little wider than thorax, 
vertically short, the face between antennal foramina and clypeus 
much less than half as long as broad; temples and cheeks rounded, 
broad ; clypeus strongly convex, elevated anteriorly ; interf oveal line 
about equal to foveo-ocular line; eyes small, broadly oval, not ex- 
tending bej^ond the outer li"ne of the temples, and situated low so 
that vertex is very broad and strongly convex, rising much above 
the level of upper margins of the eyes; ocelli very small; postocellar 
line more than twice, the ocell-ocular line more than four times, the 
diameter of an ocellus ; maxillary palpi short, not longer than height 
of head, the longest segment shorter than the scape; labial palpi 
very short, the apical segments but very little longer than broad; 
face a little punctate medially ; antennae distinctly shorter than the 
body, 33-segmented, the second segment of flagellum only twice as 
long as broad ; scape short and stout. 



l4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Thorax with middle lobe of mesoscutum not rising distinctly above 
level of lateral lobes; notauli distinctly foveolate only posteriorly; 
propodeum completely rugulose and opaque; sides of pronotum 
mostly rugulose ; mesopleura confluently punctate below ; metapleura 
mostly punctato-rugulose ; legs shorter and stouter than is usual in 
Macrocentrus; all femora short and somewhat thickened; anterior 
metatarsus not distinctly half the anterior tibia; apical segment of 
anterior tarsus as long as the second; calcarium of anterior tibia 
about half the metatarsus; longer calcarium of posterior tibia half 
the posterior metatarsus; trochanters without distinct teeth out- 
wardly at apex; stigma emitting radius from slightly beyond its 
middle; radial cell short, ending much before wing apex; first dis- 
coidal cell much longer than first cubital; nervulus almost inter- 
stitial ; submedian cell closely hairy apically ; mediella slightly more 
than twice the lower abscissa of basella, the latter longer than ner- 
vellus; radiellan cell not widening apically. 

Abdomen slightly longer than head and thorax combined, weakly 
compressed apically ; first tergite about twice as long as wide at apex, 
impressed at base, delicately ruguloso-aciculate longitudinally, with 
a distinct though shallowly impressed line down the middle ; second 
tergite about as long as broad at apex, finely longitudinally aciculate 
on basal half, polished on apical half ; remainder of dorsum of abdo- 
men smooth and polished ; ovipositor sheaths slightly longer than the 
body. 

Head black ; mandibles except tips testaceous ; palpi a little dusky ; 
antennae brownish yellow on basal half, blackish apically; thorax 
entii-ely black; legs uniformly honey-yellow; wings with a faint 
dusky tinge; veins and stigma brown, the latter pale at base; ab- 
domen black; ovipositor sheaths brown. 

Male. — Agrees with the female except for the usual sexual differ- 
ences. The antennae of the allotype are 38-segmented and are 
blackish. 

ry;?e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43490. 

Type locality. — Lake Placid, N. Y. 

Remarks. — Described from one female and one male collected Aug- 
ust 15, 1896. There are four additional specimens in the United 
States National Museum not included in the type series, labeled 
"Chelsea, Vt., 14-VII-15, H. E. Smith, collector, W. Springfield 
No. 915525," and two recorded as reared from Hadena devastatrix 
Brace, at Bozeman, Mont., August 5, 1909. These six are consider- 
ably smaller than the types but otherwise appear to be indistin- 



guishable. 



ABT. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 15 

3. MACROCENTRUS CRAMBIVORUS Viereck 

Macrocentrus (Aniicroplus) crambivorus Viekeck, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 

40, p. 183, 1911. 
Maorocentrns {Amicroplit^) plesius ViEatECK, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 44, p. 

556, 1913. (New synonymy.) 

Types. — In the United States National Museum. 

In his description of plesius, Viereck called attention to the similar- 
ity of that species to crambworus, but apparently he did not appreci- 
ate the extent to which variation occurs in species of Macrocentrus. 
In my opinion the types of the two species are clearly conspecific, and 
it may become necessary to suppress both names as synonj^ms of 
crainhi Ashmead, but owing to the apparent constancy of certain 
differences cramhivomis is for the present being held distinct. The 
eyes in general are smaller than in crmnbi, and the cheeks and temples 
correspondingly broader and less strongly receding, the malar space 
longer, and the face slightly broader; the female antennae appear 
constantly to have fewer segments, as noted in the key, and to be a 
little darker in color; the male antennae are similar in the two 
species, being usually 36 to 39 segmented with the flagellum entirely 
brown, but the thorax of males of cranibivorus seems to be consist- 
ently darker in color than in crmnhi; in general the lower abscissa of 
basella, as compared with the upper abscissa, is relatively longer in 
cranibivorus, but this difference is not dependable. 

The material examined includes, in addition to the type series of 
cranibivorus and plesius, series in the national collections reared 
from crambid larvae taken at Mount Jackson, Va., and Elmore, Ohio ; 
three specimens obtained from Grambus hortuellus Hiibner at Ware- 
ham, Mass.; another series reared from a Cramhus larva on corn, 
locality not noted ; and collected specimens from Virginia, Massachu- 
setts, Pennsylvania, District of Columbia, Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, 
South Dakota, Colorado, and Canada; also a single specimen from 
Michigan at the corn-borer laboratory, at Arlington, Mass.; and a 
series of 12 specimens from Marthas Vineyard, Mass., in the collec- 
tion of the Boston Society of Natural History. 

4. MACROCENTRUS CRAMBI (Ashmead) 

Amicroplus crambi Ashme.\d, Journ. Cincinnati Soe. Nat. Hist., vol. 17, p. 48, 1894. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

The close relationship between this species and crambivorus has 
been discussed above under the latter name. M. crambi is also some- 
what similar to collaris (Spinola) Nees, which was designated by 
Foerster as the type of his genus Amicroplus, but differs in its more 
slender form, smaller head, and much longer ovipositor. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

In addition to the type, which is a male from Indiana reared 
from Crambus zeeJlus Fernald, the United States National Museum 
has specimens from Virginia, Tennessee, Indiana, and Pennsylvania, 
as well as some without locality data. Hosts recorded for specimens 
among this material include Cramhus mutahUis Clemens, C. trisectits 
Walker, and C. zeelhis Fernald. 

5. MACROCENTRUS TERMINALIS (Ashmead), new combination 

Zele terminaUs Ashmead, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 11, p. 652, 1888. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

This species, which is known only in the male, is very similar to 
pyraustae^ differing, however, in having the metapleurum and propo- 
deum even more completely and more strongly sculptured, in the 
roughened prepectus, in having the basal abdominal tergites yel- 
low, in the broader face, and in the longer malar space, which is 
about as long as the clypeus. 

Face nearly twice as broad as long to base of clypeus ; eyes small ; 
temples and cheeks somewhat rounded; antennae usually 38 to 42 
segmented; scape, in the male, somewhat swollen; longest segment 
of maxillaiy palpus hardly as long as second segment of antennal 
flagellum; labial palpi much longer than face, the apical segment 
much lengthened; notauli foveolate; metapleura completely rugu- 
lose; propodeum coarsely reticulate; apical teeth of trochanters 
weak, indistinct ; first discoidal cell very long ; mediella about twice 
lower abscissa of basella; first abdominal tergite at least a third as 
long as the abdomen, longitudinally aciculate, the spiracles much 
farther from base than from each other; sculptured part of second 
tergite somewhat constricted at the middle; legs, as well as scape 
and pedicel, deep honey-yellow. 

The above notes are based on the type, which is from Missouri; 
on five additional collected specimens in the national collection 
from Illinois, Minnesota, New York, Pennsylvania, and Massachu- 
setts, respectively; and on three specimens, in the Philadelphia 
Academy of Natural Sciences, from New Jersey and Illinois. The 
specimen from New Jersey has the thorax almost entirely yellow. 

6. MACROCENTRUS LONGICORNIS Provancher 

Macrocentrus longicoinis Provancher, Nat. Can., vol. 12, p. 173, 1880. 

Type. — In the Museum of Public Instruction, Quebec, Canada. 

I have not seen the type of this species, but in the collection of the 
United States National Museum there are three specimens from 
Cleveland, Ohio, and one from Itasca State Park, Minn., which ap- 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 17 

pear to agree so completely with the original description, and with 
notes made by S. A. Rohwer in 1915 on an examination of the type, 
as to leave little doubt that they are longicomis. The species, as 
represented by these specimens, is most similar to pyraustcke and 
harrisi, but it can be readily separated by the characters mentioned 
in the key. The following additional notes are likewise based on 
the specimens in the National Museum: Malar space shorter than 
basal width of mandible; cheeks and temples rounded, full; anten- 
nae 37 to 44 segmented; ocell-ocular line twice the diameter of an 
ocellus; mandibles quite long, the apices crossing; face short and 
broad, nearly twice as broad as long; clypeus rather large, strongly 
convex ; entire insect black except palpi, scape and pedicel of anten- 
nae, mandibles, legs, and the three basal sternites of the abdomen. 

7. MACROCENTRUS PERONEAE, new species 

Most similar to harrisi, but at once distinguished by its unusually 
short and relativelj^ broad radial cell, the blackish abdominal stern- 
ites, the broader depressed lateral margins of second tergite, and by 
the lower abscissa of basella being scarcely longer than nervellus and 
scarcely half as long as mediella. 

Female. — ^Length 4.5 mm. Head rather small, only very slightly 
wider than thorax; eyes broadly oval, not large; temples strongly 
receding; cheeks rounded; face broad, smooth, impressed medially 
above and with a short low ridgelike elevation just below this im- 
pression ; clypeus small, convex, apically truncate ; malar space fully 
as long as basal width of mandible; ocell-ocular line nearly twice 
diameter of an ocellus ; maxillary palpi long, longest segment slightly 
longer than second flagellar segment ; antennae longer than the body, 
46-segmented. 

Thorax with propodeum delicately rugulose; pleura smooth, ex- 
cept metapleura at apex; metapleural tooth not distinct; legs very 
slender; longer calcarium of posterior tibia hardly one-third the 
basitarsus; trochanters with the apical teeth minute, indistinct; 
stigma large, broad, emitting radius from very slightly beyond 
middle; radial cell unusually short, ending far before wing apex, 
measured on wing margin scarcely longer than stigma and not more 
than one and one-half times as long as broad ; submedian cell 
closely hairy apically; nervulus postf ureal by less than half its 
length ; radiellan cell long, not widening apically. 

Abdomen longer than head and thorax combined; first tergite 

hardly twice as long as broad at apex, finely longitudinally acicu- 

lated ; second slightly longer than broad at apex, also longitudinally 

aciculated, the depressed lateral margins broadest at base, the sculp- 

98306—32 3 



IS PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

tured part broadening gradually behind; third tergite aciculate on 
basal half; remainder of dorsum of abdomen smooth; ovipositor 
sheaths distinctly longer than the body, very slender. 

Black; head black; clypeus brownish; palpi more or less dusky; 
antennae blackish, including scape and pedicel; thorax black with 
brownish tinge on sides of pronotum and on metapleura ; wings hya- 
line; veins and stigma dark brown, the latter indistinctly paler at 
extreme base; legs brownish yellow; posterior femora at apex, pos- 
terior tibiae except at base, and all tarsi, blackish; abdomen black; 
second and third tergites with a faint brownish tinge; three basal 
sternites of abdomen piceous-black, the following black. 

Type.—U.S.liiM. No. 43491. 

Type locality. — Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 

Host. — Peronea variana Fernald. 

Re7narhs. — Described from three female specimens reared by 
K. E. Schedl. 

8. MAGROCENTRUS HARRISI De Gant 
Macrocentrus harrisi De Gant, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 32, p. 164, 1930. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

Exceedingly similar to pyraustae^ but differing especially in the 
longer malar space, which is about as long as the clypeus, and in the 
darker abdomen, as noted in the key. Face broad, rather strongly 
transversely convex ; eyes small ; temples and cheeks rounded ; ocelli 
very small, ocell-ocular line more than twice the diameter of an 
ocellus ; antennae usually 42 to 48 segmented ; notauli punctate ; pro- 
podeum granularly rugulose; mesopleura mostly smooth, polished; 
metapleura rugulose on posterior half; apical teeth of trochanters 
minute, indistinct; nervulus slightly postf ureal; first discoidal cell 
very long; mediella less than twice as long as lower abscissa of 
basella, which is more than one and one-half times, sometimes nearly 
twice, as long as nervellus; three basal abdominal tergites closely 
longitudinally aciculate. Black ; clypeus more or less reddish ; scape 
and pedicel, palpi, base of mandibles, and the three basal sternites 
of abdomen, pale yellow; legs yellow, except the posterior tibiae 
outwardly and all the tarsi, which are more or less infuscated. Very 
rarely the thorax is pale beneath. 

The material examined consists of the type and 10 additional spec- 
imens in the National Museum representing a range in distribution 
from the District of Columbia and New York to Colorado and north- 
ward to Alberta; two specimens in the collection of the Boston So- 
ciety of Natural History from Mount Washington, N. H., and Mount 
Desert, Me., respectively; and 26 specimens from various New Eng- 
land localities at the gipsy moth laboratory, Melrose Highlands, 



AET. 23 REVISION OF MACEOCENTEUS MUESEBECK 19 

Mass. Three specimens in the national collection, from Washington, 
D. C, are recorded as having been reared from Gacoecia pa/rallela 
Robinson, while among the material at the gipsy moth laboratory 
are 12 males reared from Gacoecia purpurana Clemens taken at 
Brewer, Me., and 4 males obtained from Exarteiiia fasciatana Clem- 
ens taken at Orrington, Me. 

This species is evidently exceedingly similar to nigridorsis Vie- 
reck ; in fact, I suspect that the two may be identical and that it may 
become necessary to suppress harrisi as a synonym, but since I have 
not seen the type or authentic material of nigridorsis I am for the 
present recognizing harrisi as valid. 

9. MACROCENTRUS PYRAUSTAE Viereck 

Macrocentrus pyraustae Viekeck, Connecticut Geol. and Nat. Hist. Surv. Bull. 
22, p. 220, 1917 (1916). 

Type. — In the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station at 
New Haven. 

The characters that will distinguish pyraustae from terminalis and 
harrisi^ both of which it closely resembles, have been mentioned in 
the discussion under those species or in the key. From gifuensis^ 
which is also very similar, it differs principally in color as indicated 
in the table to species; but the mandibles, though short, are hardly 
as short as in gifiiensis^ distinctly crossing at the tips; the temples 
and cheeks are a little more strongly receding and the radial cell 
slightly shorter. 

Antennae long, usually 43 to 46 segmented; maxillary palpi long, 
but the longest segment not distinctly so long as second segment of 
antennal flagellum; prepectal carina strong, complete; metapleura 
usually rugose on posterior half ; propodeum mostly rugulose ; apical 
teeth of trochanters minute, indistinct ; radial cell ending considerably 
before apex of wing; first discoidal cell very long; abdomen very 
slender, the first tergite usually more than three times as long as 
wide at apex, and the second tergite in the female nearly twice as 
long as wide; ovipositor sheaths as long as the body. Head and 
thorax black or blackish; antennae blackish with scape and pedicel 
yellow ; usually apex of scutellum and the surrounding parts brown- 
ish; abdomen black with third tergite bright testaceous, and often 
the second more or less pale; legs yellow, with posterior tibiae 
weakly infuscated. 

The above discussion and descriptive notes are based on the type, 
two paratypes in the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences, 
two paratypes, and two additional specimens reared from " a tortri- 
cid in turtle-head," at Ithaca, N. Y., in the national collection; and 
31 specimens at the gipsy moth laboratory, which were reared from 



20 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Pyrausta pertextalis Lederer taken at Bedford and Hudson, Mass. 
The type series is recorded as apparently having been parasitic on 
Pyrausta theseusalis Walker. 

10. MACROCENTRUS GIFUENSIS Ashmead 

Macrocentrus gifuensis Ashmead, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 30, p. 191, 1906. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

The following discussion and descriptive notes apply to the species 
that has been recently introduced into the United States from Europe 
and Japan as a parasite of the European corn borer {Pyrausta 
nuhilalis Hiibner), and has become established at several points 
in the area infested by that pest. I am not altogether satisfied that 
this parasite is identical with gifuensis, but owing to the variability 
within species of Macrocentrus, and to the fact that the two speci- 
mens comprising the type series of gifuensis appear to be somewhat 
abnormal, it seems advisable for the present to continue the use of 
this name for the parasite of the corn borer. 

Very similar to harrisi and pyraustae but separable by the charac- 
ters mentioned in the key and in the comments under those species. 
Face sparsely shallowly punctate ; clypeus long, at least half as long 
as face; mandibles short, not, or scarcely, meeting at tips, the teeth 
very short; longest segment of maxillary palpus distinctly shorter 
than second segment of flagellum; malar space only about half £is 
long as clypeus; ocell-ocular line more than twice diameter of an 
ocellus; antennae normally 40 to 44 segmented; notauli foveolate; 
propodeum finely rugulose, also metapleura posteriorly; apical 
teeth of trochanters minute, indistinct; radius arising from about 
middle of stigma; radial cell going nearly to wing apex; nervulus 
a little postf ureal; first discoidal cell very long; mediella hardly 
twice lower abscissa of basella, the latter usually about twice the 
nervellus ; abdomen slender ; first tergite in female about three times 
as long as broad at apex, relatively a little shorter in the male ; first, 
second, and basal half of third, tergites longitudinally aciculate; 
ovipositor sheaths as long as the abdomen. 

There is much variation in color: The head is always black, but 
the color of the thorax ranges from entirely testaceous to mostly 
black, with only the venter, the pleura below, and usually the pre- 
scutum, pale ; usually at least the pronotum is blackish or somewhat 
infuscated; the abdomen is usually black or blackish with the third, 
or the second and third tergites mostly pale; sometimes the first 
tergite is also mostly yellowish; the legs are yellow; the wings 
hyaline. 

Many specimens reared from Pyrausta nubilolis and received at 
the European Corn Borer Laboratory, Arlington, Mass., from Europe 
and Japan have been examined. 



ART. 23 REVISION OP MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 21 

11. MACROCENTRUS AMICROPLOIDES Viereck 
Macrocentrus cmiicroploides Viebex:k, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 43, p. 579, 1912. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

This species, which is a common gregarious parasite of various 
leaf-rollers, is relatively easily distinguished from all related forms 
by having the base and apex of stigma conspicuously pale, by the 
larger eyes and ocelli, b}^ the narrower face, and by the color of the 
head and thorax. Eyes large; malar space usually less than basal 
width of mandible; face but very little or no broader than long; 
ocell-ocular line hardly one and one-half times as long as diameter 
of a lateral ocellus ; longest segment of maxillary palpus a little longer 
than second segment of antennal flagellum ; antennae normally 42 to 
48 segmented ; male scape somewhat swollen ; propodeum finely rugu- 
lose; metapleura roughened j)osteriorly ; apical teeth of trochanters 
minute, indistinct; radius arising from very slightly beyond middle 
of stigma; submedian cell closely hairy, not glabrous apically; medi- 
ella twice the lower abscissa of basella, the latter distinctly longer 
than nervellus ; abdomen very slender, first, second, and usually most 
of third, tergites closely longitudinally striate ; the first deeply exca- 
vated at base; second tergite much longer than broad, the lateral 
depressed margins very narrow; third tergite usually longer than 
broad, at least in the female; ovipositor sheaths slightly longer than 
the body. 

In color the species is extremely variable. The color of the head 
ranges from entirely yellow to mostly black; nearly always at least 
occiput and vertex are blackish, the face more or less brownish and 
never entirely black; the thorax also varies from entirely testaceous 
to mostly black, but the sternum and lower part of pleura are vir- 
tually always pale, with the pronotum never blackish even in the 
darkest specimens; dorsum of abdomen most frequently black, al- 
though sometimes mostly yellowish; in the darkest specimens the 
sternites, too, are blackish ; legs entirely yellow ; wings hyaline, veins 
brownish, stigma brown, conspicuously pale at base and at apex and 
usually along anterior margin. 

The national collection contains many specimens representing a 
range in distribution from Massachusetts to California; in addition 
to the type, two from Darby, Mont., are recorded as having been 
reared from Gacoeda argyrospila Walker, and two from St. Annes, 
Quebec, as having been obtained from Tmetocera ocellana Schiffer- 
miiller. Much additional material in the collection of the gipsy- 
moth laboratory has been examined. This includes series reared 
from Gacoeda rosaceana Harris, C. rosana Linnaeus, Pyrausta per- 
textalis Lederer, and Harpipteryx frustrella Walsingham, taken at 
various New England localities. 



22 PEOCEEDIISrGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

12. MACROCENTRUS CROCIDOPHORAE, new species 

Closely resembles amicrofloides but may be distinguished partic- 
ularly by its unicolorous stigma, interstitial nervulus, and shorter 
mandibles. In the unusually short mandibles it resembles gifuensis, 
but differs from that species in having the head yellow and the 
nervulus interstitial. 

Male. — Length 4 mm. Eyes large, prominent; face but little 
broader than long, smooth; temples not broad, recedin^g; clypeus 
strongly convex; distance from clypeal foveae to eyes shorter than 
length of clypeus; ocell-ocular line less than twice the diameter of 
an ocellus ; maxillary palpus long, the longest segment as long as the 
second flagellar segment; the two apical segments of labial palpus 
long; antennae very long and slender, 43 -segmented ; scape large, 
somewhat swollen. 

Thorax slender, narrowing strongly anteriorly; prothorax nar- 
row ; middle lobe of mesoscutum prominent ; notauli coarsely f oveo- 
late; scutellar furrow pitlike, considerably longer than half the 
scutellum; scutellum less than half as long as propodeum, which is 
rather long and narrow, transversely rugulose, the rugae promi- 
nent; metapleura rugose posteriorly; legs slender; longer cal- 
carium of posterior tibia much less than half the basitarsus; basi- 
tarsus of anterior legs not more than half the tibia; radius arising 
from middle of stigma; radial cell going very nearly to apex of 
wing; first discoidal cell very long; submedian cell closely hairy; 
nervulus interstitial; mediella not distinctly twice as long as the 
lower abscissa of basella, the latter one and one-half times the 
nervellus, which is but very slightly longer than nervulus; radiella 
straight; radiellan cell a little the widest apically. 

Abdomen very slender, longer than head and thorax; first tergite 
more than twice as long as wide, deeply impressed at base, irregu- 
larly longitudinally aciculated; spiracles of first tergite at end of 
basal fourth; second tergite longer than broad, parallel-sided, com- 
pletely closely aciculate, the lateral depressed margins very narrow ; 
third tergite also mostly aciculate; rest of dorsum of abdomen 
smooth. 

Testaceous; vertex and occiput brownish; palpi pale; antennae 
brownish black, scape and pedicel yellow; fourth and following 
abdominal segments piceous; wings hyaline; stigma brown, without 
a pale spot at base ; veins pale brown ; legs entirely yellow. 

Type.—V.S.^M. No. 43492. 

Type locality. — Baton Rouge, La. 

Host. — Crocidophora pustuliferalis Lederer. 

Remarks. — Described from three male specimens reared Septem- 
ber 5, 1928, by H. Spencer. 



ART. 23 REVISION" OF MACEOCENTEUS MUESEBECK 23 

13. MACROCENTRUS ATRATUS. new species 

Agrees with im-presstis and differs from all other related species 
in having lower abscissa of basella longer than nervellus and about 
half as long as mediella. It is at once distinguished from impressus^ 
however, by being mostly black. 

Female. — Length 5.5 mm. Head a little wider than thorax; eyes 
very large; malar space much less than basal width of mandible; 
face strongly impressed medially above, mostly smooth except just 
above clypeus where it is closely finely punctate; clypeus strongly 
convex, truncate at apex; ocell-ocular line hardly one and one-half 
times the diameter of an ocellus; temples and cheeks very narrow, 
strongly receding; maxillary palpus long, the longest segment much 
longer than second segment of antennal flagellum and nearly as long 
as the first; apical segment of labial palpus much lengthened; an- 
tennae longer than the body, 49-segmented. 

Thorax with prescutum prominently convex, descending abruptly 
in front; notauli foveolate only behind; propodeum finely sculptured 
except at base, more or less delicately obliquely aciculate; metapleural 
tooth prominent; mesopleura not impressed below, smooth, shining, 
with only scattered punctures; teeth outwardly at apex of trochan- 
ters conspicuous; stigma rather long, much more than twice as long 
as wide, emitting radius from much beyond middle ; radial cell end- 
ing considerably before wing apex; first abscissa of cubitus straight, 
the second about half as long as recurrent; first discoidal cell very 
long, much longer than first cubital ; nervulus postf ureal by scarcely 
half its length ; submedian cell weakly hairy apically ; lower abscissa 
of basella half as long as mediella and somewhat longer than ner- 
vellus ; radiellan cell widening slightly apically. 

Abdomen a little longer than head and thorax combined; first 
tergite twice as long as broad at apex, impressed at base, finely lon- 
gitudinally aciculate, the spiracles beyond basal fourth; second tergite 
longer than broad, finely longitudinally aciculate, the smooth lateral 
depressed margins narrow at base, the sculptured part of the tergite 
as wide at base as at the middle ; third tergite longitudinally aciculate 
on basal half; ovipositor sheaths a little longer than the body. 

Head black; clypeus entirely ferruginous; palpi whitish; man- 
dibles whitish at base; basal half of antenna, including scape and 
pedicel, brownish black, apical half paler; thorax blackish, with 
sternum and pleura mostly brownish yellow or ferruginous; legs 
yellow ; wings hyaline ; stigma and veins brown, the former not pale 
at base ; abdomen black. 

ry/?e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43498. 

Type locality. — Ithaca, N. Y. 

Paratype locality. — Bar Harbor, Me. 



24 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

Reviarks. — Described from two female specimens, the type with 
only locality data, the paratype collected by C. W. Johnson on July 
20, 1919. The latter specimen is in the collection of the Boston 
Society of Natural History. I have also seen a specimen of this 
species, from Pennsylvania, in the Philadelphia Academy of Natural 
Sciences. 

14. MACROCENTRUS IMPRESSUS, new species 

Superficially very similar to delicatus, but at once distinguished by 
the distinct impression at base of first tergite. Structurally most 
closely related to atratus, differing principally in its entirely yellow 
color. 

Female. — Length 7.5 mm. Head a little broader than thorax; 
face medially impressed on upper half; lower part of face with 
scattered, very shallow punctures ; clypeus convex, truncate at apex ; 
malar space a little shorter than basal width of mandibles ; eyes large, 
prominent; summit of vertex but little above level of upper eye 
margins ; ocelli rather large ; ocell-ocular line less than one and one- 
half times the diameter of ocellus ; temples and cheeks very narrow ; 
maxillary palpi long, the longest segment much longer than second 
segment of antennal flagellum and nearly as long as the first ; anten- 
nae of type broken. 

Thorax with prescutum strongly convex, prominent; notauli 
foveolate posteriorly; propodeum entirely finely reticulato-rugulose, 
most weakly sculptured at base; mesopleura with scattered well- 
separated punctures on lower half; metapleura smooth; calcaria of 
posterior tibiae thick; radius arising from much beyond middle of 
stigma ; radial cell ending well before wing apex ; metacarpus extend- 
ing the length of second intercubitus beyond apex of radial cell; 
first discoidal cell very long; first abscissa of cubitus straight, the 
second nearly half as long as recurrent ; nervulus postf ureal by about 
half its length; submedian cell with a hairless area apically; basal 
vein hardly curved; mediella less than twice as long as lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter much longer than nervellus ; radiellan 
cell broadening slightly apically. 

Abdomen slightly longer than head and thorax combined; basal 
impression of first tergite extending beyond line of spiracles; the 
spiracles about as far from base of tergite as from each other ; first 
tergite finely longitudinally striate; second longer than broad, com- 
pletely closely longitudinally aciculate except on the narrow lateral 
depressed margins, the sides of the raised sculptured part slightly 
emarginate at the middle; third tergite longer than broad, closely 
finely aciculate on basal two-thirds; ovipositor sheaths distinctly 
longer than the body. 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 25 

Testaceous ; head entirely yellow except the ocellar triangle which 
is black ; antennae yellow ; palpi very pale yellow ; thorax and abdo- 
men honey-yellow; legs bright honey-yellow; wings hyaline; veins 
brown ; stigma entirely yellow, 

Type.—V.S.^M. No. 43499. 

Type locality. — Pennsylvania. 

Bem^rks. — Described from four female specimens, the type and 
two paratypes, labeled " Pa. 1573, C. F. Baker collection," which are 
in the National Museum, and one paratype in the collection of the 
Boston Society of Natural History, which was taken on the island 
of Marthas Vineyard, Mass., July 29, 1929, by F. M. Jones. This 
specimen has the antennae 55-segmented. 

15. MACROCENTRUS RETICULATUS, new species 

Distinguished from all related species by the unusually strongly 
rugoso-reticulate propodeum and the coarse sculpturing of the 
metapleura, combined with a long, closely ruguloso-aciculate first 
tergite with the spiracles near end of basal third. 

FemaLe. — Length 5.5 mm. Head but little wider than greatest 
width of thorax; face scarcely convex, smooth; eyes large, very 
prominent; malar space fully as long as basal width of mandible; 
clypeus strongly convex, not more than one and one-half times as 
broad as long, weakly broadly emarginate at apex; maxillary palpi 
long, the longest segment longer than second segment of antennal 
flagellum: antennae longer than the body, 46-segmented. 

Thorax rather stout, broadest posteriorly; prescutmn strongly 
convex, prominent; notauli foveolate posteriorly; propodeum un- 
usually coarsely rugoso-reticulate, the sculpturing not transverse; 
impression on lateral face of pronotum unusually broad and deep 
anteriorly and coarsely foveate; lower part of mesopleura conspicu- 
ously depressed and strongly confluently punctate; prepectus com- 
pletely margined and more or less rugulose ; metapleura mostly rugu- 
loso-punctate ; legs very long and slender; apical teeth of trochan- 
ters rather weak ; posterior femora longer than coxae and trochanters 
combined; posterior tibiae very long; radius arising from very 
slightly beyond middle of stigma; radial cell not quite attaining 
wing apex; first discoidal cell long; nervulus postf ureal by about 
half its length or slightly more; submedian cell with a hairless 
area apically; nervellus very slightly shorter than lower abscissa 
of basella, the latter a little less than half as long as mediella. 

Abdomen slender, considerably longer than head and thorax com- 
bined ; first tergite long and narrow, nearly three times as long as 
wide at apex, closely longitudinally ruguloso-striate, subopaque; 
second tergite much longer than wide, completely closely striate with 
98306—32 4 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

only very narrow lateral depressed margins; basal two-thirds of 
third tergite closely finely striate, subopaque; rest polished; ovi- 
positor sheaths very slender, distinctly longer than the body. 

Yellow-ferruginous; base of mandibles and the palpi yellowish 
white; vertex rather brownish; antennae brown, scape and pedicel 
testaceous ; legs jtestaceous, with fore and middle coxae and trochan- 
ters paler ; wings distinctly a little dusky ; stigma brown with a pale 
spot at base ; veins brown ; apex of abdomen more or less inf uscated. 

Type.—U.S.'NM. No. 43500. 

Type locality. — Coleta, Ala. 

Remarks. — Described from four female specimens, collected by 
H. H. Smith at the type locality, and one additional female taken 
by R. A. Cushman at Difficult Run, Va., July 30, 1920. This last 
specimen is larger than the others, measuring 7.5 mm. in length, 
and is even a little more coarsely sculptured. One paratype has 
antennae 44-segmented ; in the other paratypes they are broken. 

16. MACROCENTRUS CANARSIAE, new species 

Rather similar to ancylivorus, but differing especially in the rela- 
tively longer and narrower, and completely striate, second abdominal 
tergite, in having lateral depressed margins of second tergite very 
narrow at base, in the third tergite being closely finely striate on 
basal half or more, and in the metacarpus extending well beyond 
apex of radial cell. From insularis, to which it is even more closely 
related, it differs as noted in the key. 

Female. — Length 4.8 mm. Eyes large ; temples and cheeks narrow, 
receding; malar space scarcely as long as basal width of mandible; 
face with only a few scattered weak punctures ; vertex rising but very 
little above upper level of eyes ; longest segment of maxillary palpus 
a little longer than second segment of flagellum and longer than scape 
and pedicel combined; antennae 49-segmented. 

Thorax rather short ; prescutum usually not especially prominent ; 
notauli foveolate and not distinctly confluent posteriorly; pro- 
podeum reticulate posteriorly and weakly rugulose medially at base, 
smooth laterally on basal half; mesopleura and metapleura mostly 
smooth, with a few weak scattered punctures; longer calcarium of 
posterior tibia very nearly half as long as basitarsus; apical teeth 
of trochanters conspicuous ; radius arising from very slightly beyond 
middle of stigma; radial cell ending well before extreme wing 
apex; metacarpus extending length of second intercubitus beyond 
apex of radial cell; first discoidal cell longer than first cubital; 
second abscissa of cubitus about half as long as recurrent; sub- 
median cell weakly hairy at apex; nervulus postf ureal by barely 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 27 

half its length; mediella much more than twice the length of lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter not distinctly as long as nervellus. 

Abdomen longer than head and thorax combined, very slender, 
not half as wide as extreme width of thorax ; first tergite more than 
twice as long as broad at apex, longitudinally striate, its spiracles 
before end of basal fourth; second tergite longer than broad, com- 
pletely aciculate, the lateral depressed margins very narrow, not 
wider at base than at middle of tergite ; third tergite about as long 
as broad, aciculate on basal two-thirds; ovipositor sheaths very 
slightly longer than the body. 

Entirely testaceous except for a weak suggestion of infuscation 
at apex of propodeum, at base of first tergite, and on apical ab- 
dominal tergites; antennal flagellum usually fuscous, the scape and 
pedicel pale yellow; legs mostly testaceous, posterior coxae infus- 
cated apically above; wings hyaline, veins and stigma brownish, 
the latter with a pale spot at base. 

Type.—U.S.^M. No. 43502. 

Type locality. — Bentonville, Ark. 

Host. — Canm'sm sp. 

Remarks. — Described from three female specimens reared in the 
Bureau of Entomology by D. Isely, July 20, 1918 (type), July 21, 
1918, and June 18, 1919 (paratypes), the type and first paratype 
under Quaintance No. 16392, the second paratype under Quaintance 
No. 16472. 

17. MACROCENTRUS INSULARIS, new species 

Most closely related to canarsiae, but distinguished by the char- 
acters given in the key. 

Female. — Length about 7 mm. Face broad, sparsely punctate ; eyes 
large, prominent ; malar space hardly as long as basal width of man- 
dible; clypeus about as broad as half the width of face; mandibles 
stout; ocell-ocular line about one and one-half times as long as 
diameter of an ocellus; maxillary palpi long, the longest segment 
distinctly longer than second segment of antennal flagellum; apical 
segment of labial palpus nearly as long as the two preceding seg- 
ments combined; antennae 54-segmented. 

Thorax rather stout; notauli foveolate behind, propodeum finely 
rugulose; mesopleura and metapleura mostly smooth, with some 
scattered shallow punctures; apical teeth of all trochanters well de- 
veloped; radius arising from distinctly beyond middle of stigma; 
radial cell rather short, the metacarpus extending the length of second 
intercubitus beyond apex of radial cell ; nervulus postf ureal by about 
half its length; submedian cell sparsely hairy apically; mediella 
much more than twice the lower abscissa of basella, the latter hardly 
as long as nervellus. 



28 PROCEEDIlSrGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Abdomen with first tergite much more than twice as long as broad 
at apex, closely longitudinally aciculate, the spiracles slightly beyond 
basal fourth and about as far from base of tergite as from each 
other ; second tergite longer than broad, entirely finely aciculate, the 
lateral depressed margins very narrow ; third tergite about as long 
as broad, aciculate on basal half; following tergites smooth; oviposi- 
tor sheaths as long as the body. 

Yellow-ferruginous ; palpi pale yellow ; antennal flagellum fuscous 
or blackish ; mesonotal lobes and metanotum more or less fuscous or 
blackish ; posterior coxae a little dusky at apex above ; wings hyaline, 
stigma brown, conspicuously paler at base. 

Type. — In the collection of the Boston Society of Natural History. 

Type locality. — The island of Marthas Vineyard, Mass. 

Remarks. — Described from six female specimens taken by F. M. 
Jones in July and August, 1930. The two paratypes with complete 
antennae have them 53-segmented. There is more or less variation in 
the extent of the fuscous or blackish markings of thorax; the poste- 
rior coxae are sometimes entirely pale, and occasionally the apex of 
the abdomen is blackish. Two of the paratypes are deposited in the 
United States National Museum. 

18. MACROCENTRUS CLYPEATUS, new species 

Most similar to rohustus but at once separated by the unusually 
broad clypeus, the much smaller, nonprominent eyes, and the broader 
face. 

Fenmle. — Length 5.5 mm. Head much wider than thorax, rather 
lenticular as seen in profile; face broad, nearly or quite twice as 
broad as long, polished; eyes not large, not prominent, extending 
but little beyond outer margin of temples ; temples and cheeks some- 
what rounded; clypeus broader than length of second segment of 
antennal flagellum; mandibles large, stout, the outer tooth very 
strongly developed; vertex scarcely convex; ocell-ocular line very 
nearly twice the diameter of a lateral ocellus; maxillary palpi 
scarcely longer than width of head, the longest segment not distinctly 
as long as second segment of antennal flagellum ; labial palpi short, 
about as long as face; antennae 49-segmented. 

Thorax rather stout; notauli finely foveolate; propodeum trans- 
versely aciculate, smooth at base ; mesopleura a little impressed below, 
smooth, shining, with only a few setigerous punctures; metapleura 
smooth ; prepectus defined only laterally ; apical teeth of all trochan- 
ters well developed, conspicuous; radius arising from slightly 
beyond middle of stigma ; metacarpus extending hardly beyond apex 
of radial cell; first discoidal cell considerably longer than first 
cubital ; second abscissa of cubitus nearly half as long as recurrent ; 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 29 

nervulus postfurcal by about half its length ; submedian cell with a 
hairless area apically; mediella nearly three times as long as lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter a little shorter than nervellus. 

Abdomen not, or only indistinctly, longer than head and thorax 
combined, a little narrower than thorax; first tergite not twice as 
long as broad at apex, only weakly impressed at extreme base, del- 
icately longitudinally aciculate, the spiracles before end of basal 
fourth, the distance between them much greater than the distance 
from spiracles to base of tergite; second tergite hardly as long as 
broad at apex, delicately aciculate on basal two-thirds, the smooth 
depressed lateral margins broad at base, the sculptured part of ter- 
gite distinctly narrower at the base than at the middle; following 
tergites smooth; ovipositor sheaths not distinctly longer than the 
body. 

Yellow-ferruginous; head testaceous; palpi j'^ellow; antennae fus- 
cous, scape and pedicel testaceous; thorax yellow-ferruginous; legs 
yellowish, also the abdomen entirely; wings faintly dusky, veins 
and stigma brown, the latter broadly yellow at base. 

Male. — Agrees with the female in essential respects; the antennae 
are 48-segmented and the eyes a little smaller. 

Type.—U. S. N. M. No. 43505. 

Type locality. — Germantown, Pa. 

Allotype locality. — Glen Echo, Md. 

Paratype localities. — Falls Church, Va. ; Avon, N. J. 

Remarks. — Described from three females and one male. The type 
was collected September 25, the allotype, September 19, 1920, by 
J. C. Bridwell ; the paratype from Falls Church, Va., was taken by 
E. A. Cushman September 24, 1918, while the other paratype was 
collected on September 27, 1908. This last-mentioned specimen has 
the antennae 45-segmentecl and the stigma mostly yellow. " ^' 

19. MACROCENTRUS ROBUSTUS, new species 

Closely related to ancylivorus, but distinguished especially by its 
more robust form, the unusually broad first abdominal tergite, the 
longer antennae, which are usually 50 to 54 segmented, and the some- 
what broader face and clypeus. 

Female. — Length 1 mm. Head very strongly transverse, short 
antero-posteriorly ; eyes prominent ; malar space a little longer than 
basal width of mandible; face smooth, with only minute scattered 
punctures; clypeus large, broad, more than twice as broad as long 
and fully as broad as length of scape, rather strongly broadly 
emarginate at apex; mandibles stout; longest segment of maxillary 
palpus about as long as second segment of antennal flagellum; 



30 PEOCEEDi:r>rGS of the national museum vol. 80 

apical segment of labial palpus very little longer than the preceding 
segment ; antennae of type broken. 

Thorax stout; scutellum large, more than half as long as propo- 
deum; propodeum finely, more or less transversely, sculptured; pro- 
notum laterally polished, without foveae in the depression; meso- 
pleura smooth ; metapleura a little roughened on apical half ; apical 
teeth of trochanters well developed, conspicuous ; radius arising from 
a little beyond middle of stigma ; nervulus postfurcal by about half 
its length ; submedian cell sparsely hairy apically ; nervellus usually 
a little longer than lower abscissa of basella. 

Abdomen stout ; first tergite unusually broad, usually not distinctly 
one and one-half times as long as broad at apex, delicately, irregu- 
larly, longitudinally aciculate; distance between spiracles of first 
tergite usually greater than half the basal width of propodeum; 
second tergite not quite as long as broad, faintly longitudinally acicu- 
late on basal two-thirds, the depressed lateral margins unusually broad 
at the base ; third tergite much broader than long ; third and follow- 
ing polished ; ovipositor sheaths about as long as the body. 

Yellow-ferruginous; palpi paler; base of mandibles concolorous 
with face ; antennae brown, scape and pedicel paler ; propodeum more 
or less inf uscated except anteriorly ; first tergite also in part more or 
less dusky; legs deep testaceous; wings hyaline; stigma brown, con- 
spicuously pale at base, or yellow with a brownish cloud in apical 
half. 

Male. — In the allotype the propodeum is darker than in the type ; 
also the first tergite, except at apex, and the fourth and following 
tergites are blackish. 

Ty^^e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43507. 

Type locality. — Chatham, Mass. 

Host. — Pyrausta nubUalis Hiibner. 

Remarks. — Described from eight females and six males: The 
type, allotype, and eight paratypes reared in the Bureau of Entomol- 
ogy by R. A. Biron from P. nubilalis taken at the type locality ; three 
paratypes reared by D. W. Jones from the same host, taken at Sa- 
lem, Mass., under Webster No. 16490; and one paratype taken at 
Glassboro, N. J. I have seen 27 additional specimens, all reared 
from P. nubilalis taken in eastern Massachusetts, in the collection of 
the corn borer laboratory at Arlington, Mass. In this material the 
number of segments in the antennae ranges from 50 to 54. There 
is a little variation in color of thorax and abdomen, but the mesoscu- 
tum and the second and third abdominal tergites are always entirely 
testaceous. In length these specimens range from 5.5 to 7 mm. 



AHT. 23 REVISIOlSr OF MACEOCENTRUS MUESEBECK 31 

20. MACROCENTRUS NIGRIPECTUS, new species 

Most similar to ancylivorus, but distinguishable by the black 
markings on mesonotal lobes and mesosternum, by the second tergite 
being completely aciculate, by the lower part of mesopleura being 
closely punctate and subopaque, and by the more distinctly foveolate 
notauli. 

Fe7nale. — Length 4.2 mm. Face at least one and one-half times 
as wide as long, convex, smooth, with only a few fine scattered punc- 
tures, and with a finely impressed median line above ; clypeus strongly 
convex, not twice as wide as long, subtruncate at apex ; eyes promi- 
nent, but not large ; malar space longer than basal width of mandible ; 
maxillary palpi a little longer than width of head, longest segment 
hardly as long as second segment of antennal flagellum ; labial palpi 
short, apical segment but little longer than the preceding segment; 
vertex a little convex; ocell-ocular line twice the diameter of a 
lateral ocellus; antennae 45-segmented. 

Thorax with notauli very finely foveolate; prescutum prominent, 
descending abruptly in front; scutellum small, hardly half as long 
as propodeum; propodeum completely finely rugulose, transversely 
so behind; impression on lateral face of pronotum more or less 
foveolate ; mesopleura impressed and closely punctate on lower half ; 
metapleura finely granularly roughened and subopaque posteriorly; 
anterior trochanters not longer than their coxae, apical teeth of all 
trochanters well developed; posterior coxae faintly transversely 
lineolated; radius arising from barely beyond middle of stigma; 
first discoidal cell much longer than first cubital; nervulus postf ureal 
by about half its length ; submedian cell closely hairy, without a hair- 
less area apically; mediella much more than twice as long as lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter about as long as nervellus; upper 
abscissa of basella but little more than half the lower. 

Abdomen only faintly longer than head and thorax combined; 
first tergite twice as long as broad at apex, a little impressed at ex- 
treme base, entirely closely finely longitudinally aciculate, the spira- 
cles much farther from each other than from base of tergite; sec- 
ond tergite also completely aciculate, except on the depressed lateral 
margins which are broad toward base; third tergite very delicately 
aciculate, at least medially on basal half; ovipositor sheaths distinctly 
longer than the body. ;; •) 

Yellow-ferruginous; vertex rather brownish; antennae brownish, 
blackish toward apex, scape yellowish brown; palpi brown or 
piceous; mesonotal lobes mostly black; mesosternum blackish pos- 
teriorly ; legs testaceous ; wings subhyaline ; stigma yellowish, weakly 
clouded apically; veins brownish; first abdominal tergite somewhat 
brownish ; apical tergites blackish. 



32 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Male. — Similar to the female ; antennae of allotype 44-segmented. 

Type.— U.S.N.M. No. 43501. 

Type locality. — ^Whitesbog, N. J. 

Host. — Ancylis^ species near comptatui Frolich. 

Remarks. — ^Described from nine female and six male specimens 
reared by H. B. Scammell July 30 to August 8, 1916, in the Bureau 
of Entomology under Quaintance No. 12782. I have seen one other 
specimen, not part of the type series, which is in the collection of 
the gipsy moth laboratory and which was taken at North Saugus, 
Mass., June 14, 1906, by E. A. Back. 

21. MACROCENTRUS ANCYUVORUS Rohwer 

Macrocentrus ancylivora Rohweb, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 25, p. 168., 
1923. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

This species is of particular interest to economic entomologists at 
the present time owing to the apparent importance it has assumed 
as a parasite of the introduced oriental fruit moth {Laspeyresia 
molesta Busck). It is, however, only one of several species of 
Macrocentrus that are being obtained from the larvae of that pest in 
the eastern part of the United States, and because of the variation 
occurring within species and the little attention that has been given 
to the classification of the species of Macrocentrus^ some uncertainty 
has existed regarding the identity of specimens reared from L. 
molesta. 

From delicatus, which in some areas appears to be at least as im- 
portant a parasite of the fruit moth as ancylivortis, the latter is easily 
distinguished by having the first tergite more or less impressed at 
base, with the spiracles not beyond the basal fourth, while in delicatus 
there is not even a suggestion of an impression at base of first tergite 
and the spiracles are much beyond the basal fourth ; in addition, the 
stigma of delicatus is always pale yellow, the radius arises from 
much beyond the middle of stigma, the nervulus is usually postfurcal 
by as much as its own length, and the antennae are usually 48 to 55 
segmented; ancylivorus has the stigma usually brown, with a large 
pale spot at base, the radius arising from only slightly beyond middle 
of stigma, the nervulus never postfurcal by as much as its own 
length, and the antennae usually 42 to 48 segmented. 

From instdbilis and laspeyresiae.^ which are rather less commonly 
reared from L. molesta.^ ancylivorus is sometimes less easily dis- 
tinguished. It differs from both species, however, in the shorter 
palpi, the longest segment of maxillary palpus being no longer, 
usually shorter, than the second segment of the antennal flagellum, 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 33 

and the apical segment of the labial palpus being but little longer 
than the preceding segment. In having the nervulus postfurcal by 
distinctly less than its length, the mesonotum completely testaceous 
without blackish markings on the lobes, the second and third tergites 
always entirely testaceous, the base of mandibles testaceous rather 
than yellowish white, and the male scape not strongly enlarged, 
ancylivorus differs further from most specimens of those two species. 
Moreover, the second and third abdominal tergites are smoother .than 
is usually true in mstahUis, while the cheeks are narrower and the 
antennae usually with fewer segments than in laspeyresiae. 

The face is usually considerably broader than long, although not 
so distinctly so in some specimens from the Southern States, in 
these cases an increase in the size of the eyes being accompanied by a 
correspondingly narrower face and shorter malar space; antennae 
usually 42 to 48 segmented, the scape of the male not much thickened ; 
thorax with pleura mostly smooth; first discoidal cell much longer 
than first cubital ; submedian cell usually only weakly hairy apically ; 
mediella nearly three times as long as lower abscissa of basella ; sec- 
ond abdominal tergite usually smooth posteriorly, and with the 
depressed lateral margins broad at base; the third tergite usually 
smooth or with only faint suggestion of lineolation; ovipositor 
sheaths as long as the body. Testaceous or testaceo-ferruginous, 
with more or less of metanotum, propodeum, first tergite, and the 
fourth and following tergites often more or less blackish or infus- 
cated. 

The foregoing discussion and descriptive notes are based very 
largely on the type series and many other specimens in the national 
collection representing a ran^e in distribution from New Jersey to 
Texas and New Mexico. The principal host appears to be Laspeyresia 
molesta Busck; but the type series and some additional specimens 
were reared from the strawberry leaf-roller (Ancylis comptana 
Frolich), while others are recorded from the larvae of 'EpibleTna 
strenuana Walker (Moorestown, N. J., 1929), Canarsia sp. (Ben- 
tonville. Ark., 1919), Epagoge sp. (Virginia, 1910), HoTneosoiria 
electellum Hulst, Anacavipsis sp. (Texas), and Carpocapsa pomon- 
ella Linnaeus (New Mexico, 1912) ; I have also seen considerable ad- 
ditional material, all from L. molesta^ sent me by H. W. Allen, in 
charge of the oriental fruit moth investigations of the Bureau of En- 
tomology, at Moorestown, N. J., and by W. E. Britton, of the Con- 
necticut Agricultural Experiment Station. Still other material 
studied includes collected specimens in the collection of the Boston 
Society of Natural History, taken on the islands of Nantucket and 
Marthas Vineyard, Mass., and at Fall River, Mass. (1913) ; and a 



34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM voi-. 80 

series at the gipsy moth laboratory, reared July, 1917, from Ex- 
artema sericorana Walsingham, taken at Westerly, R. I. 

22. MACROCENTRUS INSTABILIS, new species 

Most similar to laspeyresiae^ but differing in the usually narrower 
and smoother face, the shorter malar space, the usually entirely 
brown stigma, in the mesoscutum posteriorly being usually more 
sharply emarginate, with the scutellar furrow not strongly trans- 
verse, in the relatively longer and narrower second abdominal ter- 
gite, the usually stronger sculpturing of second and third tergites, 
and the somewhat smaller size. 

Female. — Length 5 mm. Head strongly transverse, much wider 
than thorax, eyes large, prominent; malar space shorter than basal 
width of mandible; face, viewed from in front, not or but little 
broader than long, entirely smooth and shining; clypeus strongly 
convex, rather long, broadly very weakly emarginate at apex, 
smooth; distance from clypeal foveae to eyes less than length of 
clypeus; palpi slender, longest segment of maxillary palpus dis- 
tinctly longer than second segment of antennal flagellum, apical seg- 
ment of labial palpus lengthened; antennae longer than the body, 
49-segmented in type. 

Thorax slender; prescutum prominent; notauli minutely indis- 
tinctly foveolate; propodeum very finely transversely rugulose, 
smooth at base laterally; sides of pronotum, mesopleura and meta- 
pleura polished; coxae polished; apical teeth of trochanters dis- 
tinct but usually not more than three or four on each trochanter; 
radius arising from middle of stigma; radial cell extending very 
nearly to extreme apex of wing; first discoidal cell much longer 
than the first cubital; nervulus usually postf ureal by as much as its 
own length; submedian cell with a hairless area apically; mediella 
nearly three times as long as lower abscissa of basella, the latter just 
about as long as nervellus and but little longer than upper abscissa 
of basella. 

Abdomen but very little longer than head and thorax combined; 
first tergite twice as long as broad at apex, closely finely longitudi- 
nally aciculate, impressed at base, spiracles a little farther from 
each other than from base of tergite; second tergite slightly longer 
than broad, closely finely completely aciculate, the lateral depres- 
sions usually narrow at base; third tergite mostly finely aciculate 
on basal half; rest smooth; ovipositor sheaths a little longer than 
the body. 

Head testaceous; palpi and base of mandibles very pale yellow; 
antennae mostly yellowish, the basal flagellar segments darker ; dor- 
sum of thorax mostly piceous in type; propodeum blackish; pleura 



ART. 23 REVISION OP MACEOCENTRUS MUESEBECK 35 

testaceous ; mesosternum tinged with brown ; legs yellow, usually very 
pale at base ; wings entirely clear hyaline ; stigma uniformly brown, 
only very indistinctly paler at base ; dorsum of abdomen mostly black, 
the apical segments a little paler. 

Male. — Not differing in any important respect from the female. 
The antennae of allotype are 47-segmented ; the scape is somewhat 
swollen, distinctly larger than in the female. 

Type.—V.S.'^M. No. 43503. 

Type locality. — Harriman, Tenn. 

Host. — Laspeyresia molesta Busck. 

Remarks. — Described from 12 females and 14 males reared by H. 
G. Butler, September, 1930. The national collection contains, in 
addition to the type series, one specimen from L. molesta., taken at 
South River, N. J.; three reared from Laspeyresia funehrana 
Treitschke at Washington, D. C. (W. B. Wood) ; also one reared 
from Coloeophora malivorella Riley at the same locality; several 
from the last-mentioned host taken at Morgantown, W. Va. (E. 
Gould) ; a series from L. molesta collected at several different points 
in Ohio; several specimens reared from Aci^ohasis caryivorell-a 
Ragonot at College Station, Tex. (S. W. Bilsing) ; and one from 
Acrohasis hehescella Hulst at Victoria, Tex. I have also seen two 
specimens reared from L. molesta^ at Chambersburg, Pa., by J. O. 
Pepper and J. R. Stear, respectively. 

There is much variation in color, the thorax and abdomen ranging 
from entirely blackish dorsally to completely yellow, and in the 
palest specimens the stigma is usually yellow rather than brown. In 
the specimens from Texas, which are the palest, the eyes and ocelli 
are a little larger than in more northern material. 

23. MACROCENTRUS UTILIS, new species 

Most closely resembling laspeyresiae., but differing especially in 
having the second tergite completely, and the basal half of the third, 
closely aciculate, in the more strongly elevated prescutum, in the 
more strongly transverse head, and in the more uniform yellowish- 
ferruginous color. 

Female. — Length 7.5 mm. Head strongly transverse, temples and 
cheeks narrow, the cheeks, viewed from the side, not wider than the 
temples ; face rather large, much broader than long, very shallowly 
sparsely punctate ; eyes large, prominent ; malar space about as long 
as basal width of mandible; clypeus quite strongly convex, anterior 
margin truncate; distance from clypeal foveae to eyes about equal 
to length of clypeus ; lateral ocelli usually not distinctly larger than 
median ocellus; longest segment of maxillary palpus a little longer 
than second segment of antennal flagellum ; apical segment of labial 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

palpus much longer than preceding segment ; antennae much longer 
than the body, 54-segmented in type; first flagellar segment very 
long, a little longer than the eyes. 

Thorax rather stout, deep; prescutum very prominent; notauli 
f oveolate posteriorly ; scutellum elongate, more than half as long as 
propodeum; propodeum ruguloso-reticulate ; sides of pronotum 
mostly smooth, the impression straight, weakly foveate; mesopleura 
smooth above, confluently punctate below; metapleura faintly sha- 
greened, subopaque ; posterior coxae delicately transversely lineolated 
posteriorly; apical teeth of trochanters well developed, conspicuous; 
radius arising from scarcely beyond middle of stigma; radial cell 
extending very nearly to extreme apex of wing; submedian cell 
weakly hairy, with a completely hairless area apically ; nervulus post- 
furcal by nearly its own length ; mediella nearly three times as long 
as lower abscissa of basella, the latter but little longer than the upper 
abscissa and not distinctly as long as nervellus. 

Abdomen distinctly longer than head and thorax combined; first 
tergite fully twice as long as broad at apex, closely finely aciculate, 
the spiracles about as far from each other as from base of tergite; 
second tergite slightly longer than broad, completely closely finely 
aciculate, the lateral depressed margins narrow, the sculptured part 
of the tergite not, or scarcely, widening from base to middle; third 
tergite very nearly as long as broad at apex, delicately aciculate on 
basal two-thirds; remainder of dorsum of abdomen smooth; ovi- 
positor sheaths a little longer than the body. 

Yellow-ferruginous; antennae testaceous, blackish apically, the 
two or three basal flagellar segments not darker than the following; 
palpi pale yellow; legs concolorous with body; wings hyaline or 
subhyaline, stigma brownish yellow, indistinctly paler at base ; veins 
dark brown; propodeum and first abdominal tergite weakly tinged 
with reddish brown. 

Male. — Essentially similar to the female; antennae of allotype 
52-segmented, the scape somewhat swollen; flagellum brownish. 

rj^ioe.— U.S.N.M. No. 43504. 

Type locality. — Carlisle, Iowa. 

Host. — Pyrausta ainsliei Heinrich. 

Remarks. — Described from seven female and six male specimens 
reared by G. C. Decker at the Iowa Agricultural Experiment Station, 
June, 1926. The national collection contains, in addition to the 
type series, 14 specimens reared from the same host at Manhattan, 
Kans., by R. Schopp ; and one specimen collected by H, H. Smith at 
Coleta, Ala. I have also seen four specimens in the collection of 
the European Corn Borer Laboratory at Monroe, Mich., from Car- 
roll County, Ind., and likewise reared from P. ainsliei. 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACEOCENTRUS MUESEBECK 37 

There is very little variation in color in this material, the entire 
insect being rather uniformly yellow-ferruginous with only the 
propodeum and first tergite sometimes weakly inf uscated. The num- 
ber of segments in the antennae ranges from 50 to 56. 

24. MACROCENTRUS LASPEYRESIAE, new species 

Very similar to instabilis, utilis, and ancylivorus. The more im- 
portant differences are discussed under those species. 

Female. — Length 6 mm. Head rather large, much broader than 
thorax ; as seen from the side the head appears fully as thick antero- 
posteriorly at the level of the lower eye margins as at the insertion of 
antennae, the cheeks being broader than temples; clypeus not es- 
pecially strongly convex, more than twice as broad as long ; distance 
from clypeal f oveae to eyes less than length of clypeus ; face usually 
nearly one and one-half times as broad as long, with well separated 
punctures; longest segment of maxillary palpus longer than second 
segment of antennal flagellum ; apical segment of labial palpus long ; 
antennae much longer than the body, 53-segmented in the type. 

Thorax elongate; prescutum not especially prominent, rather less 
strongly elevated and descending less abruptly anteriorly than in 
related species ; notauli not distinctly f oveolate ; scutellum more than 
half as long as propodeum; propodeum narrowing quite strongly 
behind, finely granularly rugulose on basal half, except laterally 
at base where it is mostly smooth, more or less transversely 
striate apically; sides of pronotum and the pleura smooth, with 
only scattered punctures; coxae smooth; apical teeth of trochan- 
ters strong, conspicuous; trochanters of middle legs usually with 
six or eight teeth ; radius arising from very slightly beyond middle of 
stigma; radial cell long but not quite attaining extreme apex of 
wing; metacarpus hardly extending beyond apex of radial cell; 
submedian cell only very sparsely hairy; nervulus postf ureal by 
nearly its own length; mediella much more than twice as long as 
lower abscissa of basella, the latter not distinctly as long as nervellus. 

Abdomen a little longer than head and thorax combined; first 
tergite more than twice as long as broad, with a distinct impression 
at base, and entirely closely longitudinally aciculate, the spiracles 
not distinctly beyond basal fourth and farther from each other than 
from base of tergite ; second tergite not distinctly longer than broad 
at apex, mostly finely aciculate, smooth apically, the depressed lat- 
eral margins broad at base, the raised sculptured part of the tergite 
broadening gradually behind ; third tergite smooth, with only faint 
longitudinal lineolation medially; remaining tergites smooth; ovi- 
positor sheaths as long as the body. 



38 PEOCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

Head yellow; vertex and occiput brownish; antennae brown or 
brownish yellow, the basal flagellar segments usually more or less 
blackish; thorax yellow, the mesonotal lobes more or less fuscous or 
blackish ; metanotum and propodeum blackish ; legs entirely yellow ; 
wings hyaline ; stigma yellow with a large brownish cloud, or brown, 
broadly pale at base; abdomen yellow, with first tergite black, the 
second blackish on basal half, the third more or less infuscated 
medially, the following mostly yellowish. 

Male. — Similar to the female, except that the scape is rather con- 
spicuously thickened; antennae of allotype 49-segmented ; abdomen 
more completely blackish above than in the type, and antennae 
darker. 

ry^e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43506. 

Type locality. — Kanawha Station, W. Va. 

Host. — Laspeyresia caryana Fitch. 

Remarks. — Described from six female and five male specimens 
reared September 7, 1906, by Dr. A. D. Hopkins, at the type locality, 
and one female and three males reared at Richmond, Ohio, by A. A. 
Girault. 

In addition to the type series, the national collection contains 
specimens reared from Laspeyresia molesta Busck at Moorestown, 
N. J. ; from Carpocapsa pomonella Linnaeus in Virginia, Ohio, and 
Arkansas; from Acr^hasis species in Texas; from Rhyacionia 
rigidana Fernald at Valparaiso, Fla. ; and from Laspeyresia caryana 
at A. and M. College, Miss. There is considerable variation in 
color, both in the type series and in the additional specimens just 
mentioned, but nearly always the mesonotal lobes, the metanotum, the 
propodeum, and the three basal abdominal tergites are at least some- 
what infuscated; the stigma rarely is entirely yellowish without a 
distinct cloud. 

25. MACROCENTRUS MELLIPES Provancher 

Macrocentrus mellipes Peovancher, Nat. Can., vol, 12, p. 172, fig. 19, 1880. 

Type. — In the Museum of Public Instruction, Quebec, Canada. 

This species, the type of which I have not seen, has been placed in 
the key on the basis of the original description and supplemental 
notes made by S. A. Rohwer on an examination of the type in 1915. 
The United States National Museum contains a single female speci- 
men from Montana, which appears to agree with mellipes in struc- 
ture, sculpture, and color, and although it is somewhat smaller than 
the type I believe it to be that species. Evidently Tnellipes is very 
similar to aegeriae but can be separated by the characters given in 
the key. 



AET. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTEUS MUESEBECK 39 

26. MACROCENTRUS AEGERIAE Rohwer 

Macrocentrus aegeriae Ron wee, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wasliington, vol. 17, p. 56, 1915. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

Rather easily distinguished from other Nearctic species by the 
characters ascribed to it in the key. Apparently it is most similar 
to meUifes but differs especially in the black posterior tibiae. It is 
exceedingly close to the European mar^ginator (Nees), and may, in 
fact, be identical with that species, which is also a parasite of 
Aegeriidae, but I should like to see additional material of marginator 
before s^monymizing aegeriae with it. 

In length aegeriae ranges from 6 mm. to nearly 10 mm. The head 
is only very little wider than thorax ; face broad, punctate ; clypeus 
large; eyes not large; malar space usually longer than basal width 
of mandible ; antennae 41 to 49 segmented ; longest segment of max- 
illary palpus slightly longer than second segment of antennal fla- 
gellum; mesopleura closely punctate below; metapleura punctate; 
apical teeth of middle and posterior trochanters well developed ; first 
cubital cell very large, at least as long as first discoidal ; second ab- 
scissa of cubitus much more than half as long as recurrent vein; 
radius arising from far beyond middle of stigma; submedian cell 
sparsely hairy; nervulus usually postf ureal by less than half its 
length ; mediella usually a little more than twice as long as the lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter about as long as nervellus; abdomen 
with first two tergites, and usually more or less of third, aciculate; 
first tergite strongly impressed at base; ovipositor sheaths fully as 
long as the body. Black; antennae black; lower part of meso- 
pleura and the mesosternum often ferruginous; legs testaceous, the 
posterior femora at apex, posterior tibiae except at base, and the pos- 
terior tarsi, black; wings subhyaline; stigma entirely brown; veins 
brown. 

The material examined consists of the type and about 30 addi- 
tional specimens in the national collection from localities in New 
York. Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Virginia, West Virginia, Michi- 
gan, North Carolina, Mississippi, Louisiana, Kansas, Idaho, Cali- 
fornia, and Washington; and two specimens in the collection of the 
Boston Society of Natural History, from New Hampshire and 
Maine, respectively. Hosts recorded in the case of the material in 
the National Museum include Synanthedo7i castaneae Busck, S. ex- 
itiosa Say, S. pictipes Grote and Robinson, S. tipuliformis Linneaus, 
S. ainerlcana Beuteimiuller, Proteopteryx holUaiia Slingerland (?), 
Laspeyresia cupressana Kearfott, an undetermined aegeriid larva 
in flowering dogwood, and an undetermined larva in rhododendron. 



40 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL, MUSEUM vol.80 

27. MACROCENTRUS PULCHRIPENNIS, new species 

Most closely related to seTniniger, from which it differs especially 
in the smaller, nonprominent eyes, the broader face, the broad, very 
weakly convex clypeus, the shorter palpi, the impunctate pleura, and 
the paler basal abdominal tergites. 

Female. — Length 4.5 mm. Head rather small, in profile lenticu- 
lar; face very broad, twice as broad as long, temples and cheeks 
convex; eyes not large, long oval, about one and one-half times as 
long as wide, not prominent, not distinctly extending beyond outer 
margins of temples ; clypeus short and broad, nearly flat, subtruncate 
at apex; distance from clypeal foveae to eyes longer than length of 
clypeus; mandibles long; ocell-ocular line nearly twice diameter of 
an ocellus; maxillary palpi scarcely longer than height of head, the 
longest segment shorter than second flagellar segment; labial palpi 
very short, distinctly shorter than face from antennal foramina to 
clypeus; antennae unusually slender, only slightly longer than body, 
42-segmented. 

Propodeum more or less transversely ruguloso-striate, nearly 
smooth at base; sides of pronotum and the mesopleura and meta- 
pleura completely smooth and shining, impunctate; metapleural 
tooth not distinct ; mesosternal suture deeply impressed posteriorly ; 
legs very slender; apical teeth of posterior trochanters very weak, 
^hose of anterior and middle trochanters well developed; radius 
arising from considerably beyond middle of stigma; radial cell 
rather short, ending much before apex of wing; second abscissa 
of radius in type shorter than the first, also much shorter than first 
intercubitus, first cubital cell very long, not distinctly shorter than 
first discoidal ; second abscissa of cubitus fully half as long as recur- 
rent vein; nervulus postfurcal by less than half its length; sub- 
median cell very weakly hairy ; the setae of basal half of wing very 
short and indistinct; mediella more than twice as long as lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter shorter than nervellus; radiella not 
sinuate near middle, radiellan cell not widening at apex; upper 
abscissa of basella interstitial with transverse abscissa of subcostella; 
fringe of hairs on posterior margin of hind wing unusually short. 

Abdomen a little longer than head and thorax combined; first 
tergite flattened, weakly impressed at base, polished basally, very 
weakly aciculate on apical half; spiracles not beyond basal fourth, 
and farther from each other than from base of tergite; rest of 
abdomen polished, with only very faint suggestion of aciculation 
basally on second tergite; second and third tergites fused, the sec- 
ond suture altogether wanting; ovipositor sheaths a little longer 
than the body. Head ferruginous; palpi and antennae blackish, 
scape and pedicel ferruginous; thorax ferruginous, with propodeum 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTRUS — MUESEBECK 41 

blackish; legs yellowish brown; wings unusually clear hyaline, iri- 
descent; stigma dark brown with a small pale spot in the mem- 
brane at base; abdomen brownish ferruginous, more or less infus- 
cated, the fourth and following tergites black. 

7'y^e.— U.S.N.M. No. 43494. 

Tyye locality. — Richfield, Utah. 

Remarks. — Described from one female taken at a light trap, June 
15, 1929. 

28. MACROCENTRUS SEMINIGER, new species 

Closely allied to pulchrl'pennis but differing as noted in the key 
and in the discussion under that species. Also very similar to affinis, 
from which it may be distinguished by the entirely black abdomen 
and black posterior tibiae. 

Female. — Length 6.5 mm. Face smooth, with some weak punctures 
above clypeus, also just below^ antennae; eyes large, extending promi- 
nently beyond outer margins of temples; clypeus strongly convex; 
distance from clypeal foveae to eyes shorter than length of clypeus; 
maxillary palpi about as long as width of head ; two apical segments 
of labial palpus subequal; antennae as long as the body or very 
slightly longer, 39-segmented, tapering to apex. Thorax rather 
stout, deep ; prescutum prominently elevated ; notauli distinctly f ove- 
olate; propodeum rather broad, strongly convex, irregularly trans- 
versely striate, more or less smooth basally; prosternum, sides of 
pronotum, mesopleura, and metapleura uniformly punctate, shining ; 
coxae polished ; calcaria of posterior tibia slender, the longer calcar- 
ium nearly half as long as basitarsus; radius arising from beyond 
middle of stigma; apex of radial cell considerably before wing apex; 
metacarpus extending about length of second intercubitus beyond 
apex of radial cell; first discoidal cell slightly longer than first 
cubital ; second abscissa of cubitus half as long as recurrent ; nervulus 
only slightly postfurcal; submedian cell nearly glabrous, with only 
scattered rather indistinct hairs; mediella more than twice lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter about equal to nervellus ; upper abscissa 
of basella interstitial with transverse abscissa of subcostella ; radiel- 
lan cell not broadening at all at apex. Abdomen not distinctly longer 
than head and thorax combined; first tergite rather stout, hardly 
twice as long as broad, broadly impressed at base, finely longitudin- 
ally aciculate; second tergite only very faintly aciculate at base, not 
separated from third, the second suture wanting; most of second, 
and all of following tergites polished; ovipositor sheaths about as 
long as the body. 

Head yellowish ferruginous; antennae including scape piceous; 
palpi blackish ; thorax ferruginous, propodeum brownish black ; legs 



42 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

ferruginous, the posterior coxae apically, the posterior femora, and 
all tibiae and tarsi, piceous to blackish ; abdomen entirely black, in- 
cluding the sternites; wings clear hyaline, stigma dark brown, veins 
paler. 

Type.—U.S.'NM. No. 43495. 

Type locality. — San Diego, Calif. 

Remarks. — Described from a single female specimen. 

29. MACROCENTRUS AFFINIS, new species 

Very similar to sefniniger, but differing in the mostly brownish 
abdomen and yellowish legs, and in the longer palpi. 

Female. — Length 5.5 mm. Face smooth, weakly punctate 
medially; eyes large, very prominent; clypeus rather large, strongly 
convex, subtruncate apically; distance from clypeal foveae to eyes 
less than length of clypeus ; f rons short, maxillary palpi much longer 
than width of head, the longest segment fully as long as second 
segment of antennal flagellum ; apical segment of labial palpus much 
longer than the third; antennae a little longer than the body, 44- 
segmented. Thorax rather narrow, deep; prescutum prominently 
elevated ; notauli not f oveolate ; scutellum more than half as long as 
propodeum ; propodeum transversely striate, more w^eakly so basally, 
smooth at extreme base ; prosternum smooth ; sides of pronotum only 
indistinctly punctate; mesopleura flat, not depressed below, uni- 
formly punctate, the punctures well separated ; metapleura punctate ; 
hind coxae polished; a.pical teeth of trochanters well developed; 
longer calcarium of hind tibia very nearly half as long as basitarsus ; 
radius arising from a little beyond middle of stigma; radial cell 
ending much before wing apex ; metacarpus extending the length of 
second intercubitus beyond apex of radial cell; first cubital cell 
about as long as first discoidal; second abscissa of cubitus much 
more than half as long as recurrent ; nervulus postf ureal by half its 
length; submedian cell almost entirely glabrous, with only a few 
scattered hairs ; mediella more than twice the length of lower abscissa 
of basella, the latter not quite as long as nervellus ; upper abscissa of 
basella interstitial with transverse abscissa of subcostella; radiellan 
cell narrowing slightly at apex. Abdomen not distinctly longer than 
head and thorax; first tergite about twice as long as broad, deeply 
impressed at base, finely but not closely aciculate ; second tergite not 
distinctly longer than broad at apex, smooth except toward base, 
where it is very feebly aciculate ; remainder of dorsum of abdomen 
polished ; ovipositor sheaths a little longer than the body. 

Head yellowish ferruginous, vertex blackish; antennae including 
scape and pedicel blackish; palpi slightly dusky; thorax brownish 
varied with black in the depression surrounding scutellum, and on 



ART. 23 EEVISION OF MACROCENTKUS — MUESEBEOK 43 

propodeum; legs entirely yellow; wings clear hyaline; stigma dark 
brown, veins somewhat paler; abdomen brownish yellow, more or 
less blackish apically. 

Type.—U.S.^M. No. 43496. 

Type locality. — Ithaca, N. Y. 

Remarks. — Described from a single female specimen. 

30. MACROCENTRUS FUSCIPENNIS, new species 

Resembles pallisteri, bnt differs particularly in the unusually small 
nonprominent eyes, the broader face, the shorter robust abdomen, 
the relatively shorter second abdominal tergite, and the infumated 
wings. 

FeTTiale. — Length 5 mm. Head rather thin antero-posteriorly ; 
eyes unusually small, hardly half the height of head, and scarcely 
extending beyond outer margins of temples; face fully twice as 
broad as long, polished; malar space as long as clypeus; clypeus 
strongly convex, the distance between clypeal foveae hardly equal 
to distance from foveae to eyes; mandibles large; vertex convex, 
rising considerably above upper level of eyes ; ocell-ocular and post- 
ocellar lines subequal, about twice the diameter of a lateral ocellus; 
maxillary palpi slightly longer than width of head, the longest seg- 
ment not distinctly as long as second segment of antennal fiagellum ; 
antennae slightly longer than the body, 45-segmented. 

Thorax rather stout; prescutum prominent, rather abruptly de- 
clivous in front; scutellar furrow not large; scutellum more than 
half the length of propodeum; propodeum broad, delicately rugulose, 
with some irregular, transverse raised lines on posterior half, the 
lateral carinae complete, strong; sides of pronotum, and the meso- 
pleura and metapleura, smooth; prepectal carina complete; meso- 
sternal furrow not deejDly impressed posteriorly; posterior coxae 
faintly transversely lineolate above toward apex; longer calcarium 
of posterior tibia about half as long as metatarsus; apical teeth 
of trochanters well developed ; radius arising from beyond middle of 
stigma; radial cell not nearly attaining extreme apex of wing; first 
cubital cell about as long as first discoidal ; second abscissa of cubitus 
much more than half the length of recurrent vein ; nervulus intersti- 
tial with basal vein; submedian cell weakly hairy at apex; radiella 
weakly sinuate, radiellan cell a little the narrowest at the middle; 
mediella fully twice lower abscissa of basella ; nervellus not inclivous ; 
upper abscissa of basella interstitial with transverse abscissa of sub- 
costella. 

Abdomen not distinctly longer than head and thorax combined, its 
greatest width about equal to width of mesoscutum ; first tergite not 
twice as long as broad at apex, deeply impressed at base, entirely 



44 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM tol. 80 

closely striate, the spiracles not beyond basal fourth of tergite ; second 
tergite broader at apex than long, longitudinally striate, the lateral 
depressed margins broad at base ; third tergite subequal with second, 
finely aciculate at base ; rest smooth, ovipositor sheaths about as long 
as the body. 

Testaceous; palpi brownish; antennae piceous, scape and pedicel 
brownish yellow ; legs deep testaceous ; tai^i a little inf uscated ; wings 
distinctly somewhat fuscous. 

Type.—U.S.^M. No. 43497. 

Type locality. — Germantown, Pa. 

Remarks. — Described from three females from the type locality 
and one female from Maspeth, Long Island, N. Y. The type and 
one paratype were collected September 25, 1904, the two remaining 
paratypes on October 1, 1904, and September 27, 1924, respectively. 
The only paratype with complete antennae has these 45-segmented, 
like the type. 

31. MACROCENTRUS PALLISTERI De Gant 

Macrocentrus paedlscae Riley MS., Insect Life, vol. 3, p. 59, 1891. 
Macrocentrus pallisteri De Gant, Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 32, p. 65, 
1930. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

Closely related to cerasivoi'anae, and unusually pale specimens of 
pallisteri are sometimes difficult to distinguish from that species; 
however, the differences noted in the key will apparently separate 
the two. It is possible that pallisteri is identical with pectoralis 
Provancher, but I have not seen the type or authentically identified 
specimens of the latter, and accordingly am recognizing pallisteri 
as a valid name. 

In length, specimens of pallisteri range from 5 mm. to 9 mm. Head 
but very slightly wider than thorax; face nearly twice as broad as 
long; temples and cheeks rounded, not strongly receding; clypeus 
large, long, subtruncate apically ; longest segment of maxillary pal- 
pus not distinctly as long as second segment of antennal flagellum; 
antennae usually from 44 to 50 segmented. 

Thorax stout; mesopleura anteriorly below, and prepectus, usually 
closely punctate, sometimes confluently so ; mesosternal suture deeply 
impressed posteriorly ; posterior coxae usually transversely aciculate 
or lineolate apically; first cubital cell large, about as long as first 
discoidal ; second abscissa of cubitus much more than half as long as 
recurrent, often nearly as long; radius arising from beyond middle 
of stigma ; submedian cell sparsely hairy, at least at apex ; nervulus 
usually interstitial; hind wing with nervellus not inclivous, hardly 
as long as lower abscissa of basella, which is much less than half as 



ART. 23 EEVISION OF MACKOCENTRUS MUESEBECK 45 

long as mediella ; upper abscissa of basella interstitial with trans- 
verse abscissa of subcostella; radiella sinuate though less strongly 
than in cerasivoranae. 

Abdomen usually rather stout; first and second tergites strongly 
longitudinally striate ; the third sometimes more delicately so, and the 
sculpture restricted to basal half or two-thirds ; first tergite impressed 
at base, the spiracles before end of basal fourth and farther from each 
other than from base of tergite ; ovipositor sheaths fully as long as 
the body. 

Ferruginous, varied with black; vertex and more or less of occiput 
usually blackish; face varying from entirely ferruginous or testa- 
ceous to black ; thorax also varying from entirely testaceous to mostly 
black, usually at least the sutures of mesonotum, the metanotum, and 
the propodeum blackish ; legs testaceous or ferruginous, tarsi usually 
more or less fuscous ; wings subhyaline, stigma usually brown, pale at 
base; abdomen testaceous or ferruginous, the tergites beyond the third 
most frequently black. 

In addition to the type the national collection has specimens rep- 
resenting a range in distribution from Massachusetts and eastern 
Canada to Missouri and Kansas. Hosts recorded are Epiblema 
otiosana Clemens, E. scudderiana Clemens, and E. strenuana Walker. 
I have also seen two collected specimens from Massachusetts in the 
collection of the Boston Society of Natural History, and one from 
New York in the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences. 

32. MACROCENTRUS CERASFVORANAE Viercck 

Macrocentrus cerasivoranae Viereck, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 42, p. 623, 1912. 

Type. — In the United States National Museum. 

Easily distinguished except from occasional specimens of pallisferi, 
and the longer antennae and palpi, the color characters mentioned 
in the key, the usually more strongly receding temples and cheeks, 
and the usually relatively shorter ocell-ocular line, will separate it 
from that species. 

Length usually 7 to 9 mm. Head but little wider than thorax; 
face shining, but usually punctate; clypeus large, long, not distinctly 
twice as broad as long; eyes prominent, large; ocell-ocular line 
usually distinctly less than one and one-half times diameter of a 
lateral ocellus. Prescutum usually more prominently elevated than in 
pallisterl; lower part of mesopleura depressed and closely punctate; 
metapleura punctate, confluently so posteriorly; posterior coxae 
usually finely transversely aciculate or lineolate; first cubital cell 
about as long as first discoidal ; second abscissa of cubitus distinctly 
more, usually much more, than half as long as recurrent vein ; radius 



46 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 

arising from much beyond middle of stigma, inner side of latter 
twice as long as the outer ; nervulus usually a little postf ureal, rarely 
interstitial ; radiella strongly arched so that radiellan cell is very nar- 
row at the middle; mediella twice as long as lower abscissa of basella, 
the latter fully as long as nervellus ; upper abscissa of basella inter- 
stitial with transverse abscissa of subcostella. Abdomen longer than 
head and thorax combined; first and second, and most of third, 
tergites closely longitudinally striate ; first tergite impressed at base ; 
spiracles not beyond basal fourth of tergite; ovipositor sheaths a 
little longer than the body. 

Color uniformly ferruginous; antennae sometimes more or less 
brownish ; tarsi usually paler than femora or tibiae ; wings hyaline ; 
stigma uniformly yellow or brownish yellow. 

In addition to the type series the national collection contains 
several specimens reared from Cacoecia fervidana Clemens in North 
Carolina and Virginia (C. Heinrich), two from Cacoecia cerasivo- 
rana Fitch in Ohio (H. C. Ingerson), and collected specimens from 
Maine, New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, 
Michigan, Kansas, Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, and Washington. 
Additional material examined consists of several specimens in the 
collection of the Boston Society of Natural History from Marthas 
Vineyard and Nantucket, Mass., and more than 200 specimens at the 
gipsy moth laboratory, which were reared from C. cerasivorana and 
G. fervidana taken at various localities in the New England States 
and New Jersey. 

83. MACROCENTRUS DELICATUS Cresson 

Macrocentrus delicatus Cresson, Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc, vol. 4, p. 178, 1872. 

Type. — In the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. 

Most closely allied to nwperus and texanus but easily distinguished 
from both by lacking the conspicuous blackish transverse band on 
vertex, and otherwise as noted in the key. 

One of the most common of the Nearctic species of Mac9'ocentru8, 
and rather easily recognized. The following descriptive notes are 
given to supplement the characters mentioned in the key: Ranges 
in length from about 4 mm to about 8 mm. Head considerably 
wider than thorax; eyes very large; temples and cheeks strongly 
receding directly behind eyes; antennae usually 48 to 55 segmented, 
but rarely, in unusually large specimens, up to 60-segmented ; the 
male scape conspicuously thickened; face smooth, not or indistinctly 
broader than long; longest segment of maxillary palpus usually a 
little longer than second segment of antennal flagellum. Mesoscutum 
smooth medially behind, the notauli usually not nearly extending 



ART. 23 REVISION OF MACKOCENTEUS MUESEBECK 47 

to apex ; propodeum mostly delicately and more or less transversely 
sculptured, smooth at base; sides of pronotum and pleura polished; 
radius arising from much beyond middle of stigma, the first abscissa 
of radius perpendicular to anterior margin of wing, or only very 
slightly oblique; first discoidal cell longer than first cubital; sub- 
median cell weakly hairy, usually with a hairless area apically; 
nervulus usually postfurcal by its own length, or very nearly ; medi- 
ella fully twice the lower abscissa of basella, the latter usually a little 
longer than nervellus. Abdomen with first, second, and more or less 
of third, tergites closely longitudinally aciculate; the first convex 
at base, not impressed in front of the spiracles, the latter near end 
of basal third and usually distinctly farther from base of tergite 
than from each other; spiracles not very prominent; ovipositor 
sheaths distinctly a little longer than the body. 

Yellow; sometimes completely yellow, but most frequently with 
more or less of dorsum of thorax and abdomen varied with black; 
in the darkest specimens mesonotal lobes, scutellum, metanotum, and 
propodeum piceous to blackish with the abdomen entirely blackish 
except at apex; head always yellow; palpi pale yellow, antennae 
yellowish, basal flagellar segments sometimes darker; legs yellow; 
wings hyaline, stigma always entirely yellow, veins yellowish to 
brown. 

The following material, in addition to the type, has been ex- 
amined: At the United States National Museum, two paratypes 
from Texas and a large number of specimens from numerous locali- 
ties ranging from Pennsylvania to Florida and Texas, and includ- 
ing material reared from Laspeyresia molesta Busck, Pyrausta 
nubildlis Hiibner, Rhofobota vacciniawi Packard, Garpocapsa yomo- 
nella Linnaeus, Epibleina tripartitana Zeller, E. strenuana Walker, 
Aristotelia dbsconditella Walker, Euzophera ostricolorella Hulst, 
Proteopteryx holliana Slingerland, and Tetralopha subcanalis 
Walker; many specimens reared from Laspeyresia molesta and 
Epibleina strenuana taken in New Jersey, Tennessee, and Ohio, 
which were sent me for study by H. W. Allen, in charge of the 
oriental fruit moth investigations, at Moorestown, N. J.; a series 
from the European Corn Borer Laboratory, at Monroe, Mich., 
reared from Papaipeina nehris Guenee, taken in Ohio ; several hun- 
dred specimens reared by H. G. Butler, of the Bureau of Ento- 
mology, from L. molesta at Harrison, Tenn. ; a series from the same 
host reared by J. O. Pepper at Chambersburg, Pa.; one specimen 
from Cohasset, Mass., in the collection of the Boston Society of 
Natural History, and 14 specimens at the gipsy moth laboratory 
reared from Episimus argutanus Clemens, taken at Revere and 
Roxbury, Mass. 



48 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. SO 

34. MACROCENTRUS NUPERUS Cresson 

Maorocentrus nuperus Ckesson, Trans. Amer. Ent. Soc, vol. 4, p. 178, 1872. 

T^/pe. — 111 the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. 

From delicatus, to which it is allied, nuperus differs especially in 
the longer and narrower three basal abdominal tergites, with the 
spiracles of the first even farther from the base and more prominent, 
in the nervuliis being postfurcal by only half its length or less, in 
the somewhat longer malar space, and in having a transverse black 
band across vertex. From fexanus^ which it also closely resembles, 
it is readily distinguished by the much longer and strongly sculptured 
basal tergites of the abdomen and the shorter calcaria of the posterior 
tibiae. 

In length the specimens examined range from 7 to 9 mm. Anten- 
nae usually more than 50-segmented ; longest segment of maxillary 
palpus about as long as second segment of antennal flagellum ; notauli 
extending nearly to extreme apex of mesoscutum; scutellar furrow 
very large; mesopleura usually punctate below; metapleural tooth 
prominent, truncate; posterior coxae very long; longer calcarium of 
hind tibia about half as long as metatarsus, not distinctly longer; 
radius arising from beyond middle of stigma; first discoidal cell 
somewhat longer than first cubital; submedian cell with onlj'^ a few 
scattered hairs; mediella a little more than twice as long as lower 
abscissa of basella, the latter fully as long as nervellus ; upper abscissa 
of basella interstitial with transverse abscissa of subcostella ; abdomen 
much longer than head and thorax combined ; first tergite more than 
three times as long as broad at apex, not at all impressed at base 
in front of spiracles, the surface of tergite irregularly longitudinally 
rugulose or ruguloso-striate, the spiracles at about end of basal third 
and much farther from base of tergite than from each other ; second 
tergite twice as long as broad, longitudinally ruguloso-striate, par- 
allel-sided, the lateral depressed margins rather broad, the raised 
sculptured part constricted medially ; third tergite fully one and one- 
half times as long as broad, delicately longitudinally aciculated on 
basal half or more; ovipositor sheaths about as long as body. 

Yellow; vertex with a transverse blackish band extending almost 
to the eyes; antennae yellow, the three or four basal flagellar seg- 
ments blackish ; mesonotal lobes with more or less dusky to blackish 
median markings, that on middle lobe usually broadest and darkest ; 
wings hyaline, stigma yellow ; legs yellow. 

The foregoing notes are based on the type and on six collected 
specimens in the United States National Museum; four of these 
six are, like the type, from Texas ; two are from Plummers Island, Md. 



ABT. 23 REVISION OF MACROCENTEUS — MUESEBECK 49 

35. MACROCENTRUS TEXANUS, new species 

Most similar to nuperus and delicatus but distinguished as noted in 
the key and in the discussions under those species. It is also closely 
allied to uniformis, which it resembles in the long calcaria of the 
posterior tibiae, the prominent acute metapleural tooth, the unusually 
long second abscissa of cubitus, the unusually long palpi, the sinuate 
radiella, and the mostly smooth abdomen ; but it differs especially in 
the long ovipositor, the less strongly compressed abdomen, the shape 
of the first abdominal tergite, which narrows rather strongly from 
the spiracles to the base, and the narrow temples and cheeks. 

Female. — Length 8 mm. Head strongly transverse; temples and 
cheeks receding directly behind the eyes; eyes large, very prominent; 
malar space short; face broader than long, polished; vertex rising 
scarcely above upper level of eyes ; postocellar and ocell-ocular lines 
subequal, about one and one-half times the diameter of a lateral 
ocellus; maxillary palpi very long, the longest segment nearly as 
long as first segment of antennal flagellum, much longer than second ; 
apical segment of labial palpus long; antennae much longer than 
body, 56-segmented ; scape rather stout. 

Thorax short; notauli not foveolate except posteriorly; propo- 
deum short, not convex longitudinally, very w^eakly transversely 
sculptured, nearly smooth at base ; sides of pronotum, and the meso- 
pleura and metapleura, smooth; mesosternal suture distinct only 
posteriorly ; legs long, slender ; longer calcarium of hind tibia longer 
than half the basitarsus ; stigma elongate, radius arising from a little 
beyond its middle ; second abscissa of cubitus longer than recurrent ; 
first cubital cell fully as long as first discoidal; third abscissa of 
radius less than twice the second; nervulus postf ureal by at least 
two-thirds its length; submedian cell hairless; first brachial cell 
with only scattered hairs; radiella somewhat sinuate, the radiellan 
cell broadest at apex, narrowest at middle; mediella hardly twice 
the lower abscissa of basella, the latter a little longer than nervellus. 

Abdomen slender, longer than head and thorax combined; first 
tergite nearly three times as long as broad at apex, not at all im- 
pressed at base in front of spiracles, mostly smooth, with only a 
little indefinite sculpture near middle, the spiracles near end of basal 
third, and much farther from base of tergite than from each other; 
second and third tergites subequal, the second not distinctly longer 
than third, both slightly longer than wide, both with a little faint 
aciculation at base; ovipositor sheaths fully as long as the body. 

Testaceous; vertex with a transverse blackish band extending very 
nearly to the eyes ; mesonotal lobes blackish medially ; wings hyaline. 



50 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAX, MUSEUM vol.80 

costa and stigma yellow ; antennae yellow, the basal flagellar segments 
not darker. 

Type.— U.S. 'iHM. No. 43493. 

Type locality. — Dallas, Tex. 

Remarks. — Described from a single specimen collected April 17, 
1908, by F. C. Bishopp. 

36. MACROCENTRUS UNIFORMIS Provancher 

Macrocentrus uniformis (Cresson) Provanchek, Nat. Can., vol. 12, p. 173, 1880. 

Type. — In the Museum of Public Instruction, Quebec, Canada. 

Differs from all other Nearctic species in its very short ovipositor, 
which is shorter than the height of the apical truncature of the abdo- 
men. It agrees in this as well as in all other important respects with 
the genotypes of Doliehozele Viereck and Pamscazele Enderlein, 
the synonymy of which has been discussed earlier in this paper. 
Except for the decided difference in the ovipositor it rather closely 
resembles texanus^ being readily separable, however, by the differ- 
ences mentioned in the key and in the description of that species. 

A large species, ranging in length from about 7 to 10 mm. Head 
transverse, wider than thorax; temples and cheeks convex, not re- 
ceding directly behind eyes ; eyes prominent, diverging a little below ; 
face at least one and one-half times as broad as long; malar space 
as long as basal width of mandible ; mandibles stout ; maxillary palpi 
very long, the longest segment longer than first segment of antennal 
flagellum; labial palpi much longer than face; antennae more than 
one and one-half times as long as the body, about 50-segmented. 

Thorax rather short, deep, mostly smooth and shining; prescutum 
prominent; propodeum more or less transversely rugulose, smooth 
basally at least at sides ; pleura smooth ; metapleural tooth prominent, 
acute; legs very slender; posterior coxae long; longer calcarium of 
hind tibia much more than half as long as basitarsus in the male, 
in the female usually three-fourths as long, the basitarsus being 
relatively longer in the male than in the female; wings very large 
and broad; stigma elongate, radius arising from beyond its middle; 
radial cell very nearly attaining extreme apex of wing; first cubital 
cell large, very nearly or quite as long as first discoidal; second 
abscissa of cubitus more than half as long, sometimes as long, as re- 
current vein ; nervulus only slightly postf ureal ; submedian cell wid- 
ened at apex and entirely glabrous; first brachial cell also glabrous 
basally; mediella twice as long as lower abscissa of basella, which is 
longer than nervellus and about twice as long as upper abscissa of 
basella; radiella strongly sinuate, the radiellan cell very narrow at 
the middle. 



ART. 23 BE VISION OF MACROCENTRUS MUESEBECK 51 

Abdomen a little longer than head and thorax combined, com- 
pressed apically ; first tergite slender, more than three times as long 
as broad at apex, not distinctly impressed at base in front of spira- 
cles, the latter prominent, a little farther from base of tergite than 
from each other; second and third tergites not distinctly separated, 
the second suture wanting or veiy faint ; dorsal surface of abdomen 
smooth, sometimes with a little faint sculpture on first tergite ; ovi- 
positor sheaths shorter than height of apical truncature of abdomen. 

Testaceous or ferruginous ; the head in front, pleura, and sternum 
usually paler; antennae usually testaceous, brownish apically, but 
sometimes flagellum entirely dark ; vertex completely black ; usually 
mesonotal lobes more or less blackish down the middle, wings hyaline, 
veins brown, stigma testaceous; legs testaceous, hind tarsi pale 
yellow. 

The national collection contains 34 specimens; of these 4 were 
reared from Psycomorpha epinienis Drury at Green Village, N. J., 
by Charles Rummel; the remainder are collected specimens from 
various localities in Maryland, Virginia, Pennsylvania, District of 
Columbia, North Carolina, Kentucky, Georgia, Illinois, and Kansas. 
I have also examined 11 specimens taken at Raleigh, N. C, which 
were sent me by C. S. Brimley ; a single specimen at the gipsy moth 
laboratory reared from Alypia octortmculata Fabricius by J. V. 
SchafFner, jr., the host having been taken at Brockport, N. Y. ; and 
a specimen at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 
labeled ''^ Macrocentrus uniformis Cress. MS." 



SPECIES THAT HAVE NOT BEEN RECOGNIZED 
MACROCENTRUS IRIDESCENS French 

Macro<;entrus iridescens Fbe:nch, 6th Ann. Rep. Southern Illinois Normal Univ., 
p. 42, 1880. 

Type. — Location unknown. 

It has not been possible to identify this species with certainty from 
the original description; accordingly it has been omitted from the 
key. However, I have seen two male specimens in the Academy of 
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia that are labeled " Carbondale, Ills., 
May 18, 1878, French Coll." and bear the name label Macrocenti^us 
iridescens French. These are amici^ofloides Viereck, If they are 
correctly identified as iridescens it will become necessary to suppress 
amicroploides as a synonym. Since French, in his description, 
acknowledged his indebtedness to E. T. Cresson for the generic de- 
termination of the species, and since his type series consisted of 12 
specimens, it seems rather likely that he sent Cresson specimens for 
the collection of the Philadelphia Academy, and that the two spec- 
imens referred to above are actually paratypes. Nevertheless, I hes- 
itate to synonymize ajnicroploides^ owing to the fact that French 
described the ovipositor of indescens as " not exserted." 

MACROCENTRUS NIGRIDORSIS Viereck 

Macrocentrus nigridorsis Viereck, Can. Ent., vol. 56, p. 68, 1924. 

Type. — In the Canadian National Collection at Ottawa. 

As already mentioned this species is obviously very similar to, if 
not identical with, harrisi; there appears to be nothing in the origi- 
nal description which will separate it from harrisi., and I believe a 
comparison of the types will make necessary the suppression of the 
latter name as a synonym. 

MACROCENTRUS PECTORALIS Provancher 

Maorocentrus pectoralis Provancher, Nat. Can., vol. 12, p. 173, 1880. 

Type. — In the Museum of Public Instruction at Quebec, Canada, 
Since I have not seen the type, and am unable definitely to identify 
the species from the original description or from notes made by 
Eohwer, I have omitted pectoralis from the key. It appears, how- 
ever, to be exceedingly similar to paUisteri and may be found to be 
identical with that species, in which case paUisteri would fall as a 
synonym. 
52 



HOSTS OF MACROCENTRUS RECORDED IN THIS PAPER 

Host Species of Macrocentrus 

Acrobasis caryivorella Ragonot instabiUs Muesebeck 

hebescella Hulst instabiUs Muesebeck 

gp laspeyresiae Muesebeck 

Alypia octomaculata Fabricius unifoi'tnis Provancher 

Anacampsis sp ancylivorus Rohwer 

Ancylis comptana Fr^Iich ancylivorus Rohwer 

sp nigripectus Muesebeck 

Aristotelia absconditella Walker delicatus Cresson 

Caccecia argyrospila Walker amicroploides Viereck 

cerasivorana Fitch cerasivoranac Viereck 

fervidana Clemens cerasivoranae Viereck 

parallela Robinson fiarrisi De Gant 

purpurana Clemens hairisi De Gant 

rosaceana Harris amicroploides Viereck 

rosana Linnaeus amicroploides Viereck 

Canarsia sp canarsiae Muesebeck 

Canarsia sp ancylivorus Rohwer 

ancylivorus Rohwer 

Carpocapsa poinonella Linnaeus laspeyresiae Muesebeck 

delicatus Cresson 

Coloeophora malivorella Riley instabiUs Muesebeck 

Crambus hortuellus Hiibner crambivorus Viereck 

mutabilis Clemens crambi (Ashmead) 

trisectus Walker crambi (Ashmead) 

zeellus Fernald crambi (Ashmead) 

sp cra7nbivorus Viereck 

Crocidophora pustuUferalis Lederer crocidophorae Muesebeck 

Epagoge sp am.cylivorus Rohwer 

Epiblema otiosana Clemens pallisteri De Gant 

seiidderiana Clemens paUisteri De Gant 

pallisteri De Gant 

strenuana Walker delicatus Cresson 

ancylivorus Rohwer 

tripartitana Zeller delicattis Cresson 

Ep'isimus argutanus Clemens delicatus Cresson 

Euzophera ostricolorella Hulst delicatus Cresson 

Exartema fasciatana Clemens harrisi De Gant 

sericorana Walsinghara ancylivorus Rohwer 

Hadena devastatrix Brace crassipes Muesebeck 

Harpipteryx frustrella Walsingham amicroploides Viereck 

Homeosoma electcUum Hulst ancylivorus Rohwer 

Laspeyresia caryana Fitch lasjic-yresiae Muesebeck 

(?) cuprcssana Kearfott aegeriae Rohwer 

funcbrana Treitschke instabiUs Muesebeck 



53 



54 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 80 : abt. 



2?. 



Laspeyresia vwlesta Busck. 



Host Species of Macrocentrus 

ancylivorus Rohwer 
instaMlis Muesebeck 
delicortus Cresson 
laspeyresiae Muesebeck 

Papaipema nebris Guen^e delicatus Cresson 

Peronea variana Fernald peroneae Muesebeck 

\aegeriae Rohwer 
Proteopteryx bolUana SUngerland [delicatus Cresson 

Psycomorpha epimenis Drury uniformis Provancher 

Pyraustn ainsliei Heinrich utilis Muesebeck 

gifuensis Ashmead 

nuMlalis Hiibner robustus Muesebeck 

delicatus Cresson 
(pyraiistae Viereck 
I amicroploides Viereck 

theseusalis Walker pyraustae Viereck 

Rhopobota vaccmiana Packard delicatus Cresson 

Rhyacimiia rigidana Fernald laspeyresiae Muesebeck 

Syna/nthedon americana BeutenmuUer aegeriae Rohwer 

castaneae Busck aegeriae Rohwer 

eantiosa Say aegeriae Rohwer 

pictipes Grote and Robinson aegeriae Rohwer 

tipuliformis Linnaeus aegeriae Rohwer 

Tetralopha aubcatnalis Walker delicatus Cresson 

Tmetocera ocellana Schiffermiiller amicroploides Viereck 



pertextalis Lederer. 



INDEX TO SPECIES 



(Accepted specific names are in Roman type; synonyms in italic) 



aegeriae Rohwer, 39. 
affinis, new species, 42. 
amicroploides Vierecli, 21. 
ancylivorus Roliwer, 32. 
atratus, new species, 23. 

canarsiae, new species, 26. 

cerasivoranae Viereck. 

clypeatus, new species, 28. 

crambi (Ashmead) [Amicroplus], 15. 

crambivorus Vierecl£, 15. 

crassipes, new species, 13. 

crocidophorae, new si^ecies, 22. 

delicatus Cresson, 46. 

fuscipennis, new species, 43. 

gifuensis Ashmead, 20. 

harrisi DeGant, 18. 

impressus, new species, 24. 
incompletus, new species, 12. 
instabilis, new species, 34. 
insularis, new species, 27. 
iridescens French, 52. 



laspeyresiae, new species, 37. 
longicornis Provancher, 16. 

mellipes Provancher, 38. 

nigridorsis Viereck, 52. 
nigripectus, new species, 31. 
nuperus Cresson, 48. 

paediscae Riley MS., 44. 
pallisteri DeGant, 44. 
pectoralis Provancher, 52. 
peroneae, new species, 17. 
plesms Viereck, 15. 
pulchripennis, new species, 40. 
pyraustae Viereck, 19. 

reticulatus, new species, 25. 
robustiis, new species, 29. 

seminiger, new species, 41. 

terminalis (Ashmead) [Zele], 16. 
texanus, new species, 49. 

uniformis Provancher, 50. 
utilis, new species, 35. 

55 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1932 



^^ 



"»ORP 01 42^^ opiT 



\ 



*^ ♦ *s 



