UC-NRLF 





Effi 






11 



PI 



28 I 
and thi 
periods 
have aj 
such de 
Book, a 
day wh 
3d. for 





THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 
OF CALIFORNIA 



PRESENTED BY 

PROF. CHARLES A. KOFOID AND 
MRS. PRUDENCE W. KOFOID 



CHAPTERS 



COMMON THINGS OF THE SEA-COAST. 



BY ANNE PRATT. 



PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF 

THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION, 

APPOINTED BY THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING 

CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE. 



LONDON: 

SOCIETY FOB PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE ; 

SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY, 

GREAT aUEEN STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS; 
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE? 16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE; 

AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS. 
1856. 



ub, 

P K E F A C E 



; 



THE main object of this little book is to 
enable the reader, unacquainted with Natural 
History, to recognise some of the different 
objects frequent on our shores. There is not 
one of them all, but has some interesting cir- 
cumstance connected with it, familiar enough 
to the man of science, but never suspected by 
those who have not had opportunity or incli- 
nation to study them. Could we trace the 
mental history of our great naturalists, we 
should find that many who have devoted their 
lives to the pursuits of science, had at first 
their attention directed to it, like Linnaeus, by 
listening to a conversation, or, like Sir Joseph 
Banks, by musing, in a leisure moment, on 
the beauty of a flower ; and thus the reading 
of a little volume like this, on Common Things, 
may serve to awaken an interest in nature, 
which shall not sleep again. 

A2 

^ '5 



vi PREFACE. 

In so small a book little reference could be 
made to any system of classification; and though 
the alphabet of science is as important as the 
alphabet of literature to any who would make 
progress in it, yet the use of scientific terms 
would here be out of place. Perchance the 
reader may be led to investigate more fully the 
subjects here presented; and this book will 
have well accomplished its design, if it should 
create a desire to study the works of our great 
naturalists, of Dr. Harvey, or Dr. Johnston, 
of Professor Forbes, or Rymer Jones, or other 
writers here so often referred to; or if it 
should send him into the wide fields of nature 
to observe and discover for himself. 

But should time and place be wanting to 
pursue the subject farther, yet will he have 
gained something, if he have learned aught of 
common things. " Partial knowledge," says 
an Arabian proverb, " is better than total igno- 
rance. He who cannot acquire all that he 
would, should be careful to get all that he 
can." 



- 



' 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

EFFECT OF SEA-AIR ON VEGETATION^SAMPHIBE GLASSWOET SALSOLA 
HOENED POPPY SEA-HOLLY CLIFF CABBAGES KALE THBIFT- 
8EA-LAVENDEE SEA-SANDWOBT SEA-PEABLWOBT SEA-PUBSLANE 
FEOSTED SEA-OEACHE GOOSEFOOTS VIPEE'S BUGLOSS SEA-BEET 
FUBZE TEEE MALLOW TAMEEISK SEA-BUCKTHOBN SEA-CAMPION 
SEA-MELKWOBT BLUE TOAD-FLAX STONECEOPS SEA-SIDE GEASSES 
MAT-WEED SEA LYME-GEASS SEA-SEDGES SEA SPUBBEY-SAND- 
WOBT BOSE-EOOT GOLDEN DOCK SEA BINDWEED CENTAUBY 
GENTIAN SEA-HEATHS SAND STEAPWOET MOUNTAIN EOCK-BOSE 
8CUEVY-GEASS VEBNAL SQUILL AUTUMNAL SQUILL SEA-LUNGWOBT 
PUEPLE SEA-EOCKET ASPAEAGUS LOVAGE ALEXANDEES FEN- 
NEL SEA-CAEBOT PAESLEY-WATEB DEOPWOET MICHAELMAS DAISY 
SEA-STOCKS SUBNET EOSE SEA BUPPIA PEPPEE-WOETS SEA- 
EADISH SWEET ALYSSUM ZOSTEEA BEOOMBAPES SCOTTISH PBIM- 
EOSE SEA STOEK'S-BILL SEA-PEAVETCHES TEEFOILS COTTON- 
WEED SEA-WOEMWOOD GOLDEN SAMPHIEE SEA-FEVEBFEW SEA- 
CAMOMILE THISTLES NETTLES SEA - SPUEGE SEA-PLANTAIN 
BUCK'S - HOEN PLANTAIN MOUNTAIN GAELIC KNOT - GEASS WOBT- 
CEESS MAESH MALLOW SEA- SPLEENWOBT VABIEGATED HOBSE- 

TAH, p. i 



Viil CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER II. 

SEA-WEEDS. 

MICBOSCOPIC ALG^E BLADDER FUCUS PRICKLY TANG KNOBBED FUCUS 
VARIOUS USES OF FUCI PODDED HALIDRYS SEA-THONGS GULF-. 
WEED LICHINA SEA-BELT TANGLE BULBOUS OAE-WEED EVER- 
LASTING BLADDER-CHAIN ESCULENT ALARIA SPINY DESMARESTIA-- 
STRAP - LEAVED DESMARESTIA DICTYOTA SEA-WHIPLASHWHIP- 
CORD FUCUS SPONGY CLADOSTEPHUS PEACOCK'S-TAIL PAVONIA 
SCARLET HAIR-FLAG PALMATED RHODOMENIA PEPPER DULSE 
BLOOD - COLOURED DELESSERIA RED OAK -LEAVED DELESSERIA 
WINGED DELESSERIA OPUNTIA-LIKE CATENELLA FORKED FURCEL- 
LARIA DOTTED NITOPHYLLUM LACERATED NITOPHYLLUM CARRA- 
GEEN MOSS RED PHYLLOPHORA FEATHERY PTILOTA SCARLET 
DASYA ESCULENT IRID^EA HORNY GELIDIUM CILIATED CERAMIUM 
BRISTLY GRIFFITHSIA BUSHY POLYSIPHONIA LOBSTER-HORN POLY- 
SIPHONIA STRONG-JOINTED CORALLINE ARCTIC CONFERVA PALE- 
GREEN CONFERVA BROAD-GREEN LAVER LETTUCE LAVER COM- 
PRESSED ENTEROMORPHA INTESTINE-LIKE ENTEROMORPHA PUR- 
PLE LAVER FEATHERY BRYOPSIS p. 91 

CHAPTER III. 

SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

USES OF SHELLS OF SHELL-FISHBEAUTY IN COLOUR AND STRUCTURE OF 
MOLLUSKS SEA -ACORNS STALKED BARNACLES TRANSFORMATION 
OF BARNACLES TUNICATED MOLLUSKS SEA-SQUIRTS BOTRYLLUS 
BIVALVE MOLLUSKS COMMON MUSSEL PINNA OYSTER MOTHER-OF- 
PEARL PEARL SCALLOP ANOMIA SILVERY ARK NOAH'S ARK 
STONE-PIERCERS SHIP-WORM COCKLE RAZOR SHELLS GAPERS 
CHIONE VENUS GOLDEN VENUS TRUNCATED DONAX TELLINA 
GASTEROPODS LIMPETS KEY-HOLE LIMPETS CANOE-SHELLS SEA- 
HARE HUNGARIAN BONNET PERIWINKLES MUDDY-RED TROCHUS 
SPOTTED TROCHUS FALSE WENTLETRAP CARRIER SHELL NAUTICA 
OCEANIC SNAIL COWRIES WAVED WHELK DOG WHELK NETTED- 
WHELK PELICAN'S-FOOT STROMBUS CUTTLE FISHES POULPE COM- 
MON CUTTLE-FISHSEA-PENSEA-GRAPES p. 186 



CONTENTS. IX 

CHAPTER IV, 

ZOOPHYTES. 

COBYNE TUBULAB COBALLINES COMMON SEA-FIB SEA-OAK COBALLINE 
POMEGBANATE-FLOWEBING COBALLINE HEBBING-BONE COBALLINE 
SE A-HAIB BOTTLE-BEUSH COBALLINE SICKLE - BEABD PODDED 
CORALLINE KNOTTED-THBEAD COBALLINE LUMINOUS PBOPEBTY OF 
COBALLINES SMALL CLIMBING COBALLINE WITH BELL-SHAPED CUPS 

LOBSTEB-HOBN COBALLINES SEA-FANS SEA-PEN PEAT) -MAN'S 
FINGEBS SEA ANEMONES SEA-SCUBFS SEA-MATS BBOAD-LEAVED 
HOBNWBACK p. 236 

CHAPTER V. 

VARIOUS COMMON OBJECTS OP THE SH011E. 

BLADDEB CHAINS FAIBY PUBSE HEBMIT CBAB COMMON 8HOBE-CBAB 
VELVET CBABS PEA CBABS LOBSTEB SHBIMP PBAWN FOSSIL 
STAB-FISHES FIVE-FINGEBED JACK SUN STAB-FISH BBITTLE STAB- 
FISHESDAISY BBITTLE-STAB LINGTHOBN SEA-UBCHINS COMMON 
SEA-EGG GEEEN- PEA UECHIN PUBPLE-TIPPED UBCHIN HEABT 
UBCHINS FIDDLE UBCHIN SEA-CUCUMBEBS PBICKLY SEA-MOUSE 
LUG-WOBM VEBMICULAB SEEPULA NAUTILUS -LIKE SPIBOBBIS 
TOOTH-SHELL SIPHUNCULUS TEBEBELL^E PHOSPHOBESCENCE OF 
SEA JELLY-FISHES MODEEBA SCABLET CYANEA COMMON AUBELIA 
HALEY CYANEA HEMISPHEBICAL THAUMANTIAS GBEAT SEA-NETTLE 

GLOBULAB BEBOE IMMENSE NUMBEB OF MEDUSA SPONGES 
STBUCTUBE OF SPONGES COMMON HALICHONDEIA SEA-GULLS SEA- 
SWALLOWS STOEMY PETBEL PUFFINS COBMOBANT GEESE AND 
DUCKS PIED OYSTEB-CATCHEB GANNET CUBLEW DUNLIN, p. 281 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

" For there, by sea-dews nursed and airs marine, 
The Chelidonium blows in glaucous green ; 
Each refluent tide the thorn'd Eryngium laves, 
And its pale leaves seem tinctured by the waves ; 
And half-way up the cliff, whose rugged brow 
Hangs o'er the ever-toiling surge below, 
Springs the light Tamarisk ; the summit bare 
Is tufted by the Statice ; and there, 
Crush'd by the fisher, as he stands to mark 
Some distant signal or approaching bark, 
The Saltwort's starry stalks are tliickly sown, 
Like humble worth, unheeded and unknown." 

IT is delightful on some fine summer's morning 
to wake up to the loud continuous sounds of the 
waves, and to stray along the shore, with eye and 
heart alive to the natural beauty of this world. 
When the calm airs seem, as the poet describes 
them, 

" Like Music slumbering on its instrument,*' 

they are to the listener both sweet and soothing, 
and serve we know not how nor why to awaken 
memories of the past, and so to identify themselves 
with our own being, that scenes far away, and 
long absent friends, gradually mingle in the day- 
dreams begotten by their tones. 



2 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

The glorious ocean ! Can we wonder that lin- 
gering groups gather daily close by its boundaries, 
gazing hour after hour upon the silver waves? 
Call them not idlers. They may have come from 
scenes of busy toil for needful repose ; and while 
listening to sweet sounds, and looking on lovely 
objects, they are getting treasures of memory for 
other days, and store of health and strength for 
future duty. 

What thoughtful person ever listened to the 
ocean's murmurs without thinking aver what a 
mass of contents its waters roll : 

" Bones of dead men, that made 
A hidden Golgotha where they had fall'n, 
Unseen, unsepulchred, but not unwept 
By lover, friend, relation far away, 
Long waiting their return to home and country, 
And going down into their fathers' graves, 
With their grey hairs or youthful locks, in sorrow, 
To meet no more till seas give up their dead ; 
Some, too, ay, thousands, whom no living moum'd, 
None miss'd, waifs in the universe, the last 
Lorn links of kindred chains for ever sunder'd." 

We have often thought, on looking on the mul- 
titudes of invalids who with their companions 
crowd our shores in summer, that they would 
possess a great advantage if they had some out- 
door pursuit with which to beguile the time. Dr. 
Cullen used to say, that he had cured weak 
stomachs by engaging his patients in the study of 
botany, and particularly in the investigation of 
wild plants ; and many a head-ache, and a heart- 
ache too, would be relieved if its owner could be 
brought to feel an interest in the shells or sea- 
weeds which are strewed on the beach, or in the 
sweet wild blossom which smiles on the side of 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 3 

the cKff. But the time spent at the sea-side is 
not usually the time for study. Rest of mind is 
often absolutely necessary for health ; and even 
where this is not the case, yet the many hours 
spent in the open air, while invigorating to the 
frame, render us indisposed to any continued 
mental exertion. It is those already in some 
degree acquainted with natural history who can 
now enjoy its results. There are few, however, 
who, while for a period they are residents on our 
coasts, would not Ibe glad to know some of its 
familiar objects, if tire knowledge could be ob- 
tained without study ; and it is for the unlearned 
in these matters that these pages are written. 

It will be necessary to confine our remarks on 
the plants of our shores to such as grow only by 
the sea-side, or to such as grow more frequently 
there than elsewhere. The flowers which cluster 
in some of the meadows at a little distance, and 
many which spring up on the cliffs, thrive equally 
well on inland soils of the same nature. The rich 
clumps of the wild rock rose (Helianthemum 
vulgare) are as bright on the chalky cliff which 
skirts the green lane, as on those that lie about 
the sea; and, find them where we may, have so 
bright . a golden tint, that we remember how 
Pliny told of them, that the kings and wise men 
of Persia anointed themselves with them, to make 
them fair and beautiful, and called them the 
" beauties of the sun." Then there is the wild 
thyme ( Thymus serpyllum), sending its sweetness 
from among the short grass on the eliff, or on 
the air of the heathland; and the pale chocolate 
blossoms of the wild marjoram ( Origanum vulgare), 
which the Greeks termed the " joy of the moun- 

B 2 



4 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

tain ; " and the pretty little euphrasy, or eye- 
bright (Euphrasia officinalis), which grows equally 
well on the pasture land far away from the sea, 
and which in the Greek language signified " de- 
light;" and many another, with old names so 
expressive, and so pretty withal, that we are re- 
minded of the words said to be spoken by Mary 
Powell, before she married John Milton, that 
" Adam might have named the animals, but that 
Eve surely named the flowers." 

Notwithstanding considerable variety in the 
aspect of different parts of our coast, yet every 
one must have remarked the general barrenness 
of vegetation in the immediate vicinity of the sea. 
Such trees as are planted near the shore, have 
usually a stunted appearance, and have their upper 
boughs bent down by the strong winds which 
blow over them. The sycamore is the only tree 
which can be said to flourish close to the sea as 
well as on inland spots, and to lift as bold a front 
and as full a canopy to the sea breeze, as to the 
wind of the sheltered valley ; and the tamarisk 
and the tree mallow are almost the only shrubs 
which seem to prefer the saline soil for their 
growth. The presence of a large quantity of salt 
in the soil, has, from the earliest ages of the 
world, been known to produce sterility ; and not 
only do the early Greek and Roman writers name 
the practice of sowing a field with salt when they 
condemned it to barrenness, but we have an 
instance of this named in the Scriptures, when 
Abimelech in his fury beat down the city of 
Shechem, and sowed its site with salt, that never- 
more the earth should yield her produce to gladden 
the heart of man. The Psalmist, speaking of 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 5 

some once beautiful country, says, " He turneth 
the land into barrenness," literally, "into salt- 
ness;" and the scanty herbage and the small 
number of trees and flowers usually found on the 
vast saline deserts of Africa, or the sandy regions 
of the countries of the East, are proofs at once of 
the injury done to vegetation by salt. On some 
lands of Cheshire, even of late years, when a soil 
has produced too abundantly the rushes and weeds 
which trouble the agriculturist, he has laid rock 
salt upon the earth to destroy them. 

But it is only lands very near the sea whose 
produce is injuriously affected either by the 
muriates of the atmosphere which have passed 
over it, or by the saltness existing in the earth. 
A portion of salt is favourable to the growth of 
plants, and the supply of moisture derived from 
so large a body of water renders the land at a 
small distance more fertile than those parts of the 
earth's surface which are further from the coast. 
Every one at all acquainted with the southern 
part, especially, of our island, can call to mind 
some quiet nooks of sunshine in which the wild 
flowers attain great size and beauty, and crowd 
the hedgebank or meadow, only just screened by 
a cliff from the rudest breezes of the sea. What 
Keats said of the Isle of Wight, might equally 
well apply to some parts of the coast of Devon- 
shire : " I have found," said the invalid poet, 
" several delightful wood alleys, and copses, and 
quiet freshes ; as for primroses, the isle ought to 
be called Primrose Island that is, if the nation 
of cowslips agree thereto, of which there are divers 
clans just beginning to lift up their heads," 

But, barren as the soil is close to the sea, yet it 



6 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

has its own peculiar plants ; plants winch will 
grow nowhere else saline plants, which, if carried 
away to grace some inland garden, droop and 
pine for their native shore. Others grow not 
only by the sea-side, .but on pasture lands to 
which saline waters have access ; and some which 
grow in our inland fields, yet are so much more 
luxuriant near the shore, that we must consider 
that as at least an especial place of their growth. 
So small, however, is the number of wild plants 
of the sea-side, that limited as is this little volume, 
they can be enumerated in the chapter appro- 
priated to them. 

There are few subjects more interesting to the 
botanist than the adaptation of plants to their 
peculiar places of growth. The most lofty Alpine 
hills have their blossoms, and the deep blue 
gentian thrives amid the snows, 

" The living flower that skirts the eternal frost ; " 

the sand has its sand- worts, which refuse to grow 
on richer soils. The magnificent cedar is wild 
on its native Lebanon only; Lapland boasts her 
flower called Charles's Sceptre, which is never 
seen beyond the limits of her own land. Even 
the dreary Siberia has her own beautiful Cypri- 
pedium, or, as we in English term it, the ladies' 
slipper. Our streams have their water-lilies, our 
meadows their field flowers, our woods their 
anemones and hyacinths. At the extreme limits 
of vegetation we find the wood sorrel, ferns, 
lichens, and mosses cover the grey rocks ; one 
lichen growing even on the forbidding surface of 
the stalactite. There are plants which are indi- 
genous to sulphureous springs, and a little flower 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. ? 

grows in luxuriance on the refuse of the lead mine. 
The sea itself has on its bed immense tribes of 
marine vegetation, the food and home of its living 
creatures ; and where but in the sound of its 
waves shall we find that bright flower of our sand 
and shingle, the yellow horned poppy ? 

There are some features in our wild saline 
plants which, while they are not invariable or 
peculiar to them, yet are very general. They are 
usually very succulent, and their stems and foliage 
have on them more or less of a sea-green powder, 
a kind of pale green or whitish bloom. Leaves 
or stems covered with this are termed by botanists 
glaucous, and a very familiar instance of glaucous 
foliage may be seen in the outer leaves of the 
common cabbage. The succulent nature of sea- 
side plants renders them suitable for soik which 
yield little nourishment ; for succulent plants have 
many pores, by means of which they readily im- 
bibe moisture, which is long retained in their juices, 
and which, deriving as they do from rains or dews, 
renders them less dependent on nutriment to be 
obtained from the root. The common houseleek 
and stonecrop of our house-tops are nourished far 
more by the atmosphere than by the soil ; and so 
are the aloe and the fig marigold, and the ice-plant 
of desert lands, many of which are like the plants 
of our sea-side, too, in the glaucous nature of their 
green. 

One of our sea-side plants, the Samphire ( Crith- 
mum maritimum), is known, at least by name, to 
most persons. Several of our early poets have 
alluded to it, and its frequent use as a pickle ren- 
ders it familiar to many. Not one of our native 
plants can yield so good, and warm, and aromatic 



8 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

a flavour for a pickle as this ; arid it has been a 
favourite with good housewives for many years ; 
for an old song of Heywood's, enumerating the 
cries of London in his time, has this line, 

" I ha' rock samphier, rock samphier." 

The inhabitants of places whose rocks abound 
with this plant use it not only as a pickle, but also 
as an ingredient in salads ; and they also eat it as 
a culinary vegetable. It is sometimes grown in 
gardens and pots, and it appears under certain 
circumstances to thrive well. Thus Braddick, the 
horticulturist, who cultivated the samphire in 
Thames Ditton, on a sheltered and dry spot, well 
screened from the morning sun, and who sprinkled 
the soil where it grew with powdered barilla, 
remarks of it, "This I do to furnish the plant with 
a supply of soda, since, in its native place of growth, 
it possesses the power of decomposing sea-water, 
from which it takes the fossil alkali, and rejects the 
muriatic acid." This horticulturist also protected 
it from the cold of winter, and he found that by 
this mode of treatment the plants flourished most 
plentifully, and produced a large supply of leaves 
and shoots, which were cut twice in the season. 

The stem of the samphire is about a foot high, 
round and leafy ; and it has dense clusters of 
greenish-white flowers. The whole plant is fleshy 
and glaucous, with a salt aromatic flavour. It 
grows on several rocky shores of our southern 
coast, but it is not common in the north of Eng- 
land. It is very rare on the rocks of Scotland; 
and Sir William Hooker remarks of it, " It is 
found only, I believe, on the coast of Galloway, 
and thence northward to Colzean Castle, Ayrshire 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 9 

(whence I have received numerous specimens), 
and at Aberlady, Haddingtonshire." He adds, 
that when the process of drying this plant for the 
Herbarium is aided by immersion in hot water, 
a number of opaque white dots make their appear- 
ance on the surface. 

The samphire is always found on rocks or stone 
walls beyond the reach of the tide. The chalk 
hills of Dovor, which gave its old name to that 
ancient town, the Dwyr of the Saxons, from their 
" Dwfyrrha," a "steep place," have long been 
celebrated for the growth of samphire. Michael 
Drayton refers to it in his Poly-Olbion : 

" Some, his ill-season'd mouth that rightly understood, 
Bob Dover's neighbouring cleeves of samphyre, to excite 
His dull and sickly taste, and stir up appetite." 

And the very name of the Shakspeare Cliff was 
derived from its connexion with the passage in 
which the great dramatist refers to this plant. 
That cliff has recently suffered from the long- 
continued action of rain and sunshine upon it ; 
but as long as it exists, the samphire will probably 
continue to thrive there. We must quote again 
the oft-quoted lines on this subject, and which, 
indeed, well describe the scene from the summit 
of the cliff: 

" How fearful, 

And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low ! 
The crows and choughs that wing the mid-way air 
Show scarce so gross as beetles ; halfway down 
Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade ; 
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head ; 
The fishermen that walk upon the beach 
Appear like mice, and yon tall anchoring bark 
Diminish'd to her cock, her cock a buoy, 
Almost too small for sight : the murm'ring surge, 
That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes, 



10 SEA-SIDE PLANTS, 

Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more, 
Lest ray brain turn, and the deficient sight 
Topple down headlong." 

This trade of samphire gathering from the cliff 
has indeed proved a dangerous one. A few years 
since, a man, resident in Dovor, and who had for 
many summers gathered the plant for sale in the 
neighbourhood, was suspended, as usual, by a rope 
attached to a pole at the summit. The rope, on 
this occasion, suddenly gave way, and the un- 
fortunate man was precipitated to the base of the 
cliff, and expired immediately. 

The word Samphire is a corruption of St. Pierre, 
the plant having, in former times, been dedicated 
to the memory of the Apostle ; and it was also 
familiarly called St Peter's Herb. It had, besides, 
the name of Crest Marine. The monks, as we well 
know, gave the names of the wild plants known 
to them, according to the times when they came 
into blossom, making them the remembrancers of 
their saints' days and festivals. Upwards of three 
hundred plants., now in use., and recorded in our 
works of medical botany, under different names, 
were known in years long passed away in the 
monasteries, as the medicinal herbs used by the 
religious orders. A writer in Bees's Encyclo- 
paedia says that we ought to pronounce and spell 
the name of this plant sampire, our modern ortho- 
graphy and pronunciation being a corruption of 
this. But our quotations from the old writers 
serve to show that various modes of spelling the 
word were used in past times ; nor indeed need we 
wonder at this, when even in the days of Queen 
Elizabeth a man would spell his own name half a 
dozen ways if it could possibly bear such a variety 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 11 

of modes of orthography. The word samphier, as 
Heywood spells it, seems to give the nearest simi- 
larity in sound to its original derivation. 

Crabbe, who resided at a part of our coast where 
vegetation is peculiarly barren, refers to this plant, 
as well as to one mentioned afterwards, the salt- 
wort. His pictures of sea-shore scenery are always 
mournful and dreary, nor is this description of the 
salt river-side less so : 

," With ceaseless motion comes and goes the tide ; 
Flowing, it fills the channel vast and wide ; 
Then back to sea, with strong majestic sweep, 
It rolls in ebb, yet terrible and deep : 
Here sampire banks and saltwort bound the flood ; 
There stalks of sea-weed withering in the mud ; 
And higher up, a ridge of all things base, 
Which some strong tide has roll'd upon the place." 

The samphire is found also on the rocky shores of 
other countries, as in Italy, Spain, and France, 
and is used there, as with us, as an article of food 
and luxury. 

Somewhat similar to this plant, and commonly 
known as the annual samphire, is the jointed 
glasswort (Salicornia herbaeea), so abundant on the 
salt marshes near our coast, or on muddy shores 
occasionally overflowed by the tide. It is a leafless 
herb, of pale bright green, and much succulence, 
and it flowers in August and September. The 
poor people who reside in the neighbourhood of 
these marshes gather this plant, and sell it for the 
purpose of pickling; and, assisted by strongly 
flavoured spices, it is certainly as good a herb for 
a pickle as many another one commonly used ; but 
the aromatic flavour of the real samphire is want- 
ing in this plant, whose juices have in themselves 
only a saltish mawkish flavour. Those who know 



12 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

the real samphire are not likely to purchase this ; 
and similar as it is in general appearance, it differs 
much in its flowers, which consist of dense spikes, 
jointed like the stem, and bearing at the base of 
every articulation, on two opposite sides, a cluster 
of three little blossoms. It was formerly called 
jointed glasswort, crabbe grasse, and frog grasse, 
and we now frequently hear it termed marsh 
samphire, to distinguish it from the rock plant. 
Its saltish taste renders it very agreeable to ani-. 
mals, and it is one of the plants which, on our 
saline soils, prove so beneficial to cattle, that they 
are often sent there by their owners to regain lost 
flesh and strength. Most animals enjoy feeding 
on this kind of herbage, as the whole of it must be 
more or less impregnated with salt, and it is not 
unlikely that the sea air has upon the frame of the 
inferior animals the same invigorating effect which 
it has upon the constitution of man. 

This glasswort, as well as several other species, 
abounds on the shores of the Mediterranean, and 
they are all included under the name of Erla-cali> 
by the Italians ; while the German name of glass- 
schmaltz, like our glasswort, is significant of the 
uses of these plants in Germany. In the south 
of Europe, as well as in northern Africa, this 
salicornia was burnt for the soda which its ashes 
contain ; and this material was much in use by the 
soap and glass manufacturer of these countries. 
At Marseilles, especially, a great quantity was 
gathered from the sea-shores for the purpose 
of burning for soda. We have another British 
species, called the creeping-glasswort (Salicor- 
nia radicans], which is very much like the former 
kind, only that it is more branching and strag- 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 13 

gling; and it is distinguished by having a per- 
ennial stem, which, at the lower part, is quite 
woody, and about a foot long. It grows some- 
times on the edge of a low muddy bank depending 
from thence ; but it is a rare plant. It has been 
found in the Isle of Sheppey, in Kent, and also on 
the Norfolk and Sussex coasts. The botanic name 
of the genus, taken from salt and a horn, is very 
expressive of the nature and form of the plants. 

But the abundance of soda yielded by several 
sea-side vegetables is in none greater than in the 
genus of plants called Salsola, by botanists, one of 
which is the prickly-saltwort of our shores. These 
plants, like the samphire and marsh samphire, are 
pickled with vinegar and eaten at table. The 
various uses of soda have rendered some species 
of this genus of considerable importance ; and our 
only native kind was once much valued for the 
alkaline salts yielded by its ashes. Carbonate of 
soda has, however, of late years, been obtained 
from common and rock salt, so that the impure soda 
once procured from sea-weeds, and called kelp, and 
the more valuable barilla yielded by the soda plants, 
are no longer in request in this country. The 
prickly saltwort (Salsola Kali) is a spreading plant, 
with awl-shaped leaves, tipped with spines, and an 
angular stem with pale greenish flowers growing 
close down upon it. It blossoms in July, and grows 
very generally among the sands of the shore. This 
species is not a native of our coasts only, but is 
plentiful on most sandy shores in all parts of the 
world, and its value in producing soda is very 
generally known. The species of saltwort called 
the round-leaved saltwort (Salsola sativa) was 
cultivated very extensively in southern Europe, 



14 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

and furnished the best soda used in this quarter of 
the world. Its produce is called by the merchant, 
the Spanish or Alicant soda. The large cultiva- 
tors of this soda plant along the Mediterranean 
shores of Spain, found during the long war, in the 
early part of this century, so great an increase in 
the value of the soda, that they wished to extend 
the culture of the saltwort. They therefore tried 
the experiment of forming some salsola fields far- 
ther inland. But the plan proved unsuccessful; 
for although the plant was luxuriant, yet the 
quantity of soda was so much diminished as to 
render it of little worth. The planters ascertained 
the fact, that, as long as the land sloped upwards 
from the sea, the saltwort was rich in its alkaline 
products; but when the field sloped inland, the 
soda decreased. The saline soil, and the saline 
winds and vapours of the ocean, were needed 
to render it a true saltwort. Neither is our native 
species a plant which flourishes remote from the 
sea. 

It was observed, in an earlier page, that many 
plants of the deserts resemble those of our sea- 
shore plants in their succulence, their saltish 
flavour, and glaucous green hue. These plants, 
too, yield the same product. Thus the ice-plant 
which we rear in the hot-house, because of the 
beauty of its ice-bespangled foliage, is cultivated 
on the salt lands of Greece for its soda, and called 
Barilla, and the knot-flowered fig marigold of the 
desert saline soils of Egypt, is gathered and 
burned for the same purpose. 

But turning from plants possessing little beauty, 
though abundantly compensating for its absence 
by their utility to man,- we must proceed to one 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 15 

or two of the gayest flowers of our sea-side. We 
have not one peculiar to the coast which is so 
handsome as that large flower, the yellow horned 
poppy ( Glaucium luteum), whose deep gold-coloured 
petals wave to every wind that comes murmuring 
over the face of the sea, and fall at night from their 
stem. Though this flower cannot be found on 
every sandy shore or shingly beach, yet it is very 
common. At Sandgate and Dovor, as well as in 
many other places, it grows on the beach scarcely 
beyond the reach of the tide ; and, indeed, when 
the winter storm brings the waves higher than 
usual, they must flow above hundreds of the roots 
of this flower. The petals of these large and 
showy blossoms are crumpled, and, like those of 
our field poppies, seem as if they had been rolled 
up tightly in their flower-cups before they opened 
to the light of day. The large leaves, sheathing 
at their base around the stem, have the sea-green 
bloom so often found on sea-side vegetation ; and 
the botanic name of the genus, Glaucium, originated 
in the Greek word for sea-green. Nor do the 
leaves loose their greenness when winter winds have 
borne away all beauty from the few plants on the 
shore. There they are lying over the barren 
shingle, to remind us that Nature lives,, and still 
delights in her own verdant tints. The upper 
leaves are more smooth, but the lower ones are 
hairy, almost prickly; and the seed-vessels, which 
are pods like horns, sometimes a foot long, and 
curved, are rough with many minute tubercles on 
their surface. This plant is found also in the 
Carolinas and Virginia, and it may be cultivated 
in gardens, but never grows wild inland. A 
beautiful scarlet horned poppy ( Glaucium cormcu- 



16 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

latwn) is occasionally found on the southern coast 
of England, and is said to have grown both in 
Norfolk and in Portland Island; but most botanists 
doubt if this is a truly British flower, though De 
Candolle thinks it is a variety of our common 
yellow species. It is a remarkably elegant blossom, 
the petals being of richest scarlet, and having a 
black spot at the base of each. 

The genus was once called Chelidonium, and 
the yellow horned species is referred to, under that 
name, in the lines which stand at the head of this 
chapter. Several botanists have said that this 
flower possesses an acrid copper-coloured juice, 
which causes madness. The writer of these pages 
has, however, examined many specimens, and found 
only a colourless juice. It is certainly of a most 
acrimonious description ; so much ^so, that on ap- 
plying to the tongue the finger which had touched 
the broken stem, a sensation of burning was pro- 
duced in the mouth and throat, which remained 
for an hour afterwards. Ben Jonson mentions the 
yellow horned poppy as one of the flowers used 
by pretended witches and magicians in their incan- 
tations. That the practice of burning herbs ac- 
companied that of the magical art, there is no 
doubt ; and it is equally evident that such plants 
were selected as were likely, while burning, to 
produce fumes of such a nature as to affect the 
nervous system, so as to deceive the imaginations 
of persons subjected to their influence. Various 
plants of narcotic and stupifying properties also 
were administered internally, just as the poor 
Kamschatdales, when preparing themselves for the 
service of their gods, are accustomed to produce 
a kind of intoxication by eating their native plant, 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



17 



the cow-parsley, by means of which they expe- 
rience a wild delirium of feeling. If the juices of 
our yellow horned poppy cause madness,- then it 
seems likely that this was one of the herbs used in 
the times of superstition ; and now that those dark 
practices have passed away, no record save the poet's 
song remains of this its former use in our land. 

Though not quite so common a flower as the 
yellow horned poppy, the sea-side Eryngo is a 
well-known ornament of some maritime spots, and 




ERYNGO (Eryngium maritimum). 



18 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

in many parts of the eastern shores of England it 
is abundant. The Kev. W. K. Drummond has 
well described it : 

" The Eryngo here 

Sits as a queen among the scanty tribes 
Of vegetable race. Around her neck 
A gorgeous ruff of leaves, with snowy points, 
Averts all rough intrusion. On her brow 
She binds a crown of amethystine hue, 
Bristling with spicula, thick interwove 
With clustering florets, whose light anthers dance 
In the fresh breeze like tiny topaz gems. 
Here the sweet rose would die. But she imbibes 
From arid sands, and salt sea dew-drops, strength. 
The native of the beach, by nature form'd 
To dwell among the ruder elements." 

The sea eryngo (Eryngium maritimum) has a 
stem about a foot high, much branched, with 
prickly strongly-veined leaves, resembling the 
foliage of the holly, and dense heads of blue 
flowers. This flower flourishes too on the coasts 
of Ireland and Scotland; and travellers tell us 
that it grows equally well along the European and 
African shores of the Mediterranean. It is known 
on the several parts of our coast by a variety of 
names, as the sea hulver, sea holly, and sea holme. 
Our common prickly holly formerly bore also the 
names of hulver and holme, as well as that of 
scarlet oak, and the general resemblance of a 
branch of this plant to the holly bough, naturally 
led to its familiar names. Not that the reader 
must expect any similarity between the delicate 
waxen-like flowers of our evergreen tree, and the 
blossom of the eryngo ; for this is more like our 
wild thistle flower, and so much so, that the author 
has heard children on the coast call the plant the 
blue sea thistle. The roots of the eryngo were 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 19 

formerly candied and sold by confectioners as a 
sweetmeat; and though they have lost their old 
renown for their strengthening and stimulating 
virtues, and no modern poet like those of older 
days sings their praises, yet there are persons who 
still sell the candied eryngo roots in London, 
though they have not so many purchasers as in 
the days of Queen Elizabeth. There existed till 
lately, and probably exists still, in the town of 
Colchester in Essex, an establishment where these 
roots are prepared, and it was in this very town 
that these candied comfits first originated. More 
than two centuries since, an apothecary named 
Robert Buxton, who had a high idea of their 
medicinal properties, prepared the root in this 
way for general use. These plants grow on the 
sandy soils of Arabia, and the Arabs regard them 
as an excellent restorative. The use of plants as 
medicine was known long before men thought of 
seeking remedies among metallic or mineral drugs, 
and in Boerhave's time this plant was not only 
recommended by him, as a tonic, but seems to 
have been for many years generally so regarded. 
Linnaeus says that the young flowering shoots are 
eaten in Sweden, boiled as asparagus, and describes 
them as a good vegetable. The young shoots of 
several of our wild plants are equally good for this 
purpose, and none are better than those of the 
wild burdock, which may be known by its very 
large leaves, purple thistle-shaped blossoms, and 
above all by the spiny flower-cups which children 
call burrs. It grows by most waysides. 

We have but two species of eryngo, and the other 
(Eryngium campestre) is rare, though found occa- 
sionally in sandy fields : it is more bushy and lender 
c2 



20 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

than the sea-side kind, and was found originally in 
Bay's time truly wild in England near Plymouth, 
where it still grows. It has also been seen on 
some spots near the sea at the north of England, 
but it has probably been introduced there in 
ballast. Throughout Italy, France, and Flanders 
it is a most common flower ; and so general are the 
eryngos in North America, that nearly one hun- 
dred species have been described as growing wild, 
and one is in so frequent use as a medicine, for the 
relief of hysterical complaints, as to have acquired 
the familiar name of Fit- weed. 

But, quitting for awhile the velvet-like sands 
which border our sea, we must in imagination 
linger by the cliffs near them. Tall venerable 
cliffs are they, on whose brow time seems to have 
written no changes, and which might give to 
England its name of Albion, as well as they did 
in days of yore. They have their own peculiar 
herbage, besides being decked by the milkwort, 
and the rest-harrow, and the beautiful yellow 
chlora, plants of the chalk soil everywhere through- 
out our land. All up their sides we see the green 
patch here and there, 

" And down their slanted glory move 
Scents from the flowers that grow above." 

One of the plants which is not wild elsewhere, 
is the sea-side cabbage, or cliff cabbage, as it is 
sometimes called ; the Brassica oleracea of the bota- 
nist. It is not a common plant, though in some 
places very abundant. On the cliffs of Dovor, as 
well as on some portions of the beach, it is plenti- 
ful, and growing up beyond the reach of the waves, 
yet requiring the saline air for its production, the 
clumps of this plant, with its glaucous green leaves, 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



21 



give a peculiar tint and character to the vegetation 
of the spot. It is sufficiently like the young 




SEA CABBAGE (Brassica oleracea). 

cabbage-plant of the kitchen-garden to be recog- 
nised at once : but few who look upon its bluish 
small scattered leaves and handsome pale yellow 
flowers, much like the wild mustard or charlock, 
are aware that to this sea colewort we owe all the 
kinds of cultivated cabbage, the leaves and flowers 
of which are eaten at our tables : and that red 
and white cabbage, and the giant cow-cabbage, and 



22 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

the delicate brocoli, had so humble an origin, not 
to exclude that familiar vegetable, of which Dr. 
Johnson most unsentimentally declared, " Of all 
the flowers of the garden, I like the cauliflower." 
The Doctor should have lived at Tarragona, where 
the cauliflower is said to reach the enormous 
weight of forty pounds. No instance exists in 
which a vegetable is so altered by culture from its 
original condition. Our kitchen-gardens, with their 
compact cabbages, their Brussels sprouts and 
Savoys, indicate this ; but this is little compared 
to the tall Caesarean cow-cabbage, which from its 
arborescent nature is called the tree-kale, and 
which in La Vended is said to be sixteen feet 
high ; while one of its varieties, the palm-kale, is 
commonly ten or twelve feet in height, with a 
heart sweet and tender enough to fit it for the 
food of man, and leaves which furnish a plentiful 
nutriment for animals. Our cliff cabbage is fre- 
quently gathered from the heights in the neigh- 
bourhood where it is abundant, and is said to be 
a good boiled vegetable, but its uncooked leaves 
are very bitter to the taste. It was very early 
cultivated; indeed, from time immemorial some 
of its numerous varieties have been valued, though 
the common variety with a close compact heart, 
peculiarly called cabbage, was for some years 
imported from Holland into this country. Sir 
Anthony Ashley first cultivated it in England : 
but it was more than a century before its culture 
became so general as to render importation from 
Holland unnecessary. This grower of our esculent 
plant is said to have had a cabbage sculptured on his 
monument at Wimborne St. Giles, in Dorsetshire, 
in memory of this service rendered to his country. 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 23 

The kale or colewort of the gardener is another 
variety of this sea-side cabbage. Of this kind is 
made the sauerkraut of the Germans, and it is 
probable that several varieties were formerly in- 
cluded in this name, as kale is mentioned among 
the oldest English records, and the Saxon name 
for our month of February, when leaves begin 
again to clothe the ground, was Sprout-Kale. It 
is at this season that the sprouts from the old 
cabbage-stalks become fit for use, and hence their 
name for the month. The brassica was cultivated 
by the Romans, and also by the ancient Germans 
from very remote periods ; and this, the botanic 
name of the genus, seems to have been derived 
from the Celtic word Bresic, a cabbage. 

The flowers of the cabbage are of the form 
termed by botanists cruciferous, and are shaped 
like a cross, as in the single stock or wall-flower of 
the garden. This is a numerous family of plants, 
and to it belong a very large number of our escu- 
lent vegetables, as the turnip, the cresses, the 
radishes, and many of our wild and garden flowers, 
as the stocks, and rockets, and alyssums. Plants 
of this tribe universally possess stimulant qualities, 
combined with an acrid flavour ; and none of the 
family are poisonous. The roots, leaves, stems, 
and buds of many of these plants are used as food ; 
and in all cases their seeds abound in a fixed oil, 
which is expressed from some species for various 
economical purposes. They may always be known 
by the shape of their flowers ; and they are more 
numerous in Europe than in either of the other 
great divisions of the globe. In our own land 
some of their number are to be found in almost 
every field. 



24 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

Among the clefts of the rocks we may, in the 
months of July and August, see the tufted pink 
blossoms of the common Thrift, or sea Gillyflower 
(Statice armeria), called by the French, Spanish 
turf, and by the Italians, Ladies' pins ; while our 
old English writers term it Ladies' cushions, and 
sea-grass. We have the name of Statice from the 
Greeks, but they probably applied it to another 
plant. It signified to stop or arrest, and is now 
appropriated to an extensive genus, whose wiry 
and entangled stems seem well formed to stop the 
hasty footstep of the passenger over the cliff, or 
sandy ground, or muddy shore, where they grow. 
But the familiar names of our wild flowers those 
by which they are known in country places are 
often expressive of some hue, or form, or supposed 
virtue, or they tell a tale of spots where they grow ; 
and the old name of thrift is a good one for the 
common plant of our sea-shore, for it needs no rich 
soil, but grows on loftiest mountains and on boggy 
shores, and in crevices of maritime rocks, through- 
out Europe, as well as in North America. Lightfoot 
well designates it "the most humble and most lofty 
of plants." On some of the highest of the Scottish 
mountains this little flower rears its head, and 
Balfour says that he has gathered it from the 
summit of Muich Dhui, a mountain only second in 
height to Ben Nevis. It has been proved that 
this, and some similar plants, differ in their consti- 
tuents according to the situations in which they 
grow. When adorning the sea-shore, they contain 
salts of soda and iodine ; but when they grow in- 
land they lose the iodine, and exchange soda for 
potash. We have all seen the pink tufts and grass- 
like leaves of the thrift growing around the city 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



25 



garden, and even the smoke of London seems 
scarcely to hurt its hardy little flowers. Though 
generally pink, yet in Cornwall it is often of a pure 
white colour. Its roots, cut in slices and boiled in 
milk, are said by Neill to have been formerly 
highly valued in the Orkneys as a cure for pul- 
monary consumption. 

The Sea Lavender, or Lavender Thrift (Statice 
limonium), though a flower quite unlike, in general 
appearance, to the sea gillyflower, belongs to the 
same genus of plants ; but this never grows on the 




SPIKED THRIFT (Statice spathulato), AND COMMON THRIFT (Statice 
armeria). 



26 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

rocky height, but blooms during July and August, 
in salt marshes and on muddy shores. It has fiat 
bunches of close spikes of lavender-coloured flowers, 
which, however, have not the perfume of the gar- 
den lavender, and large, thick, leathery leaves, 
about five or six inches high. It is called the 
spreading spiked thrift, to distinguish it from a 
third species which grows on some parts of the 
sea-shore of Kent, at Whitehaven, on the Mull of 
Galloway, and on some other spots, both of Eng- 
land and Ireland ; but it is not, like the other 
species, a common plant. This is the Upright 
Spiked Thrift (Statice spatkulata), which has more 
slender branches of flowers, and blossoms in August. 
Both the last species and this are rare in Scotland, 
and rare in every part of the United Kingdom is 
the plant called Matted Thrift (Statice reticulata], 
which has small, crowded, purplish-blue flowers, 
and grows on the sea-shore at Norfolk. They 
have all scentless blossoms, and leaves somewhat 
succulent and of saltish flavour, but are very pretty 
plants ; and they retain so much of their beauty 
when dried, that they do well to mingle with the 
groups of grasses which sometimes ornament the 
chimney-piece. 

We do not find rich green meadows growing 
down close by the sea-side, but the short grasses 
which cover the cliffs or downs open to the sea- 
breezes, have among them many lovely little 
flowers ; and we can enjoy the music of the waves, 
when amid our summer rambles we come upon 
such a spot as Miss Barrett describes : 

" A nook that openeth unto 
The glorious ocean's steadfast view, 
Being most closely shut from all 
Its kindred earth's sweet pastoral ! 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 27 

And yet its banks too smooth and steep 
To be o'erbrowsed by the sheep, 
Withal are slanted very greenly ; 
And flowers and grasses so serenely 
Grow up them, that I ween the sea 
Whereto their dewed faces be, 
Doth serve them for another sky, 
As warm and blue as that on high." 

We have no marine grasses, yet we have some 
essentially maritime, and others peculiar to sandy 
districts, grasses which are so valuable to our 
shores, that we should be unwilling to look on 
them with careless eye. They might speak to us 
of the providential care of the Almighty Creator 
and Preserver of the world, and are among those 
silent utterances of the universe which show forth 
his praise. Some are to be found on almost all 
our coasts : some, in small green patches, lie like 
oases among the barren sands or shingle. They 
show God's care over minutest things, and so 
should have their cheering influence over our 
spirits while the great element itself is, as Keats 
said, "no mean comforter, while the earth is our 
throne, and the sea, like a mighty minstrel, play- 
ing before it, able, like David's harp, to make such 
as we forget almost the tempest cares of life." 

Most persons who frequent the coast have re- 
marked the sand sedges and sand grasses so often 
grouped or scattered there. Thus we have our 
sea-side barley, sea wheat-grass, sea cat's-tail, and 
other grasses, besides several of the rush and reed 
tribe ; all contributing, in a lesser degree, to bind 
down the driving sands, and some more important 
ones which will be named. Some of the grasses 
and sedges of the salt marshes, at a little distance 
from the sea, afford a saline vegetation very ser- 



28 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

viceable to cattle. But the sand sedges and 
grasses of the shore have, in general, a far more 
important office than that of even giving suste- 
nance to the beasts of the field. They serve to 
bind the sands by their long roots, so that our sea 
sands are not driven inland by the stormy winter 
winds, which in their strength have been known 
to carry the salt spray of ocean to a distance of 
fifty miles from the shore. Some of the grasses 
destined for this especial purpose, as the upright 
sea lyme-grass, flower but rarely, and few ripen 
their seeds by the shore. Indeed, in such unshel- 
tered situations it would be of little use that they 
should do so, for the high winds which prevail there 
would either bear their seeds far away to some in- 
land soil, or cast them on the waters of ocean, where 
they would float and die. But grasses growing on 
sandy spots are either viviparous, and bear young 
plants instead of seeds, or, like those of our shores 
in general, they are propagated by means of sub- 
terranean shoots. Wide-spreading shoots, increas- 
ing continually by these suckers, give their value 
to sea-side grasses ; and were it not for their aid, 
inland regions would be desolated by the loose sand 
of the large sand-banks which, on some shores, 
the mighty ocean washes up from its bed. The 
excessively long and creeping roots of the great 
sea-carex, as well as those of the upright sea lyme- 
grass, and the sea-reed or matweed, are often 
planted, that they may hold the sand together. In 
Holland, and in our own county of Norfolk, these 
grasses have been cultivated in order to restrain 
the deluges of sand to which these places would be 
subject. It has been providentially appointed that 
no animal will touch this grass for pasturage. In 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 29 

Norfolk, where its service is very great, it is called 
Marram, a name much resembling Muran, which 
is its name in the Gaelic language. The Dutch owe 
to these grasses the greater part of their country, 
which but for the sand-banks, held down by their 
roots, would have long since been swept into the 
sea. The fact is, that the sea retires from some 
shores and encroaches upon others ; and such is the 
situation of the town of Hull, in Yorkshire, that it 
is generally believed it would long ago have been 
covered by the waves were it not for the sand- 
banks at Spurn Point, on which their full force is 
borne, before they reach the town. These sea-side 
grasses bind together this useful natural fortifica- 
tion ; and thus Hull, like some places on the Welsh 
coast, and like the shores of France which lie 
between Boulogne and Dunkirk, especially in the 
tract near Calais, is saved by its sand-banks, thus 
preserved from dispersion by the strong matwork 
of roots running under the surface of their soil. In 
the sandy soils of Upper and Lower Egypt, the 
driving sands have buried cities, the ruins of which 
still appear among the wide-spread heaps. " No- 
thing can be more melancholy," says M. Denon, 
" than to walk over villages swallowed up by the 
sands of the desert; to trample under foot their 
roofs ; to strike against the summits of their mina- 
rets : to reflect that yonder were cultivated fields ; 
that there grew trees; that here were even the 
dwellings of men, and that all have vanished." 

But it is not only in countries remarkable for 
large tracts of sandy soil that whole regions have, 
by the action of the winds, been converted into 
deserts. Beautiful and fertile districts in our own 
country, lands of cornfields and meadows, and trees 



30 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

and flowers, have been overwhelmed by the sand. 
In some cases this has been owing to the folly of 
some persons in the neighbourhood, who have per- 
sisted in gathering the grasses for fuel. God has 
given to the animals the instinct by which they 
refuse to eat the mat-grass ; to man he gives the 
higher faculty of reason, which should have taught 
him to leave it untouched; yet let us not blame 
ignorance, unless our consciences tell us that we 
are doing all in our power to lessen it. With such 
perseverance have the peasantry on some shores 
of our island continued to uproot the grasses, un- 
mindful of all but their own present convenience, 
that an Act of Parliament was passed, rendering 
the destruction of these grasses punishable by law. 

Burnet mentions several instances of the destruc- 
tion of property caused by the incursion of sands 
upon fertile regions. Among others, he informs 
us that near Downham, in Suffolk, the sand-hills 
have encroached five miles during the last century ; 
and that in some parts of Scotland, hundreds of 
acres have been entirely devastated. He also refers 
to the well-known case of the Coubin estate, near 
Fores, which was at one time worth three hundred 
pounds per annum, but which has long been over- 
whelmed by sand. This terrible calamity befel this 
estate in 1769 ; and so rapid were the encroach- 
ments of the sand, which came upon it in sweeping 
heaps, that an apple-tree which grew there, was, in 
the course of the season, so buried as that nothing 
but the summit remained visible. This catastrophe 
was occasioned by the reckless pulling up by the 
roots, of a quantity of mat-grass, when some trees 
were cut down. 

The difficulty of describing the grasses without 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 31 

using botanical terms, renders it undesirable in a 
little volume of this kind, to dwell at length on 
any but those which seem, in an especial manner, 
to have been given by the great Creator to our 
shores for the purpose of holding them down. Of 
these, the common Sea-reed, or Mat weed (Ammo- 
phila arundinacea) , is the most useful, because it 
is so common a grass. It is entirely a maritime 
grass, never found but on loose, driving sands, or 
on such as were formerly so ; and as these by 
degrees become consolidated, so, when the grass 
has effected the purpose for which it was designed, 
it gradually pines away, and we find it no more. 
Very few of its seeds are perfected, but such as 
ripen fall on the soil where they grow ; for, unlike 
other grasses of this genus, this plant is destitute 
of the long tufts of wool at the base of each floret, 
which serve as wings to the seed, and the tiny tufts 
formed on this are insufficient for the purpose of 
bearing it away on the winds. Its creeping root 
is often twenty feet long, and it has a stiff, green- 
ish-yellow stem, about two or three feet high, 
and long, narrow, glaucous leaves. It flowers in 
July. It is often manufactured into door-mats and 
brushes, and in the Hebrides it is used for various 
purposes. It is twisted into ropes, woven into 
mats for pack-saddles, and into bags for holding 
meal and grain ; while a common sort of hat is 
made of its straw. It has also been planted in 
many places for preventing sand-drift. 

Xot less serviceable to the shores on which it 
grows, though far less frequent a plant than the 
matweed, is the Upright Sea Lyme-grass (Etymus 
arenarius}. This is a grass which, if the reader 
should chance to meet with, he cannot easily over- 



32 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

look. Few of our native plants are more con- 
spicuous than this, as its tall stem rises four or 
five feet in height, and its long leaves are so 
glaucous, that they look remarkable for their 
blueness of tint, even long before we come near 
them. This plant may be known from the mat- 
weed by its leaves, which are quite flat, and rather 
broad and slightly notched at the edges; but it 
chooses for its growth just the same situation 
as that. Its roots are even tougher and longer, 
and they form a superior matwork under the soil 
to those of any other plant. Knapp remarks of 
it, " This fine grass is not the promiscuous produc- 
tion of all our sea-coasts, but we find it attached 
to but a few places, and we may seek along hun- 
dreds of miles of our coasts, and be disappointed in 
the end. We have seen it in Norfolk ; but at the 
mouth of the Tees in Durham, called the Snook 
of Seaton, it abounds, producing in that situation 
a larger number of spikes than we have seen else- 
where." A coarse sort of fabric was formerly 
made of its leaves ; hence its botanic name of 
Elymus is taken from a Greek word, signifying 
to cover. The foliage is pungent in flavour, and 
though, in analysing the soluble matter of the 
grass, Sir Humphry Davy found it to contain 
more than one-third of its weight in sugar, yet 
none of our domestic animals will eat it. And so 
the plant grows uninjured, and spreads life around 
on the else desert sands: for under its shadow 
rises up many a tuft of grass and tiny flower, 
which can find a soil firm enough around its roots 
to spring and blossom. 

The Sea-carex, or Sedge (Carex arenaria), by 
its very long and creeping roots, is another of the 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

grass-like plants which offer some resistance to 
the sand storm. It is a smaller plant, with tri- 
angular rough stems, scarcely more than a foot 
high, and yellow spikes of flowers ; but it is so 
common, that it is truly a serviceable sedge on 
our coasts, its wide and numerous suckers creep- 
ing among the loose sands. Several sedge plants 
are equally useful in other places, for in some 
cases they are the only vegetation on swamps, and, 
by their growth and decay, ultimately prepare 
a soil fitted for the growth of pasture. 

Our mat-grass or sea-reed seems to be one of the 
grasses called " bents " by our older writers, " with 
which we in London," says Gerarde, " do usually 
adorn our chimneys in summer-time, and we com- 
monly call the bundle of it, handsomely made up 
for use, by the name of bents." According to the 
old poets, there was a regular succession of these 
simple chimney ornaments, suitable to the season. 
Thus Herrick, having named some of those of the 
earlier months, says, 

" When yew is out, then birch conies in, 

And many flowers beside, 
Both of a fresh and fragrant skin, 
To honour Whitsuntide. 

" Green rushes then, and sweetest bents, 

With cooler oaken boughs, 
Come in for comely ornaments 
To readorn the house." 

And though the various kinds of reeds and rushes, 
and grassy plants, are not of domestic value, as 
they were when they were strewed on floors, and 
when men blamed Cardinal Wolsey for his extra- 
vagance, because he had his strewings changed so 
often, yet in villages, remote from large cities, the 
sedge has its economical purposes, as the dim 
D 



34 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

rushlight in the cottage, and the homely chair, and 
the useful basket might show. 

We might look on the reeds and rushes too with 
the eye of a philosopher, as did Baron Humboldt, 
when he saw the young Indian drawing a sweet 
and plaintive accompaniment from an instrument 
made of a series of reeds. " The Greeks said with 
truth," observes this writer, " that reeds had con- 
tributed to subjugate nations by furnishing arrows ; 
to soften men's manners by the charm of music ; 
and to unfold their understanding by affording the 
first instruments for tracing letters." And we have 
seen, too, that to reeds of the shore men are in- 
debted for the very ground they tread on, and for 
the clearness of the air which they breathe. 

Growing sometimes close by the sand-grasses, 
sometimes on banks and among pastures at a little 
distance, some of the pretty little flowers called 
the sandworts are plentiful on our shores ; and 
the name of the genus, arenaria, from Arena, sand, 
is significant of the soils on which they grow. Far 
away in sandy fields and on heath-lands, in woods, 
in pastures, and on high mountains, thousands of 
them are found in our summer months ; and one 
of the species considered as peculiar to the sea- 
shore, is, by many good botanists, thought to be 
but a variety of the purple sandwort of our 
gravelly or sandy lands. This is the Sea 
Spurrey Sandwort (Arenaria marina], which is 
very common near the sea, and, if the same as 
the inland species, yet it is certainly usually larger 
and stouter in its appearance when growing on 
the coast. It has a small purple, star-like flower, 
with fleshy stem, and leaves of equal succulence, 
of semi- cylindrical shape, and scarcely thicker 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 35 

than the stem. The numerous blossoms grow 
close down between the stem and leaves. This 
little flower opens at nine in the morning, and 
closes between two and three o'clock in the after- 
noon. Charlotte Smith notices its early closing 
in one of her poems : 

" Among the loose and arid sands 
The humble Arenaria creeps ; 
Slowly the purple star expands, 
But soon within its calyx sleeps. 

" And those small bells so lightly ray'd 

In young Aurora's rosy hue, 
Are to the noontide sun display'd, 

But shut their plaits against the dew." 

A much larger and more conspicuous plant 
than this is the sea sandwort (Arenaria peploides), 
which is very common. On our sea-side sands, 
the first-named species would perhaps be scarcely 
seen, except by botanists, and by children who 
espy the smallest flowers ; but large patches of the 
sea sandwort, with their smooth shining fleshy 
leaves, cannot be unnoticed. The flowers are, how- 
ever, very small ; and as they will not open in the 
shade, and close very early, extensive clumps of the 
leaves may be found, on which the casual observer 
would believe no flower ever opened to the sun. 
The Icelanders, who use several wild flowers, as 
our sweet thyme and others, to flavour their sour 
whey, make much use of the sea sandwort for this 
purpose. They steep this plant in the whey when 
it ferments ; they then strain it off the liquid, and 
add fresh water to the beverage, which is said, 
when thus prepared, to taste like olive oil. Some 
species of Arenaria grow on the very borders of 
the snow on the Swiss mountains, and several are 
found on the high mountains of Dauphine. 
D2 



36 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

A little spreading plant, with linear leaves, 
called the sea pearl- wort (Sagina maritima), is very 
common on the sea-coasts of England, Ireland, 
and Scotland. Those who know our other two 
species of pearl-wort, would at once recognise 
this, but it has no bright petals to invite attention. 
Its little green calyx is its only flower. The 
stems are about two inches high, spreading at the 
base, and its leaves are slender, smooth, and suc- 
culent. The stems and flower- cups are often quite 
reddish or purplish in tint. It blossoms from May 
to August. 

No pretensions to beauty have the tribe of 
plants which will next be noticed, but they are a 
marked feature of sea-side vegetation, on some of 
our shores where they ' abound. These are the 
different species of atriplex, or orache, some of 
which are to be found on almost all parts of our 
coast. They have mostly grey, or indeed whitish 
green leaves, and the flowers usually grow in 
green, or yellow, or reddish coloured spikes ; but, 
excepting when they are red, are not at all showy 
blossoms. The leaves of the shrubby orache, or 
sea purslane (Atriplex portulacoides], are of a sil- 
very whiteness. This shrub-like plant, however, 
is not common, though it grows on muddy sea- 
shores of some parts of England and Ireland. Its 
stems are one or two feet high, and its flowers, 
which appear in July and August, are small, and 
of a yellowish green. It makes a good pickle. 

The frosted sea orache (Atriplex laciniata) is by 
no means uncommon on sandy shores, and has much 
broader leaves than the shrubby kind. The whole 
plant looks as if covered thickly with hoar frost. 
In salt marshes, as well as on waste inland grounds, 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 37 

the spreading halberd-leaved orache (Atriplex 
patula) is also very, frequent, growing, indeed, 
everywhere, but becoming, when near the sea, 
much more succulent and reddish in tint. Its 
leaves are, when not thus red, of a dull green 
and mealy surface ; and their triangular forms, 
lobed at the base, are well expressed by the 
specific name. Then there is the grass-leaved 
orache (Atriplex. littoralis), with its grass-like foli- 
age, found chiefly on the east coast in muddy salt 
marshes; and the stalked sea orache (Atriplex 
pedunculata) , with its zigzag stem and spreading 
branches, which flourishes on the muddy salt 
marshes of the east and south-eastern coasts 
of England, and is well known to botanists by 
the scaly mealiness with which the whole plant is 
covered. It is sometimes found on the muddy 
shores of rivers, and Sir J. E. Smith gathered it 
from the borders of the Ouse, just below Lynn. 
It is occasionally cooked for food, but unless cut 
while very young the stalks beconie tough and 
unfit for use. The tall shrubby orache, which we 
often see cultivated in our gardens for its beautiful 
silver-coloured foliage, is, when wild, a maritime 
plant, and is brought from the shores of Southern 
Europe ; and one species of this plant, called the 
garden orache, or mountain spinach, was formerly 
cultivated as a culinary herb. Several species are 
valued on the Continent as edible vegetables ; and 
in the neighbourhood of Paris the orache is planted 
to a great extent for the Paris market. 

It is difficult, by description, to convey to the 
unscientific reader any idea of the appearance 
either of the orache, or its ally the goosefoot. 
These plants are very similar to each other, not 



38 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

only in their general aspect, but also in their pro- 
perties. We have thirteen British species of 
goosefoot, several of which grow near the sea. 
There is the shrubby sea-side goosefoot ( Chenopo- 
dium fruticosum) , a somewhat rare plant, yet found 
on the coasts of Devonshire, Cornwall, Suffolk, 
and Dorsetshire, and also on the Norfolk shore. 
It was formerly termed the shrubby saltwort, and 
was first discovered in this country in the time of 
Ray, by Sir Thomas Browne, the author of the 
Religio Medici. It is an elegant evergreen, and 
its leaves have a saltish and somewhat acrimonious 
flavour. 

The annual sea-side goosefoot or sea-side blite 
(Chenopodium maritimum) , is a very common plant 
on our sea-shores, and the many-spiked goosefoot 
(Chenopodium botryoides) , with its triangular leaves, 
grows on some cliffs by the sea ; but there is one 
kind, equally frequent with the former, growing 
especially on the coast, but found also on waste 
places and on walls, far from the shore, and it 
certainly deserves its most inelegant name of 
stinking goosefoot. It may at once be known 
from all the other kinds by its odour, which is 
such as would not induce us to gather it. Its 
small leaves and stems are greasy to the touch, 
and covered over with a powdery substance, which, 
when bruised, causes the offensive scent. Professor 
Hooker well compares this to the smell of putrid 
fish. Nor can we remember any plant of our 
lands more disgusting in perfume, except some of 
the mushroom tribe. Yet this goosefoot is a really 
valuable anti-spasmodic medicine, and is held in 
great repute, not only by village doctors, but 
large quantities were,, until recently, sent to 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 39 

Covent Garden market from some extensive plan- 
tation of this vegetable at Mitcham. 

Several of the goosefoots are commonly boiled 
as greens for the table, and several are planted for 
this purpose. Our own sea-side goosefoot is one 
of the best of our native species for food. The 
plant called Good King Henry, or mercury goose- 
foot (Chenopodium Bonus Henricus), a very com- 
mon kind, growing on waste places and way-sides, 
with large dark green triangular arrow-shaped 
leaves, was formerly very generally sown in gar- 
dens for spinach, and is still planted in some 
places, for it is very hardy, requiring little care, 
and early coming into leaf. The name of good 
was probably given to it, however, rather because 
of its supposed virtue in healing wounds, than for 
its excellency as a table vegetable. Our sea-side 
species yields soda, and is often gathered for this, 
with the saltwort and other maritime plants, from 
shores where it abounds. This substance is largely 
produced by several of the orache tribe; and, 
indeed, almost all our sea-side vegetation furnishes 
it in a greater or less degree. Some of the goose- 
foots are common articles of food in Peru; and 
when the mummy cases of the ancient Guanches 
of Teneriffe have been opened, it has been found, 
that among the aromatic plants used there in ancient 
days to make this mortal frame immortal, the 
Mexican goosefoot (Chenopodium ambrosioides) was 
constantly present. 

The plant of our waste places near the sea, 
called the stinking goosefoot, has been remarked 
by M. Chevalier, to give out pure ammonia, during 
its whole existence. Dr. Lindley remarks on this 
fact : " This is the only observation on record, of 



40 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

a gaseous exhalation of azote, by vegetables ; and 
the facility with which this principle is abandoned 
by ammonia, may perhaps explain the presence of 
azotic products in the vegetable kingdom." 

Of all our sea-side plants, boiled for table vege- 
tables, the one which seems to the writer of these 
pages most to deserve commendation for the pur- 
pose, is the sea-beet (Beta maritima). Unlike 
the silvery glaucous foliage of the orache and 
goosefoot, the leaves of this plant are of a deep 
rich green colour, very succulent and wavy at the 
edges. The stems are angular, grow down near 
the ground, and are one or two feet long, and the 
flowers are green, and appear in August. When 
properly boiled, it has the appearance and full 
flavour of the cultivated spinach ; indeed, it is 
rather superior to that plant, but if not gathered 
while young, the vegetable becomes too strongly 
bitter. It is not general around our coasts, but 
in some places in England it is very abundant, 
and it grows also on the southern shores of Scot- 
land. At Dovor it is plentiful, not only on the 
cliffs, but on the upper part of the beach, where a 
grassy spot may sometimes be seen on which the 
bright blue viper's bugloss rises above its prickly 
stems, and no less prickly leaves; and the lilac 
mallow, and the yellow dandelion and hawkweed, 
unite with clumps of orache and sea-beet to 
make a green and gay patch on the stones. On 
some parts of the coast it is gathered from the 
cliff or the muddy shore for food, yet it is often 
left unnoticed. The English proverb, which our 
old writer, Fuller, so often quotes, " Fetched far, 
and cost dear, is fit for ladies," applies, seemingly, 
as well to the other portion of humanity as to the 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 41 

fair sex. This sea-side spinach is certainly very 
wholesome, and if it were not a wild plant would 
be in much request. The roots of all the beets 
contain much saccharine matter, and the well- 
known experiments of the French on another 
species, the red beet, for the purpose of obtaining 
sugar, need not be referred to. No such quantity 
of sugary substance is yielded by other European 
esculents as by this. This plant is also common 
as a culinary root, and is also frequently used for 
salads, and its deep red colour deserves the name 
given to the whole tribe by our Saxon ancestors ; 
for "beet" appears to be the corruption of their 
word "bet," which signified "red." The Italians 
call the plant Barba Brettola, and the French term 
it Betterave. The juice of our common beet is said 
to cure head-ache, and if drawn up the nostrils to 
occasion sneezing. 

We have not more than three or four shrubs 
which can be called natives of our British shores ; 
the yellow furze bush, however (UlexEuropoeus), 
may be very well planted there, for it will bear all 
the rough winds and the salt spray, and still be 
rich with golden blossoms almost throughout the 
year. One of our most beautiful sea-side shrubs 
is the tree mallow (Lavatera arborea), and even 
this is better known by its place in our shrub- 
beries than by its frequent growth on the cliffs of 
our island ; it, however, adorns some of the rocks 
on the south and south-west shores of England 
and the eastern shores of Scotland. The Rev. 
J. A. Johns, in his interesting work, called " A 
Week at the Lizard," says of it " It is a large 
and picturesque plant, and chooses to perch itself 
on the insulated rocks all along this coast, in which 



42 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



situation it sends up its rigid erect stem in defiance 
of wind and storm. It varies in height from two 
feet or more." It is very ornamental to spots 




TREE MALLOW (Lavatera arborea). 



where it abounds, for it has large purplish rose- 
coloured darkly veined flowers, shaped like those 
of the common mallow of our fields, and darkening 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 43 

in colour 'at the base of their bell-like vases. 
It has leaves downy and soft as velvet, plaited and 
lobed with seven angles ; and though of a shrubby 
nature, yet it is sometimes six feet high, and its 
round stem branches chiefly at the top, where it 
forms a leafy canopy. It adorns an islet off the 
coast of Anglesea, but always grows wild on in- 
sulated maritime rocks. On the Bass rock, that 
lonely island in the midst of the waters, so re- 
nowned in Scottish history, it thrives well ; and 
Balfour, who has given us some account of the 
botany of that island, says that the tree mallow is 
the most important plant which grows there. This 
author observes that the Lavatera, according to 
Sibbald, existed at one time on the other islands of 
the Frith of Forth, as on Inch Garvie and Inch 
Mykrie ; but that it has now disappeared. He 
adds, that on the rocks, below the fortifications of 
the feass rock, it grows in great profusion, and 
that in the month of July the place is quite gor- 
geous with its flowers. It also adorns the Ailsa 
Crag. Like all the mallow tribe, this plant is 
very mucilaginous in its properties ; and its fibres 
are so tenacious as to fit them for making useful 
and strong ropes and cordage. Its name of Lava- 
tera was given to it by Tournefort, in honour of 
two physicians who were friends of that botanist, 
but who are not known as men of science, and 
were no way related to the celebrated physiogno- 
mist of that name. 

The shrub, wiiich, because we see it so much 
in sea-side gardens, seems more than any other 
to be characteristic of our shores, and yet which 
is, by some writers, thought rather to be a natu- 
ralized than an indigenous plant, is the French 



44 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

Tamarisk (Tamarix cjallica). On many parts of 
the British coast it is unknown as a wild plant, 
but it is plentiful on the rocks, cliffs, and sandy 
shores by the sea, about the Lizard and St. 
Michael's, Cornwall ; and grows near Hurst 
Castle, Hastings, at Sandgate in Kent, and on 
several parts of the southern shores of England. 
Its leaves are of a pale sea-green, and its young 
twigs are red. The blossoms come upon this 
shrub in July, and are most elegant feathery spikes 
of pink flowers. Fuller says that the Tamarisk 
was first brought from Switzerland into England 
by Bishop Grindal, when he returned from the 
exile into which he had been sent in the reign of 
Queen Mary, and planted it in his garden in his 
native land. It grows abundantly on the Tanaris, 
now called the Tambra, on the Spanish side of the 
Pyrenees, and hence the plant was named from 
the Tamarisci, the people who inhabit these coun- 
tries. Very pretty hedges of it grow luxuriantly 
around Boulogne, on the French coast, and Sir 
J, E. Smith observed there that the sheep so pre- 
ferred its branches to any other herbage, that they 
never touched another plant so long as its boughs 
grew within their reach. It is one of the most 
common productions of the Arabian desert, where 
its green leaves afford a welcome, though slight 
shadow, and the camels crop its graceful branches. 
The Oriental Tamarisk is by pre-eminence the 
tree of Egypt, for on its saline and sandy soils no 
other tree rises which can give wood enough for 
fuel or for furniture but this. They call it the 
Atle, and the Egyptians have a proverb, that the 
world would go ill with them if Atles were to fail. 
Our French Tamarisk, when it attains any size, 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 45 

has a very hard wood. Fuller refers to the prac- 
tice of making cups of this wood in his time ; and 
Gerarde records, as a fact, the fiction that ale or 
beer is the more wholesome when drunk from a 
cup of Tamarisk wood. Our forefathers thought, 
too, that their meat was the sweeter if roasted on 
a spit made of the wood of this shrub. It has one 
sad historic association, however, for the Romans 
were accustomed to bind a garland of its cypress- 
like boughs around the brow of the criminal con- 
demned to execution ; and from its frequent use in 
these mournful wreaths, it was called the unhappy 
Tamarisk. 

More frequent than any other wild shrub on our 
shores is the common sallow-thorn, or sea Buck- 
thorn (Hippophce rhamnoides), which, because of 
its pretty silvery foliage, is often honoured with a 
place in our garden or shrubbery. It is common 
on the sand-hills and cliffs of the east and south- 
eastern coasts of England: and the small green 
flowers come out at the same season as the young 
slender leaves, in the month of May. It is a 
thorny shrub, and smaller when wild than when 
planted in gardens, seldom reaching, on the cliff, 
the height of five feet. In autumn the shrub is 
bright with the deep orange-coloured berries, 
which it bears in great profusion, and which are 
really very pleasant fruits, of an acid flavour, and 
very juicy. These berries are much eaten by the 
Tartars, and the fishermen of the Gulf of Bothnia 
gather baskets full of them in autumn for the use 
of their families ; and a preserve is made of them 
which imparts a delicious flavour to fresh fish. The 
leaves are of a very dark green above, but beneath 
are very silvery. Stems, roots, and foliage, are all 



46 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

full of a yellow dye, which they impart readily.. 
This plant never grows wild inland, though it does 
not require a saline air or soil. 

A flower called the sea campion, or catchfly 
(Silene maritima], is very frequent on the sea-shore 
above the water-mark, and it grows too beside 
some of those clear rivulets which run along the 
Alpine hills of Wales, and other mountainous 
parts of our island. It very much resembles that 
common flower of our hedges and pastures, the 
bladder campion, and has the same glaucous green 
leaves, and bladder-like flower cup, beautifully 
marked with a net- work of purple veins. Like 
that, too, it has the white starry flower, but its 
blossoms are generally larger. Some writers con- 
sider it only a variety of this bladder campion, 
altered, in some of its features, by its place of 
growth. This genus was named catchfly. from the 
viscous substance which is found on the stems and 
leaves of some of the species, but it is not on this. 
It has a creeping root, and the stems are often 
quite prostrate near their sandy bed. It has 
generally but one flower, though sometimes a 
little cluster of two or three may be found on the 
summit of its stem. 

One of the most common of the little flowers 
which grow on our muddy shores and salt marshes 
is the sea milkwort, sometimes called the black 
saltwort (Glaux maritima). It may be easily 
described so as to be known when seen even by a 
reader unacquainted with botany. It has stout 
branched stems, often lying on the ground, and 
about three or four, or sometimes even five inches 
long. The leaves are of a glaucous green tint, 
opposite to each other on the stalk, and are small 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 47 

and succulent, and without leaf-stalks. Pretty 
little pink flowers, freckled with red spots, may be 
seen on it in June and July, growing singly be- 
tween the leaves and stem. Loudon observes of 
this little plant, that it is well adapted for pots 
and rock-work, and that it will grow at a distance 
from the sea, if the sand on which it must be 
planted is kept well moistened. It rarely grows 
wild inland, except on the shores of salt rivers. 

Far less frequent, but an equally pretty little 
blossom, is the creeping pale -blue toad-flax (Lina- 
ria repens], which grows on chalky banks and 
rocks on some parts of the sea-side. The flowers 
are shaped like those of the common yellow toad- 
flax, but are blue and yellow. It blooms in July 
and the two following months. 

Not unfrequently we may find, on rocky or 
sandy places about our coast, some handsome tufts 
of the white English stonecrop (Sedum Anglicum). 
Both in Scotland and Ireland this plant is abun- 
dant, not only on cliffs near the sea, but upon 
inland rocks ; and there are some shores of Eng- 
land on which it is one of the prettiest plants. Its 
leaves are very succulent, and have somewhat of 
the sea-green tint, and its flowers, which are at 
first thickly clustered, but afterwards open into a 
larger and more scattered bunch, are beautiful 
white star-like blossoms, with purple anthers, and 
a reddish mark on each petal besides being gene- 
rally covered at the tips with rosy spots. Few 
would pass it by without notice when, in July, it 
opens its flowers to the sunshine. It is one of a 
large class of plants, all natives of sandy or stony 
soils, and all having the succulent foliage, and the 
small roots of plants destined rather to thrive on 



48 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

rains and dews than on the substances sucked up 
by roots from soils. Several of the Sedums, among 
them the common yellow stonecrop of our walls, 
were formerly used as a medicine, and another 
was one of the plants much used in London for 
the burning of bonfires on St. John's Eve. This 
was the Orpine, or Live-long (Sedum TelepTiium). 
These plants were, some centuries since, com- 
monly called Midsummer men ; and an old herbal 
records of the Orpine, " The people of the country 
delight much to set it in pots and shelles on Mid- 
summer Even, or upon timber, slates, or trenchers 
daubed with clay, and so to set or hang it up in 
their houses, where it remaineth greene a long 
season, and groweth, if it be sometimes over 
sprinkled with water." 

There is a plant found on our sea-side cliffs, but 
which is more abundant on the high mountains at 
the north of England and Ireland, as well as the 
north-west of Scotland, where it is very common. 
This is the rose root (Rhodiola rosed). To such of 
our readers as know the Orpine, we may say that 
this plant very much resembles it in its appear- 
ance. The blossoms are yellow, and grow in small 
compact clusters. The leaves are crowded about 
the stem, and are of a broad oblong shape, and 
notched at the edges ; in some specimens they are 
much tinged with red, and they are very juicy. 
The root is large and woody, and when dried in 
the sun, it yields an odour which is scarcely in- 
ferior to that of the blossom of the rose. It is a 
small plant, seldom exceeding ten inches in height, 
and without branches. 

One species of our wild docks grows especially 
on salt marshes, near the sea. The Golden Dock 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 49 

(Eumex maritimus) has flowers of a bright orange 
colour, in crowded whorls, on an angular furrowed 
stem, about one or two feet in height, and long 
narrow leaves. It is well named, for the whole 
plant, in process of time, becomes of a golden hue. 
The docks generally are well known to those at 
all familiar with flowers, and this has much simi- 
larity to the other species. They have little beauty 
to recommend them to notice, and cultivators of 
land well know the trouble given by the dock 
plants. Some of them, however, have very large 
and handsome leaves, which the artist welcomes as a 
suitable ornament to the foregrounds of his picture. 
This family of plants produces an immense number 
of seeds, and ripens them so rapidly, that were it 
not, that being heavy, they are less easily dispersed 
than others, and will not, like the thistle-down, 
float far away on the summer air, the land would be 
overrun with docks. Another circumstance which 
renders them difficult of extirpation from the soil 
is, that unless the root is completely extracted, 
little has been done ; for a very small remaining 
portion will generate buds, and send shoots to the 
surface. In olden times, however, docks had their 
repute as medicine ; and the Alpine dock, a rare 
British species, though common in France, was called 
monk's rhubarb, from its frequent use in the mo- 
nasteries instead of the oriental plant. Other 
species have been used as external remedies, and 
some cultivated as spinach. Our common Eed- 
veined dock (Eumex Sanguineus), with its curled 
leaves and red veins, is said to be a good vegetable 
when boiled. Children know it well ; for the leaves 
of this, and other species common by the road side, 
are often placed on the hand smarting from the 

E 



50 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

sting of the nettle, when, heedless of its presence, 
they have grasped the blackberry or wild rose. 
Most of us have fancied that it allayed the pain ; 
and it may at least have the praise so often 
bestowed by rural simplers, on their approved 
remedies, that if it does no good, it will do no harm. 
The golden dock of our salt marshes blooms in July 
and August. 

An old writer on the art of Simpling, says of all 
the plants of this genus, " Alle kinds of dock have 
this property, that what flesh or meat is sod there- 
with, though it be never so old, hard, or tough, it 
will become tender and meet to be eaten;" but it 
would seem this, as well as some other herbs 
named by old writers, had strangely lost their 
ancient virtues. 

At about the same season of the year the rambler 
of the sea-side may find two very pretty flowers 
blooming on our sandy shores, and when they grow 
in any quantity, giving a gay appearance to the 
spot. One of them, however, is not a very 
common flower, though there are some places in 
which the Sea Bindweed, or Convolvulus, is plenti- 
ful. This pretty plant (Convolvolus Soldanella] has 
large purplish-pink blossoms, with pale-yellow 
plaits, and succulent sea-green leaves. It is so frail 
a flower that we can scarcely gather it, and is a 
native of the sea-coast of many parts of Europe 
and Asia. Its young stalks are sometimes pickled. 
The other flower, or rather flowers (for three species 
grow near the sea more than elsewhere) , are the red 
Centauries. The dwarf-branched Centaury (Eryth- 
r&a pulchella) is common on the sandy sea-shores 
of England and Scotland, and is generally about 
five or six inches high, with a slender leafy stem. 



SExi-SIDE PLANTS. 



51 



At the top of this is a cluster of rose-coloured, 
star-like flowers, which, like those of all the species, 
only open in sunshiny days, and close early in the 




SEA BINDWEED, OR CONVOLVULUS (Convolcolus Soldanella). 

afternoon. On similar places grows also the dwarf- 
tufted Centaury (Erythrcea littoralis), which is ge- 
nerally a lower growing plant, with a more dense 
cluster of blossoms, which appear a month earlier 
in the year; while the broad-leaved Centaury 
(Erythrcea latifolia) grows on the sea-shore with a 

E2 



52 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

strong, stiff stem, and broader leaves. This species 
is very frequent in the Outer Hebrides, where it 
is gathered for the purpose of being infused in 
spirits as a bitter. These three plants, as well as 
the common Centaury of our inland pastures, are 
thought by some writers to be all of one species, 
varied only, in some slight particulars, by the cir- 
cumstances of soil and situation, which reminds us 
of a celebrated botanist, who had written some 
valuable papers on the rose, and who, on being 
asked how many species there were, is said to have 
replied, somewhat drily, "I really cannot say, but 
I am sure there is one." 

The Gentian is nearly allied to the Centaury, by 
its intensely bitter principle, and until later years 
the centauries were called gentians. Our true 
British gentians have all, however, deep blue or 
purple flowers. The field Gentian ( Gentiana cam- 
pestris] is a beautiful purplish-blue flower, with 
many blossoms, common in chalk or limestone soils, 
and frequent in Scotland near the sea. This is one 
of the plants used in Sweden instead of hops. 

A little flower called the Sea Heath (Frankenia 
l&vis), with slender, crowded leaves, wiry stems, 
and pale rose-coloured blossoms, is sometimes found 
on the salt marshes on the eastern coast, chiefly, of 
England. It is not a common plant of our shores, 
though it is so on many maritime places of Europe, 
and on the Canary Isles it is very plentiful. 
It is sometimes white. It is but an humble plant, 
and so too is the powdery Sea Heath (Frankenia 
pulverulenta), which is very seldom seen here, though 
it has been found by botanists on the coast of Eng- 
land. This little flower grows plentifully by the 
sea, in many parts of Europe and Asia. This genus 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



53 



was named in honour of John Frankenius, Pro- 
fessor of Botany at Upsal. 

An equally rare and lowly plant is the Sand Strap- 
wort ( Corrigiola littoralis\ found sometimes on the 




SAND STRAPWORT (Corrigiola littoralis}. 

south-western coast of England, though but three 
spots are named as its place of growth ; the Star 
Point, and the Slapham Sands of Devonshire, 
and the shores of the Loe Pool in Cornwall. In 
the latter place it thrives among the shingle, on 
several parts of the shore. It always grows in 
places which in winter are covered by water. It 
has numerous slender leaves, somewhat fleshy, 
and very glaucous, and stems spreading over the 
ground, and numerous small white blossoms. 

In the South of England, too, as on the Babbi- 
combe rocks, by the sea, and on the rocks near 
Torquay, may be found the beautiful crumpled 
flowers of the white Mountain Rock-rose (Helian- 



54 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

tliemum polifolium}, which is a shrubby plant, and 
so lovely a one that the botanist regrets that it is 
not more general around our island shores. 

A genus of plants which were highly valued some 
centuries since, for their antiscorbutic properties, 
and to which has therefore been given the name of 
Scurvy-grass, has several species, which grow com- 
monly near the ocean, or on rocks which overhang 
its snores, or on the marshes which share their 
saline airs and soil. The common Scurvy-grass 
( Cochlearia officinalis) grows alike on rocks or muddy 
sea-sides, on the margins of salt rivers, and on the tops 
of elevated mountains ; and there is no doubt that 
it has powerful and valuable medicinal properties. 
Invalids often take its expressed juices; and in days 
when salad herbs were rarer in this country, this 
was cultivated for the purpose. It has thick succu- 
lent leaves, and white flowers, of the cruciferous 
form, and blossoms in May or June. It may be 
found on almost all parts of the coast in abundance. 
The French term this plant Cranson officinale, and 
the Germans Loffelkraut. When fresh it has a 
bitter and acrid flavour, which is lost in process of 
drying. 

The Greenland Scurvy-grass ( Cochlearia green- 
landica] is much like the last-named plant, but not 
so frequent, though it blossoms in June and July on 
some parts of our shores, and on the Highland 
mountains. More general than this is the kind 
called English Scurvy-grass, which, with the 
Danish Scurvy-grass, grows plentifully on muddy 
and rocky sea-shores. The Danish species is also 
a native of Kamtschatka, and even more abundant 
in the north of Europe than with us. Thick tuft3 
of the juicy leaves of these scurvy-grasses are found 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 55 

within the arctic circle, where scarcely any other 
plants than lichens and mosses exist, and where 
even the hardy race of pines, generally so fitted to 
bear the blasts of northern tempests, yet dwindle 
into stunted shrubs. The Scurvy-grass and the 
different species of sorrel, both of which are 
welcomed by the mariner as an antidote to the 
disease generated by the salt provisions of a long 
voyage, were found by Captain Parry, nourishing 
under the snow, at the very farthest limits of 
vegetation. 

One of the handsomest of our sea-side flowers is 
the Vernal Squill (Scilla verna), which cannot be 
termed a common flower, as it is rarely seen on 
the southern shores of this island. On the coasts 
of the west and northern parts of Great Britain, 
its beautiful deep-blue bell-flowers scent the air, 
usually bearing in it so little of the odour of wild 
flowers. It is about three or four inches high, 
with numerous deep-green slender leaves ; but its 
size varies much, according to differences of soil and 
situation. In August and September the Autumnal 
Squill (Scilla autumnalis) makes its appearance on 
some parts of our shores, especially at the south of 
England. The flowers are not so pretty nor so 
brightly blue as the spring species ; and it is not 
until they have withered that the leaves come 
up from the root. They have a pinkish or lilac 
tinge. 

But rarely on the English coast do we find that 
very elegant flower, called by some botanists the 
Sea Gromwell, by others the Sea Lungwort or Sea 
Bugloss (Lithospermum maritimum), though on 
the sea-coast of the north of England it sometimes 
blooms among the sand or loose stones of the beach ; 



56 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



but it is very plentiful on the north and west of 
Scotland. "This fine plant," says Dr. Walker, " was, 
described in Scotland above a hundred years ago, by 




VERNAL SQUILL (Stilld 



the learned Sir Andrew Balfour, and afterwards by 
Kay, as growing on the sea-shore near Berwick. It 
was found in flower at Icolmkill, on the 2d of July, 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 57 

and is frequent upon the stony beach of most of 
the Western Islands, where it highly ornaments 
the shores with its beautiful flowers, and the ele- 
gant glaucous colour of its foliage. It is reckoned 
by Dillenius the most beautiful plant that is native 
to England. It is remarked by Linnaeus as being 
sometimes annual and sometimes perennial, but 
upon the shores of the Hebrides it appears to be 
constantly biennial. Upon the coast of Ireland, 
however, where it likewise grows, it will probably 
be an annual plant, and perennial in a warmer 
climate than that of Britain." The sea-side Grom- 
well has been again seen on the shores of Berwick 
within the last few years. It is quite a plant of 
the north, extending even to the dreary arctic 
regions. Its blossoms are of the most brilliant 
purplish-blue tint. Sir William Hooker remarks 
of it, that when the bloom is rubbed off, rough 
callous points are seen upon the surface, which 
become white, and almost stony in drying, when 
the rest of the plant is nearly black. This genus 
of plants contains a good deal of flint in their 
composition, and it was from their shining, hard 
nuts, that their botanic name was formed, of two 
words, signifying a stone and seed. This hardness 
was noticed of old in our own land ; for the English 
name, Gromwell, has the same origin in Celtic 
graun, a seed, and wt'Z, a stone. It has been ob- 
served that the flavour of this maritime species 
resembles that of oysters. 

Very frequent on sandy sea-shores is the showy 
flower called the Purple Sea-rocket (CaJcile mari- 
tima), with large, cross-shaped blossoms, of a 
purplish-lilac colour, growing in thick clusters. 
The whole of the plant is smooth and glaucous, and 



58 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

very succulent. It has been found on the coast of 
Ayr, with white flowers, and blossoms in June 
and* July. It grows along the shores of different 
countries, from Sweden and Lapland to Gibraltar, 
and is also found on both sides of the Mediter- 
ranean Sea. 

We have already noticed some of the culinary 
vegetables which originated in the wild plants of 
our shores. Indeed, some of our best esculents 
have been derived from the sea-side ; and the wild 
cabbage, and the wild kale, and the asparagus, all 
have their native homes where ocean's roar is 
heard, and where sea spray and salt soil water and 
nourish them. The French writers term our Kale 
(Orambe maritima) the chow marin cT Angleterre ; 
and it appears to have been sent from England into 
France before the middle of the sixteenth century. 
It is a hardy perennial, and when fully grown, a 
very beautiful plant, with its delicate sea-green 
surface, powdered over with its whitish bloom, 
and a tinge of purple here and there on its foliage, 
and its white honey-scented flowers. It is very 
common on some sandy and stony lands near the 
sea ; and where it is abundant, it has been cus- 
tomary, from time immemorial, for the people of 
the neighbourhood to watch for the time when its 
young leaf-stalks and shoots emerge from their 
sandy beds, which is in the month of March or 
April. They cut these off as they might do the 
asparagus, and boil them for table; and the blanched 
shoots of the cultivated plant are too well known 
to require comment. In some countries on the 
Continent, the large, purplish-green leaves have 
been boiled as greens, yet they are not of a very 
palatable description, unless eaten when very 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 59 

young. There is, however, a difference of taste 
in these matters ; for Dr. Walker, who gathered 
this plant from the Bass Rock, remarks that the 
leaves were large, tender, and succulent ; and says 
that he and his friends had a dish dressed of them, 
and agreed in thinking them preferable to any 
other greens they had lately tasted, 

It is now nearly a century since the Sea-kale 
was brought into repute in our country, by Dr. 
Lettsom, who highly praised it. In English gar- 
dens it is cultivated and blanched, by excluding the 
light with sands, ashes, or some other opaque sub- 
stance. The root of a species called the Tartarian 
Sea-kale is very sweet, and is eaten uncooked, with 
vinegar, oil, and salt, or it is boiled. It is so well 
liked by the Hungarians, that they call it Tar- 
tarian bread. 

The Asparagus (Asparagus officinalis) was by 
our forefathers termed Sperage or Coral wort, while 
some good old English writers called it by a name 
still in common use among uneducated persons, 
Sparrow-grass. It is a native of several parts of 
the south and south-west coasts of England. The 
little island called Asparagus Isle, at Kynance 
Cove, Cornwall, received its name from the abun- 
dance of this plant growing on that spot, to which 
in autumn its bright yellow feathery foliage and 
scarlet berries are a very picturesque addition. It 
is also described as growing in great plenty on 
the pebbly beach near Weymouth, and on the 
Links near Gosford, in Scotland. On several 
maritime places of Europe it is an abundant pro- 
duction of the sands ; and on the sandy steppes 
of Russia and Turkey, as well as on similar spots of 
the Greek islands, it is found far away from the 



60 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

sea. In North America, too, the Asparagus grows 
among the maize in fields, but in no wild state is 
it equal in size to the cultivated plant. The 
Asparagus of our own shores is seldom larger than 
a goose quill, and not worth cooking. This plant 
is one of the few on which the praise of ancient 
and modern writers has been alike bestowed, for 
Pliny and Cato told of its virtues, and the Greeks 
have transmitted it to posterity under the name 
which it has now. It must be observed, however, 
that the Greeks, like us, had several plants whose 
young shoots were used as food ; thus their term 
Asparagus seems to have included not this alone, 
but a variety of other pulpy stems. Long before the 
culture of vegetables for the table had become 
general in this country, this had received attention ; 
but nowhere do we read of finer plants than were 
said by Pliny to be reared by the Romans, as three 
shoots of the vegetable grown at Ravenna are stated 
by that naturalist to have weighed a pound. 

A large quantity of Asparagus is raised around 
London, and it is thought by some horticulturists 
that the plant might be cultivated to advantage 
on many parts of our coast on soils consisting of 
little else than sea-sand, and which afford too little 
nutriment for the growth of other than naturally 
maritime vegetables. The French call the plant 
Asperge, and it is much planted around Paris. 

In reading the travels of those who have gone 
over the sandy deserts of other countries, we find 
frequent mention of different species of the Aspa- 
ragus genus, very unlike our own plant, and 
presenting a formidable barrier to the approach of 
the passenger. The Cape Asparagus has crooked 
thorns, which if they hold the traveller by his 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 61 

clothes, will not let him escape without many a 
rent, and the inhabitants of the country call the 
plant Waht en beetje " Wait a bit." Then there is 
the linear-leaved Asparagus of Ceylon, with shoots 
five or six feet in height, thickly beset with spines, 
and the roots of which afford food to the Cingalese ; 
and another species, a native of Spain, with thorns 
as large as a finger, which will not let you touch it 
without tearing you. Well might the genus receive 
the name of Asparagus, from a Greek word to lace- 
rate, for few except our native species are unarmed. 
On our salt marshes we may gather from May 
till the end of summer, the sea-side Arrow-grass 
(Triglochin maritimum), which is a common but not 
a conspicuous plant, and not much unlike, at first 
appearance, one of the plantains. It has a stout 
stem, long narrow leaves, and small greenish 
flowers ; it has a salt flavour, and cattle, especially 
cows, are very fond of it. 

On the rocky coasts of the North of England, 
and very abundantly on the shores of Scotland, the 
Scottish Lovage (Ligusticum Scoticum) rears its 
head and grows to a large plant, fearless of winds 
and tide. It has broad, smooth, dark green leaves, 
and a cluster of small white flowers with a reddish 
tinge, which appear in July. When bruised, the 
foliage of this plant emits a powerful odour re- 
sembling that of parsley. In the Isle of Skye the 
Lovage is eaten in its natural state, and called 
Shunis, and it is also thus eaten in several of the 
northern isles of Scotland as well as boiled for 

Seens. Ray mentions of it, that in his time the 
ighlanders gathered and ate it early in the 
morning before they touched any other food, to 
preserve them through the day from infection; 



62 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

and probably its strong aromatic flavour would 
really render it a suitable plant for such a purpose. 
They call the Lovage the Sea Parsley. Its acrid 
root is occasionally chewed by the Hebridians as 
a substitute for tobacco. The boiled or raw plant 
seems wholesome, and some writers describe its 
flavour as agreeable, but persons unaccustomed to 
it would wonder how so nauseous and acrid a vege- 
table could ever be valued or indeed used as food. 

The Lovage is an umbelliferous plant, as are the 
samphire and some others yet to be named, and it 
seems desirable to explain this term, as the whole 
tribe are sufficiently alike to enable a reader un- 
acquainted with botany to recognise any individual 
as belonging to it. 

The Carrot and the Parsley are very familiar 
instances of umbelliferous plants. Every one 
knows their blossoms, and will remember that 
the little flowers grow in a cluster on stalks, all 
proceeding from one central point, and diverging 
like the rays of an umbrella. Plants of this form 
abound by our waysides, in hedges and in ditches, 
and several on the rocks or salt marshes of our 
shores. Their blossoms are among the least 
attractive of our wild flowers, but they are a tribe 
most important to man ; they are, when cultivated, 
extensively used as food, and though the most 
dangerous poisons lurk among their juices, yet 
skill and science have made these very poisons 
contribute to the recovery of lost health. The 
Parsley, Celery, and Carrot of our tables need no 
praise ; and even some, which, when wild, are of 
most dangerous quality, may be safely eaten when 
cultivated. They have mostly hollow stems, and 
cut leaves, clusters of tiny flowers, either white or 



to 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 63 

greenish, or yellow; now and then tinged with 
pink. It is generally considered that plants of 
this tribe which grow in ditches and damp places 
are poisonous, and indeed in some of the sorts 
usually deemed wholesome, the damp soil seems 
to have a pernicious effect and to render them 
dangerous. Dr. Walker remarks of our maritime 
kinds " Though I would not propose it as a rule 
to be depended on in so dangerous a case as poisons, 
yet I think it highly probable that all the maritime 
plants of this class are salutary and excellent. 
This I am certain of, that none of the umbelliferous 
plants known to be poisonous are stationed near 
the sea-shore; all the maritime plants whose 
qualities are known are innocent ; and it is further 
remarkable that this is not to be ascribed to their 
dry situation among the maritime rocks, or upon 
the sandy beach ; for the Celery and Sulphur-wort 
grow in the salt marshes in as watery a soil as any 
of the umbelliferous aquatics that are poisonous ; 
but here I imagine lies an essential difference 
between plants that inhabit salt water and fresh." 
Although this remark may, as Balfour observes, 
be a little too general, there is doubtless much of 
truth in Dr. Walker's statements on this point ; 
and most important investigations are now making 
on vegetable poisons, by means of which they will 
probably be in a few years better understood. 

Any one who has ever visited Dovor in the 
month of May may have noticed how completely 
some of the white cliffs at the eastern end of the 
town seem covered with the yellowish green 
clusters of a large and conspicuous umbelliferous 
plant. This plant is not peculiar to the sea-side, 
for it grows sometimes on inland spots, but it is 



64 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

one of those which seem especially to luxuriate on 
the rocks around our coasts. It is the common 
Alexanders (Smyrniumolusatrum), or, as the people 
in some places term it, the Salamanders. The 
stem is about three or four feet high and very thick 
and furrowed, and the leaves are of a bright yellow 
green. It was formerly much used as a pot-herb, 
and it appears to be perfectly wholesome, though 
by what means those who ate it were brought to 
think its flavour agreeable one would wonder much, 
for its very odour is most offensive, and it is very 
pungent. Yet that it was really much used and 
valued in bygone times appears from the fact that 
its botanic name was formed from olus, a pot-herb, 
and ater, black, the latter word probably alluding 
to its black fruits. Pliny says of it, that the juice 
smelt like myrrh, and its generic name Smyrnium 
is a synonyme of the name of that valued resin. 
It would probably be improved by culture. The 
French call it Maceron. 

The common Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) is 
another plant of the umbelliferous tribe, which is 
very plentiful on the chalky cliffs of England by 
the sea, and also on chalky soils near salt marshes. 
It is rarely found inland, except in the neigh- 
bourhoods of some towns but little removed from 
the coast. It is well known in the eastern parts 
of England, by its frequent culture in the kitchen- 
garden , where it is planted, that its boiled leaves 
may be served up with mackerel, though our 
modern gardeners happily for morality have 
forgotten the old notion, that the Fennel would not 
thrive unless the plants were stolen. It has a 
hollow stem, three or four feet high, and slender 
dark green leaves, and may at once be known 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 65 

if seen in July or August by the deep golden 
hue of its flowers, which colour is a rare ornament 
in this tribe. It is of old repute as a seasoning 
herb, and its almost sickly odour seems to have 
been much esteemed in former days, as it is one 
among the sweet flowers named by Shakspeare ; 
and Milton alludes to it : 

" When from the boughs a savoury odour blown, 
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense 
Than smell of sweetest Fennel." 

The roots are roasted and eaten by the Hot- 
tentots in the same way as anise ; and the seeds, 
which are considered carminative, are often used as 
medicine for infants. 

The wild Carrot is well known to all lovers of 
wild flowers, with its cluster of white blossoms, 
with a dark purplish red flower in the centre, and 
its graceful leaves, once deemed a worthy ornament 
for the head-dress of court ladies. There is a wild 
species called the Sea-side Carrot (Daucus maritimus) 
found on the coasts of Kent and Cornwall, as well 
as some Scottish and Irish shores, very much like 
our common carrot or bee's nest, but smaller, having, 
broader and more succulent leaves, and wanting 
the little purple blossom in the centre, which so 
often helps those but little familiar with our wild 
flowers to identify the Carrot among the many 
white blossomed umbelliferous plants which re- 
semble it. The roots of both species are similar, 
and there are writers who think that they constitute 
but one kind. These roots have the colour and 
something of the strong odour of the garden carrot, 
but are too stringy and small to be to any extent 
serviceable as food, though the people of the 
Hebrides, who well know how to turn to good 



66 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

account the wild plants, cook and eat them. Bo- 
tanists very generally believe the little wild Carrot 
to be the origin of the valuable cultivated vegetable; 
but Miller and other horticulturists have taken 
great pains, by culture, to change the carrot of our 
waysides into the edible one, and have failed. If, 
therefore, our native species was that from which 
this valuable root sprung originally, it is probable 
that the plant was first cultivated under a warmer 
temperature than that of our island. The Carrot 
was first sown in England in the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth, by the Flemings, who were compelled 
by the tyranny of Philip the Second, to take refuge 
on our shores. Our countrymen, at that period, 
knew little of vegetable gardening, and the refugees 
finding that the soil about Sandwich, in Kent, was 
favourable for the growth of one of their favourite 
articles of diet, they soon sowed their seeds in the 
soil. It shortly became a plant of general cul- 
ture here, and it is not improbable that its seeds 
dispersed themselves, and so naturalized the plant 
in this island. It is cultivated most successfully 
in a soil mixed with sand, and we generally find a 
good deal of the wild plant on sandy coasts. Our 
word carrot is from the Celtic, car, red. 

The Wild Celery or Smallage (Apium graveolens) 
is another umbelliferous plant common on our 
coasts, though not peculiar to the sea-side, and a 
frequent plant of the salt marshes is the Parsley- 
water Dropwort ( (Enantlie pimpinelloides) , with its 
flesh-coloured flowers growing on a stem about 
two feet high. This dropwort is certainly a most 
dangerous poison when growing in some of its 
native spots, yet soil and culture have a peculiar 
effect on it, and it is cultivated about Angers for 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 67 

the sake of its roots, which are there called Jouan- 
nettes. At Saumur, too, these roots are cultivated, 
and there called Mechons. This plant is re- 
markable among its tribe for having undivided 
leaves. 

An umbelliferous plant, called the Slender 
Harems-ear (Bupleurum tenuissimum) , is a native 
of our salt marshes on the south and south-east 
coasts of England. It has very slender wiry 
stems, and small green clusters of flowers, and is 
not a conspicuous plant. 

The Sea Sulphur-weed (Peucedanum officinale) 
is a much more rare plant of the salt marsh. It 
has been found on the shores of Kent and Sussex ; 
it has bright yellow flowers, growing in large 
clusters. A resinous substance is found in the 
roots of some of the species, and the whole of this 
plant has a strong odour of sulphur. The root is 
highly stimulating, and very fetid and acrid. It 
has been used as medicine, but is apparently 
dangerous for internal use. 

But leaving a tribe of plants which are rather 
useful than beautiful, we must notice that very 
handsome and not unfrequent flower of our salt 
marshes, the Star- wort, or Michaelmas Daisy (Aster 
tripolium). Every one knows our common au- 
tumnal garden flowers of this name, some of them 
very handsome blossoms, but all sufficiently like 
this to enable the reader at once to detect it. Its 
starry lilac rays are arranged round the yellow disk, 
and it grows in clusters at the top of a succulent 
stem, which, as well as its no less juicy leaves, are of 
saltish flavour. There is little on the salt marshes 
during the months of August and September which 
is very attractive, and these flowers are often at 
F 2 



68 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

that season almost the only bright things which 
invite the passing bee to taste their sweets. This 
flower is found not only near the sea, but on the 
shores of some salt rivers, as the Medway in Kent, 
and is so far from being a rare plant, that one 
would think most British botanists might, at some 
time or other, examine it for themselves. Yet the 
old writers told strange things of it, and one 
excellent old herbalist, Gerarde, says " It is 
reported by men of great fame and learning, that 
this plant was termed tripolium because it doth 
change the colour of his floures thrice a day. 
This herbe I planted in my garden, whither, in 
his season, I did repair to find out the truth 
hereof, but I could not espie any such variableness 
herein ; yet, this much I must say, that as the heat 
of the sunne does change the colour of divers 
floures, so it fell out with this, which in the 
morning was very fair, but afterwards of a pale 
and wan colour, which proved that to be a fable 
which Dioscorides says is reported by some, that in 
one day it changeth the colour of his floures 
thrice ; that is to say, in the morning it is white, 
at noon purple, and in the evening crimson." Even 
the admission of Gerarde, however, as to its changes 
by the heat of the sun, had more in it of fancy 
than of fact ; and for aught that the writer of these 
pages could ever see in the flower, it has the same 
pale lilac tint from " opening morn till dewy eve." 
Our herbalist says that women by the sea-side call 
it blue daisies and blue camomiles. 

Another pretty flower of the sea-shore is the 
Great Sea-stock (Mathiola sinuata\ which flowers 
from May to September upon some sandy shores 
of Cornwall, and also on the Welsh coast, but 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 69 

cannot often be gathered wild. Its stem has 
spreading branches, and is about two feet high, 
with downy leaved. The whole of the plant 
is covered with dense starry hairs, and short 
prickles, each rising from a little glandular base. 
The large handsome flowers have little odour 
during day, but when evening comes diffuse great 
sweetness on the air, and the wanderer by moon- 
light, or even beneath the dark and cloudy sky 
of night, might pause to wonder that so sweet 
a scent should be wafted to him by winds, which 
at that season he would not expect to bear upon 
them the odour of the flower. The hoary shrubby 
stock (Matliiola incana), which grows often plen- 
tifully on the rocks near Hastings, is not truly 
wild there, though generally enumerated in the 
list of flowers which form our British flora. It is 
the origin of our garden stock gilliflower, and is, 
as Dr. Hooker observes, generally treated by our 
gardeners as an annual or biennial. The pale 
lilac Virginian, or more properly Mediterranean 
stock, is sometimes enumerated among our native 
flowers of the sea-shore. It is very plentiful on 
the coasts of the Mediterranean, and may, like 
others, have been naturalized on our isle. But, as 
has been observed, it grows wild under the cliffs 
between St. Margaret's and Dovor, where there 
are no houses near, and therefore it is not likely 
that it is there the outcast of a garden. 

Who that wanders by glen or over hills when 
wild flowers cluster, is not glad to be greeted by 
the scent of the wild Rose ? Who is not ready 
to admit, with Pliny, that the rose is the first of 
flowers, and the lily the second? We no longer 
think the fennel has the sweetest of scents, nor 



70 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

consider the flower which we now call the Prince's 
Feather so beautiful as that the " pencil of the 
most curious painter is at a stay when he comes 
to set him downe in his lively colours." But we 
can rejoice still with Hafiz, when he sang, " cup- 
bearer, the season of the rose is come/' and could 
respond to the feelings of the writer of the 
" Wisdom of Solomon," when, rejoicing in the glad 
season of the early year, he sang, " Let no flower 
of the Spring pass by us. Let us crown ourselves 
with rosebuds before they be gathered." The rose 
is as much loved as ever, and gathered with de- 
light, whether it hang out from the pleasant hedge 
of some green lane, or we meet with it unexpectedly 
growing on the sands among the sea-weeds and 
other objects which the wind has carried up from 
the waters, to strew the shore. Few, indeed, are 
the roses to be found here, yet one is by no means 
uncommon, even close down, and unsheltered from 
the sea-breeze; while on sandy fields, at a little 
distance from the sea, it is very abundant. On 
many inland chalky and sandy places it is a well 
known blossom, and generally a favourite with 
those who are fond of wild flowers. The Burnet- 
rose (Rosa spinosissimd) is the earliest flowering 
kind of all our wild roses, and though it has not 
the delicate blush of the wild brier, it is extremely 
pretty, with its small flowers, sometimes tinged 
with cream colour, sometimes lightly tinged with 
a dash or two of pink hue, but more often of pure 
white. It generally, when growing near the sea, 
lies very flat on the shore, but its branches are 
covered with its sweet-scented flowers, the odour 
of which is said by Sir William Hooker to be in 
some varieties disagreeable. It spreads widely, 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 71 

but never grows on the shore to any height, and 
its leaves are very neat and pretty, being formed 
of very small leaflets, generally about seven in 
number, very finely notched at the edges, and of 
a full green, with somewhat of a glaucous tint. 
One might as well attempt to gather a handful of 
thistles, as to make a nosegay of these roses, for its 
stems are crowded with prickles, some of them 
very long, and interspersed with multitudes of 
smaller ones, all of a dark brown colour. The 
flower is not succeeded by the scarlet hip of the 
dog-rose, but it has a dark purplish black berry, 
which schoolboys call the Cat-hip. Dr. Johnston 
says, this is the only wild rose found in Holy 
Island, where it grows on the sandy sea-banks ; 
and Dr. Walker observes, that several parts of the 
shores of Jura and Isla are highly ornamented 
with this beautiful little flower, which is in full 
blossom about the end of June, on the stony beaches 
of those islands. 

Another of our roses, called the Ked-fruited 
Dwarf-rose (Rosa rubella), has been found on the 
sandy sea-coast of Northumberland, but it grows 
there very sparingly. The Burnet-rose is the 
origin of our Scotch garden roses, and they are 
not greatly changed by culture. 

It is pleasant, when roaming along the sea- 
shore, to linger near some of the salt-water pools, 
watching the lighter sea-weeds, as they float up 
and down, and seem to be brightened by all the 
tints of the rainbow. The naturalist loves these 
spots, for there he sees living creatures of minute 
beauty, finding their home and enjoyment. And 
the botanist loves them too, for here he may find 
some of the most delicate marine weeds, and here, 



72 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



too, he may chance to meet with that interesting 
plant, the Sea Kuppia, or Tassel-grass (Uuppia 
maritima) ; flower it can hardly be called, since it 
has no gay coloured petals to distinguish it. It 
is not uncommon in salt-water ditches and pools, 
growing wholly submersed. Its stems are like 




TASSEL GRASS (Ruppia marilima). 

slender threads, bending about and sending off 
many branches, on which grow long pointed leaves 
like bristles. The whole plant might be at first 
taken for a sea-weed, but its structure is in reality 
very different from that of any marine vegetable. 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 73 

In their early stage the flowers grow quite under 
water ; but as there comes a time when they need 
air and sunshine, the stalk which supports them 
becomes spirally lengthened, until the blossoms all 
rise up above the surface of the pool. But the 
seeds will not ripen there, and after the blossom 
has for awhile remained in the air, again the spiral 
stalk curls up in close coils, and goes down to the 
base of the waters. 

In wet shady places near the sea, and on salt 
marshes and maritime cliffs, grows a plant with 
bunches of numerous small, cross-shaped flowers, 
on a stem about three feet high, and having large 
leaves. It is the broad-leaved Pepper- wort (Le- 
pidium latifolium}. This species is not common, 
though several of the pepper-worts are very fre- 
quent plants on inland fields. They are all remark- 
able for their antiscorbutic properties, and the 
broad-leaved species yields an emetic on infusion. 
The Narrow-leaved Pepper- wort (Lepidium rude- 
rale) is a more common plant on waste places near 
the sea, but is not confined to the coast. The Cress 
of our gardens, the plant in which most of us de- 
lighted in childhood, because the vegetable crop 
appears so soon after the sowing of the seeds, is the 
Lepidium sativa ; and commonly as this plant has 
long been cultivated, its native haunt was unknown 
until Dr. Sibthorp found it growing wild in Greece. 
Some species of the Pepper- wort were of great 
value to the ships' crews under Captain Cook, 
when they were suffering from diseases incident to 
a long abstinence from vegetable food; and one 
species is in common use among the South-sea 
islanders for intoxicating fish, when they may 
easily be taken, even with the hand. 



74 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

The Sea Radish (EapJianus maritimus), though 
not a frequent production of the English shore, yet 
grows on Beachy Head and in Cornwall, is very 
abundant on the cliffs from the Lizard to Kennack, 
and is a most common plant on the western 
shores of the Outer Hebrides ; it has large, pale- 
yellow flowers, and very rough leaves. Probably 
a person but little acquainted with wild flowers 
would consider it to be a species of wild mustard, 
for it is much like those weeds. 

The Hare's-ear Treacle Mustard (Erysimum ori- 
entale), is another cruciferous plant of our cliffs, 
and is very general all along the shores of Southern 
Europe. It has cream-coloured flowers, and glau- 
cous leaves. Two kinds of ftock-cress (Arabis) 
also are found near the sea ; but, like the Hare's- 
ear Treacle, they are rare flowers, and difficult to 
describe. 

A very pretty and fragrant flower, which in 
summer time we are glad to welcome to our gar- 
dens, for its sweet, honey-like scent, is the Sweet 
Alyssum, or Sea-side Koniga (Koniga maritima), 
and it is found on the cliffs by the sea near Aber- 
deen, and at Budleigh Salterton, in Devon; but 
it is probably not a native plant. It is very plen- 
tiful on the shores of the Mediterranean, and its 
seeds were perhaps borne hither by the waves. 
Its flowers are large and white, and it has long, 
slender, hoary leaves. It flowers in August and 
September. The whole tribe of Alyssums were 
reputed by the ancients to have the power of 
allaying anger ; but we, in these later days, trust 
rather to moral remedies for the cure of this ill, 
than to any " herb of virtue." 

On many parts of our coast the Grass-wrack 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 75 

(Zostera marina) is very abundant, growing in thick 
clumps, on sandy shallows and banks in the sea, 
and on stormy days being dashed in large masses 
on the shore. One would call it a sea-weed, were 
it not that this mode of fructification excludes it 
from that tribe of plants, and connects it with 
maritime, rather than marine, vegetation. It has 
very long grass-green leaves, and hence its botanic 
name is derived from the Greek word riband. The 
French term it La Zostere, and the Germans Sea- 
tang ; and our coast people commonly call it Sea- 
grass. It abounds on the shores about Yarmouth, 
and it is there torn up by the waves, and thrown 
ashore in such quantities as that it is used to heap 
up into mounds, to serve as a sort of wall for 
resisting the encroachments of the sea upon the 
land. It is also used for thatching roofs, and 
in one respect it serves this purpose better than 
hay, as sun and wind do not decay it ; and a sea- 
grass thatch is said to last a hundred years, though 
the sun soon deprives it of its rich green hue, and 
bleaches it white. The Dutch and Swedes use 
this plant more than we do, for they strew it largely 
over their land for manure ; and in all the coun- 
tries of the north of Europe it is not only used for 
stuffing beds, but it is preferred to almost any 
other material. It is sold in our shops for filling 
mattresses, cushions, and other articles of domestic 
use, under the name of Ulva marina. The rush- 
like envelopes of the Italian liquor-casks are made 
of Grass-wrack, and it is very much used for pack- 
ing glass bottles and earthenware. The leaves 
require to be steeped in fresh water, and well 
dried before using them for bedding. A good 
quantity of saccharine matter is found in the lower 



76 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

part of the stem, which is of a reddish-brown 
colour ; and the Highlanders chew this part of the 
plant, and deem it very nutritious. Horses will 
feed on it, but cows are not fond of it. Pallas 
found it among the pottery in the old tombs in the 
south of Russia. 

Any one who knows that large and singular 
plant, not uncommon on our heath lands, the Great 
Broom Rape, would at once recognise, should he 
happen to see it, the much rarer species of our 
shores, the Red Broom Rape (Orobanche rubrd). 
Though seldom found on the English coast, it is 
frequent upon the basalt and trap rocks in the 
Hebrides and the adjacent shores of the mainland. 
It grows also on some maritime spots of Ireland. 
The broom rapes are numbered among our few 
native parasitic plants, as most of the genus grow 
on the roots of the furze or broom of our heath 
lands ; and so parasitic in habit are some of the 
tribe, that the seeds of the Branched Broom Rape, 
which grows on hemp, are said to lie inert for 
many years, unless they come in contact with the 
roots of their chosen plant, when they will immedi- 
ately flourish. So too the introduction of the broom 
and gorse into a neighbourhood, has soon been 
followed by the luxuriant growth of the Great 
Broom Rape, which sprang up on their roots. It 
is no wonder that they, long since, received their 
name from two words signifying a vetch and to 
strangle ; and they are in as ill repute as ever for 
destroying the plants on which they grow, and have 
several names used in country places expressive of 
the idea which the peasantry entertain of their 
injurious effect. They are all so acrid also in their 
nature as to be refused by cattle. The Red Broom 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 77 

Rape has purplish-red flowers, and stem of some- 
what similar hue, tinged with yellow. It has no 
leaves, but a scaly stem. Very similar, and equally 
rare, is the Purple Broom Rape ( Orobanche cceru- 
leajy which grows in grassy pastures, near the sea, 
and is parasitical on the roots of other plants. 

A very pretty little bulbous flower of the genus 
Trichonema (Trichonema columns) 9 which is one of 
the beautiful Iris family, and the smallest of them 
all, has been found on one or two spots on the 
southern coast of England. Here and there, too, 
on grassy sandy places,, near the sea, one of our 
three species of wild flax (Linum angustifolium] 
rears its pale-blue erect bell, in June and July ; 
and rare as are primroses, save beneath the shadow 
of woodland boughs or in mountain solitudes, yet 
there is one kind which graces the shore. This is 
the Scottish Primrose {Primula Scotica), and a very 
lovely little flower it is. Primroses generally seem 
fearless of cold winds. We know how they come 
out by thousands in our woods, when the wild 
winds of spring are not yet soothed into summer 
stillness, and the traveller on the high hills stoops 
down to smile on them amid the mountain snows. 
The breezes which play around the Orkney Isles 
are none of the mildest, yet they often bow down 
the blossoms of this Primrose ; and rare as it is 
elsewhere, it is frequent on the northern coast of 
Sunderland, and has been gathered from the north 
coast of Caithness. It is so different from other 
primroses, and so peculiar to the shore, that the 
reader who should happen to find it, might easily 
know it. It has a deep bluish purple blossom, 
with a yellow centre ; and though a stout and 
sturdy-looking plant, its flowers are small. Its 



78 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

leaves are mealy, and it is much like the Bird's-eye 
Primrose of the mountainous pastures of the north 
of England, which, though rare in most places, is 
not unfrequent in Yorkshire. 

The Sea Stork's Bill (Er odium maritimum) is a 
little rare sea-side plant which grows among the 
sands in some parts of the Welsh coast, and on the 
southern shores of England. It flowers from May 
until September, but its little pale red petals seem 
no sooner to make their appearance than the wind 
carries them off, and it is difficult to find specimens 
in full flower. Like the other storks' bills, its 
seed-vessels have so great a resemblance to the 
beak of the stork as to enable any one to recognise 
it by their form. 

Several pea-shaped flowers grow on our shores, 
but the Sea Pea (Lathyrus maritimus), which 
thrives on stony beaches in several parts of the 
eastern and southern shores of England, as well as 
on the coasts of the Shetland Isles, is the largest 
and prettiest of them all. It bears a good many 
purple flowers, finely veined with crimson, and it 
yields enough leaves and stems to be a welcome 
food to cattle ; while its long and deeply-spreading 
roots are almost as useful in binding down the 
sand as are the mat-grasses. The seeds are of 
bitter flavour, yet they were once very valuable 
as food to many when England suffered from 
famine. 

Another pea-shaped flower, the rough-podded 
Yellow Vetch ( Vicia lutea) , is found on rocky or 
stony ground, especially near the sea ; but it is not 
confined to the shore, and is not a common flower. 
It has large blossoms, growing singly. It is 
abundant about the rocks of Dunure Castle, and 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 79 

on the hills of Queensferry, "but seems confined 
to that part only of the neighbourhood. It grows 
also in Suffolk and Sussex, and on some Scottish 
shores. Then, too, the smooth-podded Vetch ( Vicia 
Icevigata], with its pale blue or whitish flowers, 
has a liking to the sea, and blooms in July and 
August on the pebbly shore of Weymouth in 
Dorsetshire; and the rare rough-podded purple 
Vetch ( Vicia Bithynica) , with its pale purple wings, 
is to be searched for in maritime spots, as it grows 
there more often than elsewhere. 

Every one has rejoiced in his country walks at 
the sweet scent of the clovers or trefoils of our 
meadows, and the bees rejoice over them too. 
Our purple sweet-scented clover does not send up 
its odour mingled with that of the salt wave, but 
large patches of the white or Dutch clover (the 
Irish shamrock), lie upon the beach ; not because 
this clover thrives best near the sea, but because 
it is hardy enough to thrive anywhere. We have 
besides trefoils peculiar to the coast, and such as 
may properly be called maritime species, but they 
are not very frequent flowers. The Teasel-headed 
Trefoil (Trifolium maritimum] is found in June and 
July in salt marshes on the eastern and southern 
shores of England. It is of a pale reddish purple 
colour. On the sea-coast of Sussex, between 
Shoreham harbour and the sea, the very beautiful 
species called the Starry-headed Trefoil (Trifolium 
stellatum] is said by Sir William Hooker to grow 
in great abundance. It is a singular and elegant 
species, with long calyces or flower-cups, and while 
young the small cream-coloured flowers are almost 
hid among their straight bristly teeth, till becoming 
larger they open into a beautiful starry shape, 



80 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



and assume a degree of redness. The rough rigid 
Trefoil (Trifolium scabrum) is found also on the 
Scottish coasts, as well as on sandy inland fields 
in England ; and sometimes, but rarely, that little 




TREFOILS. 



inconspicuous flower, the Suffocated Trefoil (Tri- 
folium suffocatum) , gratifies the botanist more than 
the ordinary lover of wild flowers, by springing up 
under his footstep, as he walks along the Norfolk 
or Suffolk coast. 

The reticulated Medick (Medicago denticulata) 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 81 

is another little plant which the maritime botanist 
looks for in June on some coasts. It has been 
found on exposed sandy shores in Kent, and also 
near Weymouth. We have several wild kinds of 
medick in our fields, and on our way-sides. They 
are all pea-shaped blossoms, remarkable after 
flowering, for their broad flat sickle-shaped pods, 
in some species twisted spirally. The flower of 
the sea-shore medick is like those of most of the 
genus, yellow ; though our common lucerne, which 
is a species of this tribe, has pale purple blossoms. 
The French call this Foin de Bourgogne ; it was 
highly extolled by the Roman writers as a good 
plant for fodder, and is grown both in this and in 
continental countries. Another of the tribe, called 
the Moon Medick, was the Cytisus of the ancient 
writers. It grew in the country of the Medes, 
and hence probably we derive the name Medick. 

The Cotton Weed (Diotis maritima} is common 
enough on some of our sandy shores in the east or 
south-east of England, though not sufficiently 
general to be much known to any but botanists. 
It is an autumn flower, and one which many would 
overlook, for its little yellow blossoms are almost 
hidden by the flower-cup. It well deserves its 
English name, for it is really covered with a 
cottony down. Hence Linnaeus called the flower 
Filago, because it was enveloped with a delicate 
thread, fila. 

The Sea- wormwood (Artemisia maritima) grows 
along the shore and on the salt marshes in its 
neighbourhood, and is bitter enough to remind us 
of the Scripture expression, which marked this as 
the most bitter of plants. It has in one variety 
G 



82 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

drooping brownish flowers, and in the other erect 
blossoms, and both varieties may often be found 
growing together. Like other species of the 
wormwood, it was formerly much used in medicine, 
and a superstitious veneration attached to it. One 
kind of wormwood, the Common Mugwort (Arte- 
misia vulgaris) of our wayside and waste places, 
was so much valued by the older botanists, that 
Pliny told of it that any one who carried it could be 
hurt by no poisons, nor by any wild beast, neither 
yet by the sun itself. The sea-wormwood has 
downy leaves, and it flowers in September. 

A plant with a brighter, gayer flower, adorns 
the salt marshes on the south and west shores of 
England and Wales. This is the Golden Samphire, 
or, as it is sometimes called, Samphire-leaved Flea- 
bane (Limbarda crithmoides). It is about one foot 
high, and bears single flowers on its branches of a 
bright yellow colour. In some parts of France it is 
called Limbarde ; and there, as with us, its fleshy 
leaves and stems are taken to the markets to be 
sold as samphire ; but it has none of the aromatic 
virtues of the plant whose name it resembles. 

The Sea-side Feverfew (Pyrethrum maritimum) 
is common on many parts of the sea-coast, but is 
probably only a maritime variety of the common 
May- weed, so abundant everywhere. It may be 
distinguished from the sea-side camomile (An- 
themis maritimd), to which it is very similar, by 
the faint odour of the latter plant. This camo- 
mile, too, has cream-coloured rather than white 
rays. It is almost peculiar to the sea-coast at 
Sunderland. The camomile tribe have their 
name, Anthemis, from the Greek word " a flower," 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 83 

because of the multitude of their blossoms ; just as 
the Persians call the lilac from lilag, their word for 
" a flower ;" while the people of the East often use 
the same word for "a flower" and for "a rose," 
that being with them, as with us, on account of 
its beauty, the flower of flowers. 

We have several species of knapweed in our 
lanes and fields, far away from the sea ; and the 
brown radiant knapweed, and the black knapweed, 
with their bright lilac florets surrounding a dark 
rough knob-like flower-cup, sometimes make the 
beach and other waysides gay. The Common Star 
Thistle ( Gentaurea calcitrapa) is one of those flowers 
which are more frequent on the shore of the south 
of England than on any other spot. It may be 
known by the long thick prickles, or rather thorns, 
which beset its round green cup. It is the caltrops 
of Virgil, and its name was given because its calyx 
resembles the ancient instrument of warfare, con- 
sisting of an iron ball armed with spikes. Its first 
appearance is like that of a thistle, but it has not 
prickly leaves, which thistles have. The country 
people call all these knapweeds " iron- weeds." 
Clare describes their haunts 

" And iron-weed, content to share 
The meanest spot that Spring can spare ; 
Even roads, where danger hourly comes, 
Are not without its purple blooms." 

None of our true thistles are maritime plants, 
though several of them raise their rich purple 
blossoms near the shore, or in any other wayside 
or chalky soil. The slender-flowered thistle ( Gar- 
duus tenuijlorus) flowers in July, especially on the 
G 2 



84 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

waste sandy places near the sea. It has numerous 
pale purple flowers, and is not one of the most 
beautiful of the tribe, though spiny enough to 
remind us of the Scotch motto, " No one touches 
me with impunity." 

We find nettles everywhere, whether by lane 
or woodland, by ancient ruin or on open shore. 
But the most venomous of all our British nettles 
is not a common species of inland growth, and is 
oftener found by the sea than far from it. This 
is the Roman nettle ( Urtica pilulifera) , which has 
large leaves, on long thick stalks, and four-sided 
stems. If all our nettles were like this, they 
would well deserve their name, taken from uro, 
to burn, for the pain inflicted by its sting does 
not easily pass away. Like its companions, how- 
ever, it in some measure atones for its venom by 
the uses to which it may be applied. Very good 
cordage is made of nettle fibre, and in Scotland 
the plant is frequently eaten as food. Indeed, the 
boiled tops of the young nettle are no despicable 
table vegetable. There are writers who greatly 
recommend the culture of our larger species of 
nettles for forage ; and it appears that the common 
large nettle (Urtica dioica) has yielded a good 
supply of food for cows, by being planted in rows. 
A singular purpose, too, to which nettles have 
been applied, is that of stopping the leaks of 
wooden vessels. Some handfuls of the green 
nettles are rubbed over the joinings of the staves ; 
into these the juice penetrates, and coagulating 
there, forms a barrier to the escape of any of the 
contents of the vessel. 

Almost every one knows the common Sun 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 85 

Spurge, often growing as a weed in gardens, and 
called in villages Churn-staff, or Milk -weed, be- 
cause of its acrimonious milky juice. This belongs 
to a family containing fourteen native species, 
three of which are maritime plants. The Purple 
Spurge (Euphorbia Peplis), with its oblong, heart- 
shaped leaves, and yellow greenish blossoms, is to 
be found flowering from July to September, on 
the sandy coasts of Cornwall and Devon. It may 
be known from most other species by its stems, 
often tinged with a deep purple tint. Like the 
sun spurge it contains a quantity of milky juice. 
Indeed, this corrosive secretion is common to all 
the spurges, and it is so acrid, as that if not care- 
fully applied it will blister the skin. Village 
people, however, make much use of the juice, not 
only for curing warts, but they even venture to 
apply it to the mouth in cases of tooth-ache, or 
rub it behind the ears to raise a blister, which it 
will certainly do very quickly. The different 
species of this plant were once so valued as a 
medicine, that the name of the first physician 
who used them was gratefully recorded by it; 
and Euphorbus, the physician of Juba, king of 
Mauritania, has been thus remembered for many 
centuries by those who were learned in medicine 
and surgery. The spurge of the Materia Medico, 
is a native of America, and so powerful is its 
milky juice in corroding the skin wherever it 
touches it, that persons who collect it are obliged 
to tie a cloth over the mouth and nostrils to protect 
them from the acrid dust of the withered branches, 
which causes sneezing. The two remaining species 
of spurge which are to be looked for on our 



86 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

coast are, the one termed Sea Spurge (Euphorbia 
paralia] and the Portland Spurge (Euphorbia port- 
'landica}, but they are not common plants, and are 
confined to a very limited portion of our island 
shores. The former has been found at various 
parts of the English sea-coast, and the latter on 
the sandy sea-shores to the extreme south and 
west of England, as well as on the Welsh shore, 
on the Isle of Man, and a few other places. Sir 
William Hooker remarks of this, that it is very 
rare, if not unknown, on the Continent. 

Two of our native plantains are common near 
the sea, the one on the salt marshes, the other on 
the beach, growing down among patches of grass 
or little loose mounds of sand, just beyond the 
reach of the waves. The Sea-side Plantain (Plan- 
tag 'o maritima] is very plentiful on saline pasture 
lands and in the clefts of rocks, and indeed some- 
times it grows on a sandy spot on the beach. It 
is also found, like several other of our maritime 
plants, on the summits of high mountains. Most 
persons are familiar with the plantain whose brown 
spike is gathered for birds, and which has the old 
name of Way-bred ; and this is much like it, save 
that it has not the broad leaves which our fore- 
fathers used for binding over their wounds, but has 
long narrow foliage. Few plants, however, vary 
more than this, under different circumstances of soil 
and situation. Sometimes the leaves are scarcely 
an inch high, while in a soil where it seems more 
thriving, they are often a foot long. 

The Buck's-horn Plantain (Plantago coronopus] 
grows chiefly near the sea, and is often one of the 
commonest plants on the beach. Its leaves are 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 87 

cut into many segments, and lie in great profusion 
close to the ground, all round the stem. The 
flower is like all our other plantains, a greenish 
spike. There is no doubt that the leaves were 
formerly used in salads ; but they are, in the 
opinion of the author, very unpleasant in flavour. 
A rather conspicuous plant, the Mountain Garlic 
(Allium carinatum), with dull-coloured yellowish 
or brownish white flowers, may be found in July 
on sandy grounds on the south-east coast of Eng- 
land, and on one or two spots of the Scottish 
shore. Its leaves are long and slender. Its odour 
forms no pleasant addition to the scent of a wild- 
flower nosegay, but all the garlics were once highly 
prized for remedial virtues, and they were thought, 
Fuller says, to be " Soveraigne for men and beasts 
in most maladies," though, as this excellent old 
writer adds, " the scent thereof is somewhat valiant 
and offensive." 

The Knot-grass, growing on many beaches, is 
by most writers thought to be a distinct species 
from the common knot-grass of our every way- 
side. The Polygonum maritimum is a larger plant 
than that, covering some feet with its long woody 
stems and branches, and making many a green 
patch on which animals who may stray thither 
may make a sweet repast. 

On the south and south-western shores only of 
England, and on some parts of the Irish and Welsh 
coast, may be found the lesser Wart-cress ( Coron- 
opus didymd), with its cut leaves and dense masses 
of small white cruciferous flowers. It sufficiently 
resembles the common swine-cress, or wart-cress 
of our inland waste places, to be identified by one 



88 SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 

familiar with this common plant. The latter 
species was in former days in much use as a salad, 
but its pungency is not agreeable to the taste of 
modern days. Both species have leaves something 
like the foot of a bird, hence their botanic name 
was formed of the two Greek words crow and foot. 
They grow round the stem in such a manner as 
has led to their familiar name, " The Star of the 
Earth." On the beach of Dovor, the common 
wart-cress is abundant ; we might find a hundred 
plants in five minutes' walk. Both kinds have 
seed vessels beautifully crested with minute 
tubercles. 

A far more showy, and indeed a beautiful flower 
of our salt marshes, is the Marsh-mallow (Malva 
officinalis], with its soft downy greyish-green leaves, 
and large blossoms of a delicate rose-colour. This 
plant is thought to be the Hibiscus of Virgil, and 
has been used medicinally in all countries in which 
medicine has been cultivated. The mucilage 
contained in every part of the plant renders it 
valuable, and so much of this is contained in the 
roots, that when they are boiled in water they give 
out half their weight in a glutinous substance, 
which is thought to be nearly allied to gum arabic 
or starch. The Marsh-mallow is very rare on 
Scottish shores, and indeed is not plentiful on the 
English coast, but it is one of the prettiest of all 
the flowers of the salt marsh. 

We might tell of one or two ferns which, like 
the sea-spleenwort (Asplenium marinum], festoon 
the sea-caves and clefts of rocks with their firm 
dark green fronds, or leaves, as the unscientific 
would term them; but they are so difficult to 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 89 

describe without the use of botanic terms, that we 
must leave them, to glance at the fern-like Equi- 
setum, or horsetail of our coast. It is classed with 
the ferns, but none but a botanist would discover 
its resemblance to that interesting tribe of plants. 
It has not a bright green leaf, densely studded, 
like them ; with masses of brown fructification, 
which when seen under a microscope seem groups 
of crystals and other gems ; but it has rigid hollow 
stems, without branches or leaves, and with black 
sheaths at intervals around it. The variegated 
horsetail (Equisetum variegatum) has been found 
on some sandy shores of England and Ireland, and 
also on the sands of Barry in Angusshire. It is 
the smallest of our native Equisetums, its stem 
being rarely more than eight inches high. Every 
one knows the tall stems of some of these plants, 
which grow on the marshy or boggy places of our 
lands, with their long whorls of rigid furrowed 
branchlets. They may well be so hard as to have 
been used so much in polishing ivory and wood 
and metals, for they have a framework of flint. 
If some species of the horsetail be carefully burnt, 
some remains will be left unconsumed by the fire, 
and if these are held up to the light, numerous 
little points will be seen spirally arranged, which 
are portions of pure flint, and it is the saw-like 
flinty edge which renders the plant so useful a 
polisher. Its old name was pewter-wort, for good 
housewives in the olden times used it in brighten- 
ing the ware, on which once the good roast beef 
of Old England disdained not to rest. 

The Equisetums are an interesting tribe to the 
geologist, for they appear to have formed a very 



90 



SEA-SIDE PLANTS. 



considerable part of the original vegetation of this 
world of ours. In modern days they are but a few 
feet in height, but once they were tall plants many 
yards high, or gigantic species more like trees 
than herbaceous plants ; and the strata of the 
coal-fields exhibit Equisetacege, beside which our 
modern horsetails dwindle into insignificance. 




CHAPTER II. 

SEA-WEEDS. 

" The floor is of sand, like the mountain drift, 

And the pearl-shells spangle the flinty snow, 
From coral rocks the sea-plants lift 
Their boughs where the tides and billows flow; 

" The water is calm and still below, 

For the winds and waves are absent there ; 
And the sands are bright as the stars that glow 
In the motionless fields of the upper air. 

" There, with its waving blade of green, 

The sea-flag streams through the silent water ; 
And the crimson leaf of the dulse is seen 
To blush like a banner bathed in slaughter." 

PERCIVAL. 

SOMETHING of the loveliness which the poet de- 
scribes may be beheld in the salt pools among the 
rocks, those miniature seas which on some shores 
present us with a little world of beauty. It would 
be difficult to linger gazing into these hollows, 
when the summer sun shines down upon them, 
and through their clear waters we see the dense 
silky tufts, or the waving branches of sea-weeds, 
without forming some picture in the mind of the 
scene presented by the ocean bed. But if we 
could sail away a little from the shore, where the 
water is clear and still, or yet better, if we could 
glide over the blue waters where the base of a 
deeper sea would reveal itself, we should espy 
masses of vegetation grouped in graceful forms, 
and intermingling their boughs together, like the 



92 SEA-WEEDS. 

forest trees which group themselves now on many 
a bright spot of earth, over which, as geologists 
tell us, ocean itself once flowed. The dancing 
waves carry the long leaves backwards and for- 
wards, and not a weed is there but some living 
creature of wonderful and beauteous structure is 
there too to enjoy it. We speak of the uses of sea- 
weeds, and the God who has given to man u the 
sea and all that therein is," designed them in some 
measure for his service. But we make only a faint 
estimate of the worth of marine vegetation, when 
we think of sea-weeds but as contributing to 
utility by their use in dyes and manufactures, or 
in affording nutriment to us. They belong more 
especially to the myriads of creatures which in- 
habit the great deep. They are their homes, their 
couches, their sources of food. It is wondrous to 
reflect, that the worlds of water contain far more 
of animal life than exists on this green earth, or in 
the air which surrounds it ; for besides that a much 
larger portion of the globe consists of water than 
of land, the seas are inhabited in their depths. 
Few are the terrestrial creatures which, like the 
mole, know not the worth of light, and can make 
their homes beneath earth's surface, unmindful of 
its darkness. The millions of animated creatures 
which float on air, or walk or creep over glade or 
mountain, dwell on the external portion of earth. 
But a great part of the depths has its living inmates, 
and the Psalmist expressed his sense of their mul- 
titude, when he said, " Therein are things creeping 
innumerable, both small and great." There they 
live and die, in a home suited by the great Creator 
to their wants and capacities of enjoyment. Nor 
is it all a home of darkness. The deep has its 



SKA-WEEDS. 93 

glowworms, bringing their tiny lamps to make it 
luminous, and carrying in their track a gleam of 
brilliant light. There are, probably, few marine 
animals which are not more or less indebted for 
their sustenance or enjoyment to some of the 
numerous sea-plants, which lie beyond our ken in 
the world beneath the waters. Every one of these 
has its appointed dwelling-place and provision, 
from 

" The aspiring fish that fain would be a brrd," 

down to 

" The Zoophyte, 

That link which hinds Prometheus to his rock, 
The living fibre to insensate matter." 

But amid this store of living creatures, Death has 
a work to do, and millions are born to live but a 
few hours or days. In this vast basin, whose 
every wave contains living things, 

" Countless as sunbeams, slight as gossamer," 

and in whose waters move also the monsters of the 
deep, dead animal substances lie or float, whose 
putrefying remains would spread poison on the air 
above and around the sea, and gradually diffuse 
that poison to earth's farthest limits. The sea air, 
which now brings health on its breezes, would 
carry disease and death, were it not for the sca- 
venger-like animals which prey upon its refuse, 
and for the sea-weeds, which, with continual and 
rapid growth, cover every part of ocean's bed. 
Their large tough and woody stems, crowned often 
with gigantic fronds or leaves, assimilate to their 
own support the masses of putrescence, arising both 
from this source and from the substances constantly 
carried by every tide from the shore. The decay 



94 SEA-WEEDS. 

of these sea-weeds, in their turn, renews the soil 
of ocean bed, by means of which it gradually rises. 
And thus the lovely and picturesque plants of the 
sea aid with the rushing of the waters, and ebbing 
and falling tides, and with the saltness arising from 
the deposits of saline matter in the channels of the 
deep, to change what else would be evil into good, 
and to spread purification and wholesome air, in- 
stead of poison. 

The number of British sea-weeds is about three 
hundred and seventy, and of these many need the 
aid of a microscope to discover their beauty of 
structure. Growing both in salt and fresh waters, 
or forming crusts on rocks, or sea-caves, or on in- 
land moist places, are to be found tribes of Algce, 
which seem formed of little riband-like particles, 
which, when subjected to microscopic investigation, 
startle and puzzle the philosopher, at one moment 
appearing to have animal, and at another vegetable 
life; or resolving themselves into those links be- 
tween the two kingdoms, those tribes, half plant, 
half animal, which, until the recent improvements 
in the microscope, have lived through countless 
generations, unknown and unsuspected. Some of 
the Oscillatoria tribe are found in salt waters, for 
they exist wherever there is water, though more 
abundantly in ponds or rivers, or on moist places, 
than in the sea ; and naturalists know not whether 
to regard them as plants or animals. Adanson 
was the first who discovered their singular move- 
ments, which have since much interested men of 
science. They often form crowds of filaments of 
greenish or brownish tint, each pellucid thread 
having a diameter of about the thousandth part of 
an inch. Now they assume the crooked windings 



SEA-WEEDS. 95 

of the letter S ; now they are perfectly straight ; 
and the next moment finds them twisting them- 
selves up in various contortions, either with slow 
or rapid motions. When these oscillatory plants 
are fully grown, their movements cease ; but the 
young fibres exhibit them, not only while in water, 
but when taken out and laid on a plate. These 
plants are of most rapid growth, acquiring ten or 
twelve times their length in so many hours. They 
grow and increase like vegetables, but when burnt 
yield the odour of decaying animal substances. 
Still more wondrous is that tribe of microscopic 
Algae called the Diatomacece. Many of these are 
marine, and are to be found in all seas ; even the 
melted icebergs yielding masses of them. Thou- 
sands of these minute plants are contained in a 
drop of water, yet every little plant has a beautiful 
structure of flint, and exhibits a most singular 
conformation. Some of the delicate silk-like or 
velvety tufts of the Algae of the seas, when ex- 
amined, seem like strings of beads ; some like tubes 
of glass filled with bright colouring matter ; others 
composed of networks finer than the finest cob- 
webs ; some like little bunches of slender hairs ; 
others branched, like minute trees of emerald 
green or sparkling brown, or rivalling the rose and 
violet in richest hues. We might linger over de- 
scriptions of the minute wonders of this tribe, and 
tell how some small plants have filaments consist- 
ing of two tubes, one of which is exterior and so 
transparent that it might be compared to a tube 
of glass. Within this lies a jointed tube, filled 
with colouring matter, often almost imperceptible, 
but occasionally of most brilliant green or purple, 
or faint yellow tint ; and pointing from these won- 



96 SEA-WEEDS. 

drous things to the great Maker of the universe, 
we might exclaim with Job, " Lo, these are a part 
of his ways, but what whisper-word is heard of 
him!"* ' 

But in this chapter our business is not so much 
with the unseen as with the visible. It is not of 
the hidden wonders of ocean that we must tell, 
but leaving the less known forms of Algce, we 
must proceed to describe some of the most com- 
mon kinds of our sea-weeds, in such simple manner 
as may enable the wanderer by the shores of our 
island to recognise the forms most familiar to the 
eye. And attempting no scientific classification, 
we shall simply divide the sea- weeds into the three 
great groups into which botanists arrange them, 
which are the olive-green, the red, and the green 
sea-weeds. 

At almost any part of the year we may find on 
our shores abundant specimens of some of the 
coarse olive-green sea- weeds, the Melanosperms of 
the botanist. There they lie, all withered up by 
the sunshine, or fresh and tough as they have just 
been dashed up on the shore, 

" HurPd out of darkness by the uprooting surges." 

The piers about the sea are blackened by some of 
them, and their long fronds are beaten by the 
waves which fall upon the rocks on the beach. 
The name of flags, derived from their flagging and 
drooping positions, is frequently appropriate to 
these sea- weeds, and often for miles along the 
rocky coast, the distant scene seems black by 
the profusion of their olive fronds, which, when 

* A learned writer thus renders Job xxvi. 14. 



SEA- WEEDS. 97 

the sea comes up with its high tide, no longer 
droop heavily, but float and play with every wave. 
Every one accustomed to the sea-side, or even 
to the shores of salt rivers, knows that most com- 
mon of all sea-weeds, the Bladder Fucus (Fucus 
vesiculosus) , whose dark sprays lie on every line 
of sand or shingle, or gather in clumps on rock or 
pier. When fresh from the waters, it is of a dark 
olive tint, but as it hardens in the sun it becomes 
black as ink. Its frond has on it, here and there, 
a number of oval bladders or pods. These are the 
,air bladders, which enable the fucus to float on the 
waters ; and these occasion the crackling noise, 
when, as we walk upon the shore, we crush the 
half dried sea-weed by our footstep. As this plant 
dries, it becomes covered with a whitish salt crust. 
It has the common names of Bladder- wrack and 
Sea-ware, and was formerly very generally called 
Sea-oak. The Scotch call it Kelp-ware, or Black 
Tang. Its fronds, when near the shore, are gene- 
rally about a foot long, but when found in deeper 
water, they are larger and more abundantly pro- 
vided with the air vessels, by means of which they 
wave about in the sea ; and large branches, four 
or even five feet in length, may there be gathered. 
The frond forms numerous young plants about its 
roots, and if torn, it will throw out new shoots 
from the injured part. In Gothland it is a famous 
food for cattle when boiled and mingled with meal. 
Cattle are also fed on some other of the fucus 
tribe, and in some of the Scottish isles the animals 
go down regularly at low tide to feed on this 
refuse of the waves, guided by that instinct which 
teaches them so surely, as that they never mistake 
the time of its ebbing. This is also much used for 

H 



98 SEA-WEEDS. 

manure. We may see in England the little 
cart, or the larger wagon, loaded with these dark 
tinted weeds, wending its way along some of the 
green lanes in districts near the sea, and about to 
deposit its load on the land. But in Ireland this 
kind of manure is often the only one which the 
poor man can procure, and the storm which brings 
up from the ocean depths the large masses of 
fuci, is often a source of comfort to the Irish pea- 
sants, who gather on the shore in large companies, 
at such seasons, in order to appropriate the store 
of the sea. Dr. Greville states that the dried 
frond is used for fuel in several parts of the North, 
and that in the Hebrides cheeses are dried without 
salt, by means of the ashes procured by burning 
this plant. These ashes contain half their weight 
in alkaline salt. Its bladders also yield iodine, 
the quantity of which is said by Sir Humphry 
Davy to vary according to the climate under 
which the plant grows ; for this sea-weed, unlike 
our other common fuci, has a wide range, and 
flourishes within the Arctic circle, and lifts a 
smaller frond to the waves which beat on some 
tropical shores. It was from this plant that Dr. 
Russell procured the black salt powder, called 
Vegetable Ethiops, which has been used in medi- 
cine, and is also an excellent dentifrice. The 
frond of the bladder fucus has a rib or vein up its 
middle, and air vessels, from the size of a pea to a 
hazel nut, in pairs, scattered irregularly over its 
substance. 

Another of the very common fuci is the Prickly 
Tang, or Saw-leaved Fucus (Fucus serratus), which 
is as frequent as the bladder-wrack, and much 
like it ; the length of its fronds varying from two 



SEA-WEEDS. 



99 



to six feet. It may at once be known from the 
former species by its notched or serrated edges, 
and by having no air-vessels. It often covers the 
rocks to the limit of low water. Our engraving 
represents it in the condition in wh^h w^ often 
find it, as the place of attachment to various para- 




sitic objects. The thread-like coralline and the 
rough crust are two zoophytes, which will be 
described in a future chapter; and the little 
circular shell-like substances are the structure and 
dwelling places of that singular and minute worm 
the spirorbis. They have not, like true shells, 

H2 



100 SEA-WEEDS. 

varied markings or brilliant tints, and they are 
attached by their flat sides to the sea-weed ; but the 
beautiful animal within, when seen under the micro- 
scope, excites our admiration by its symmetry and 
grace ; and its shell-like case was secreted, like the 
home of the mollusk, by its outer covering or skin. 
Another of the most common of our marine 
plants, and one of our largest kinds, is the 
Knobbed or Knotted Fucus (Fucus nodosus). 
It is a thick leathery plant, of an olive-green 
often almost yellow colour, when fresh, but when 
dried, of a black hue, and polished like ebony. 
It may easily be known by its long stem, which 
swells at intervals into large bladders, in fine 
specimens an inch and a half in length, and look- 
ing altogether like a string of beads. The air- 
vessels are said to be used, when highly polished, 
for necklaces. It has, when in fructification, 
orange-coloured pods, on little stalks ; hence the 
people of the Orkney Isles call this plant Yellow 
Tang. In Norway its large air-vessels acquired for 
it the name of Knop Tang. These bladders are 
admirably adapted to the condition of the plant, for 
it is course and heavy, and when growing in deep 
water, it is seven or eight feet long ; so that the 
stormy winds, which upraise the waves, dash it 
with great violence against the rocky peaks. Were 
the bladders of more delicate structure, and frailer 
substance, it must inevitably be torn to pieces by 
the force of wind and waves. Were they like 
those of the Bladder Fucus, which break by a 
gentle pressure of the finger, they would not suit 
this plant. But the Bladder Fucus grows in a flat 
branch upon rocks, and needs not the provision of 
a stronger fabric. The Knobbed Fucus is known 



SEA-WEEDS. 



101 



on some parts of the coast of Scotland as the Sea- 
whistles, because boys make bladders of its large 
air-vessels. If these are thrown into the fire, they 
burst with a loud report. 

One more Fucus only is very, common on our 
shores. This is the smallest species, and called the 
Channelled Fucus (Fucus canaliculatus) , from its 




channelled stems and branches. It has no air- 
vessels, for it does not need them, as it grows on 
the rocks, above the high-water mark, and on 



102 SEA-WEEDS. 

spots where the ebbing of the water leaves it, for 
many hours daily, quite open to sun and air. 
Sometimes it exists in a very dwarfish condition, 
on places where it is only spattered by the spray, 
except at such times as the ocean is raised by 
wilder storms beyond its usual height on the 
shore. It is seldom more than five or six inches 
high, and when in fructification, its pods grow in 
pairs at the end of its branches. It is a favourite 
food of cattle. Sir J. E. Smith says, that they 
never fail to browse on it in winter, whenever the 
receding tide leaves it free of access to them. 

There are, besides these, two other species of 
Fucus, belonging to our British genus of that 
name, but they will be left unnoticed, as not being 
common plants. All these species, as well as some 
other of the olive-coloured sea-weeds, are burned 
for kelp, for the service of the glass and soap 
manufactories. The Knobbed Fucus seems the 
most valuable plant for this purpose ; but the ser- 
rated species, as well as some kinds of those large, 
leaf-like marine plants called the oar- weeds, con- 
tribute also to the kelp-burning. Time was, when 
this preparation of kelp was a source of livelihood 
to many ; but among the changes which have been 
made by the improvements in chemistry during 
late years, other means have been found of pro- 
curing soda by a less expensive process, and the 
kelp-burners have had little to do. The weeds, 
when intended for kelp-burning, were cut from 
the rocks, or gathered from the shore, by men, 
women, and children, and laid in the sun to dry. 
They were then made up into little mounds, till 
the summer was over, when they were thrown 
into pits, where they were lighted and left to 



SEA-WEEDS. 103 

burn. They thus formed cakes of ashes, which 
were in this state sold; and Dr. Drummond 
remarked a few years since, that almost the entire 
rent of the Island of Ratlin, on the northern 
coast of Ireland, was paid from the produce of 
sea- weeds ; and added, that from this source alone, 
the rents of a Highland chief had of late years 
increased 2,000 1. per annum. The picture drawn 
by his brother, Dr. William Drummond, of the 
Highlanders engaged in that occupation, is such as 
to make us feel regret for that individual injury, 
almost always sustained on the accession of any 
public benefit. He thus describes them : 

" A race inured to toil severe, 
Of manners simple, and of heart sincere; 
Sons of the rock, and nurslings of the surge, 
Around the kiln their daily labours urge ; 
O'er the dried weed the smoky volume coils, 
And deep beneath, the precious kali boils.'* 

The growth of these sea-weeds is remarkably 
rapid, so that in a few months they will cover 
with a dark vegetation the barren rocks on the 
shore over which the white sea-wave dashes. So 
readily do they increase, that on some parts of the 
coast where the plants are not naturally abun- 
dant, they have been raised by merely placing 
stones at intervals, close to the sea. In a short 
time these sea-weeds yielded to their owner a 
plentiful crop. Scotland and its adjacent islands 
are stated, at one time, to have furnished no less 
than 20,000 tons annually of kelp, made from the 
coarse marine plants. 

An anecdote related by Neill, is quoted by 
Dr. Greville, and, indeed, by many writers on 
sea-weeds, and well illustrates their rapid growth. 



104 SEA-WEEDS. 

A stone beacon was about to be erected on a low 
rock, near the entrance of the Frith of Forth, 
called the Carr Rock. This is about twenty feet 
broad, and sixty feet long, and before the com- 
mencement of any operations, was blackened by 
dark masses of sea-weed, particularly of the 
Digitate oar-weed, and Esculent alaria, which 
were only left uncovered at the lowest ebb of 
spring-tides. In the autumn of 1813, a great 
part of the foundation for the proposed beacon had 
been levelled, when it was found necessary for a 
time to relinquish the project. The sea-weeds 
had then been cut away, and their roots trampled 
down by the workmen. In May, 1814, the work 
was resumed, and great was the surprise of the 
engineer, at finding that the surface of the rock 
was again dark with its marine vegetation, and 
that the long olive leaves were waving to and fro 
in the waters. Little more than six months had 
expired since he saw the rock naked and barren ; 
now freshly grown leaves of the alaria, six feet 
long, and the specimens of oar-weed about two 
feet in length, seemed waving their flags of 
triumph over their old dwelling-place. It was 
evident that they had grown from seed, for they 
were flourishing over the soil whose surface had 
been so completely cleared in the autumn by the 
pick and chisel. 

The different species of Fucus have a variety of 
uses besides those already mentioned. The poor 
Icelander, who can command no wealth, but who 
can still with patriotic gratitude look on his 
country and say, " Iceland is the best land on 
which the sun shines," makes use of many sea- 
weeds, and the commonest kinds on his shore 



SEA-WEEDS. 105 

serve him for mattrasses. The Bladder Fucus is 
the food of his horses, and in the winter time the 
cows and sheep go down to the shore to feed upon 
it. In Holland, both this and the Serrated Fucus 
are used by fishermen in packing their fish for 
exportation. Invalids who resort to our own 
shores for the relief of glandular affections, derive 
benefit both from the outward application of the 
Bladder Fucus, which contains the principle of 
iodine, and from the iodine which they inhale with 
every breath which they draw from the sea-side. 

But nowhere is sea- weed an object of greater 
interest than in the Channel Isles, where the 
gathering of these plants from the rocks is made 
the subject of frequent legislative enactions. At 
all seasons of the year, groups of women and 
children may be seen on the shores of Jersey, 
diligently collecting the dark species of fucus. 
It is used as a manure both in its fresh state, and 
after having been reduced to ashes by being 
burned as fuel. So general is its use as fuel, 
that it is only on grand occasions that coal or 
wood is added; and it must be on a festive 
day, a birth-day, or some season sacred to the 
" superstitions of the heart," that a coal fire 
glimmers in the stove of a Jersey parlour. The 
sea-wrack fuel makes a hot, though not a cheerful 
fire, even without the addition of wood or coal ; 
and as the ashes are so useful on the land, the 
fire is suffered to burn by night as well as day, 
so that, as Inglis says, " a stranger in the country 
would, on an early morning ride, imagine that the 
Jersey farmer and his household were astir long 
before daybreak; for he would see the smoke 
curling from every farm-house, and almost from 



106 SEA-WEEDS. 

every cottage chimney." The French name of 
these plants is varech, and in Jersey dialect it is 
vraic, being somewhat similar to our common 
name of wrack. In the daily gatherings from 
the shore, the inhabitants are prohibited by their 
island laws from collecting it between sunrise 
and sunset, in order to allow some advantage to 
those who reside at a distance from the coast. 
But besides these daily gatherings from the tide, 
there are two times of the year called the vraick- 
ing seasons, when, at dawn of day, large parties 
sally from every part of the island, and rest not 
till they reach the shore. Merry parties they are, 
for though they must labour hard, yet singing 
gleefully to the music of the waves, they with their 
scythes cut away from the rocks the useful weeds, 
and filling their carts with them, sit down to their 
humble meal of the vraicking cake, made of flour, 
milk, and sugar, and to other articles both of 
eating and drinking which they carry with them. 
The carts proceed as far as the tide will admit ; 
but boats carry the vraickers to the more distant 
rocks ; and the stranger to the scene is often 
amused at seeing the busy crowds covering the 
rocks and the shore, while, when the ruthless tide 
sets in, the carts and horses may sometimes be 
seen floating on the waves. The two annual 
seasons for gathering the weeds in this way are 
limited to about ten days in March, and a similar 
portion of the month of July; and there are 
many families who look forward to these labours, 
not only as furnishing fuel for their houses, and 
manure for their lands, but as the means of pro- 
curing a commodity for sale, by which clothing 
and other necessaries may be purchased. 



SEA-WEEDS. 107 

On every part of the shores we may find that 
common marine plant the Podded Halidrys 
(Halidrys siliquosa], which lies in dark branched 
masses about the beach, or grows on the rocks 
and stones upon it. It has the common name of 
sea-tree, from its shrub-like appearance, and it 
may be known by its numerous pods, about an 
inch long, which grow on both sides of the stem 
and branches. It is of a pale olive-green, but 
turns quite black in drying. In Norway this plant, 
as well as the knobbed fucus, is called Knoptang. 

On many parts of the coast, the Strap-shaped 
Himanthalia, or Sea Thongs (Himanthalia lorea), 
attracts the notice of those who are interested in 
the productions of the ocean. Sometimes we may 
look for it in vain for weeks on the beach, but 
after a storm it will lie in great profusion, and 
hundreds of specimens might be collected in an 
hour's walk. It is commonly on our coast called 
Sea Thongs, and this name well describes it. It 
is a flat olive-green sea-weed, often ten feet long, 
and sometimes found in Cornwall of the length of 
twenty feet, looking like a continuation of flat 
narrow pods or seed-vessels, dividing every now 
and then into two branches, each of which divides 
farther on into two more, and so on through its 
whole length. When in a perfect state, however, 
it has one peculiarity by which it may at once be 
known from all our other sea-weeds. It springs 
from a kind of cup at its base, and in the earliest 
stage of its growth these cups may be seen thickly 
scattered on the rocks in the sea, and looking just 
like those plants of the fungus tribe which are 
called Pezizas. Little projections arise from this 
hollow cup, after it has grown into a good size 



108 SEA-WEEDS. 

which gradually enlarge and lengthen into a long 
flat strap of uniform shape throughout. It has 




on both sides small projections or tubercles, im- 
mersed in the strap-shaped portion, and plentifully 
scattered over it. It is of leathery texture, but 



SEA-WEEDS. 109 

its interior is pulpy and succulent. In some cases 
it has a yellow, slimy substance on it : and the 
author of these pages having wound a piece 
around the hand, when gathering it up from the 
beach, had a stain on the fingers remaining for 
some time after touching it. In Orkney, where 
it is called Drew, it is very abundant, and it 
yields excellent kelp. Dr. Greville observes, that 
in regard to its duration it seems to commence its 
vegetation in the spring, and to arrive at maturity 
in the early part of the spring following. It turns 
black in drying, and requires well washing in 
fresh water to deprive it of the slimy substance 
with which it is covered. The cup is in this case 
the true frond, the long thongs being merely the 
seed-vessels, and both parts should be preserved 
for the herbarium by the collector of sea- weeds. 

Most sea- weeds have some kind of root, or rather 
means of attachment to the soil on which they 
grow. This is merely a continuation of their leafy 
substance, the fixed end of the plant swelling out 
when it roots itself. Some have a callous disc, 
others a tough leathery fibre, and there are besides 
species of marine weeds which grow on sand, and 
are therefore provided with branching roots, in 
some measure resembling those of land plants. 
There are, however, some few sea-weeds which 
have no point of attachment, but which grow in 
floating masses or individual clusters in the sea 
itself. The celebrated Gulf-weed is one of these. 
This plant, which is the floating Fucus of the 
older authors, is by writers of our Marine Floras 
always enumerated among the British plants ; but 
all agree that it is not properly native to our 
shores, though often cast on them by- the waves, 



110 SEA- WEEDS. 

especially on the Orkney Islands. The Gulf- weed, 
or Sea-grape, is the Sargassum vulgare of modern 
authors ; but another species, the berry-bearing 
Sargasso, is also thrown up on our coast, and some 
writers consider these as but varieties of one spe- 
cies. However that may be, this floating Sargasso 
is a very interesting plant on many accounts. It 
has been found in almost every part of the world, 
and it floats in an immense tangling mass, covering 
a space of at least forty thousand square miles in 
the Atlantic, just within the great Equatorial cur- 
rent. This was the mass of weed which Columbus 
described as floating meadows, and these fields of 
sea-weed (so new a sight to the Spanish navigators) 
alarmed the crew of the " Santa Maria," when Co- 
lumbus was guiding them to the discovery of a 
new world. Superstitiously regarding this obstacle 
as an indication that their expedition had not re- 
ceived the sanction of the Almighty, they had 
nearly, in their faint-heartedness, given up the 
pursuit on which they had so far entered. This 
part of the ocean is believed to be the portion 
called by the ancient Phoenicians the Weedy Sea. 
The English mariner still terms it the Grassy, 
and the Spaniard, El Mar do Sargasso. This sea 
extends from 22 to 36 north latitude, and from 
25 to 45 west longitude, and its weeds often im- 
pede the course of vessels through them. Beyond 
these limits there are few pieces of the sea- weed 
seen, and sometimes even in the grassy sea, the 
vessel may float for hours and scarcely see any, 
till it shall at once find itself in a dense dark mass. 
These floating tangles were formerly supposed to 
have been brought by the Gulf stream from the 
Gulf of Mexico. Then they were supposed to have 



SEA-WEEDS. Ill 

grown on shallows in that part of the sea where 
they abound, and to have been rent from them by 
fishes. But it seems now to be ascertained that 
this weed has no other station than the sea itself, 
since among the thousands of specimens fished up 
and examined, no root has been discovered. It 
grows, therefore, freely in the open sea. 

The Sea-grape is an olive-green weed, with long 
slender leaves, and berries about as large as a pea, 
from which it derived its name of Tropic Grape. 
Our sailors call this sea- weed Midshipman's pickle, 
because it is pickled in vinegar and eaten on board 
of our ships. It is also made into salads, in some 
countries of the East. Myriads of fishes and sea 
animals live on these masses of weeds these ocean 
meadows ; and though they are not firm enough to 
bear the foot of man, yet the birds which 

" Make voyages amidst the pathless heaveii " 

find a temporary resting-place and a pleasant food 
on these floating islands, and sing their thankful 
songs amid the waste of waters, heard only by the 
ear of Him, who, when He called them into being, 

" Forgot not one of his large family, 
But cared for each as for an only child." 

We have five British species of the olive-coloured 
genus of sea-weeds called Bladder-chain, but they 
are none of them very common, except on the 
southern shores of England and Ireland. The 
most frequent is the Granulated Bladder- chain 
(Cystoseira granulata), which has a cylindrical 
stem, about as thick as a goose-quill, from two to 
eight inches high, with numerous branches, slender 
as a packthread. The air-vessels form a kind of 



112 SEA-WEEDS. 

chain, sometimes running into one another. This 
sea-weed is firm, leathery, and flexible in texture. 
Every one has seen those grey crusted, shaggy 
lichens which hang about our old trees, and will 
readily agree that two of our sea- weeds sufficiently 
resemble them to deserve their name of Lichina. 
The dwarf Lichina (Lichina pygmced) is the more 
frequent kind, and it grows on sea-side rocks, near 




NATURAL SIZE. 




MAGNIFIED. 



to the high-water mark, but within reach of the 
waves. When the tide is out it is often left dry 
for hours, and it is then a black, hard crust ; but 
the returning waves restore it to its native olive 
tint, and render it soft and flexible. It is common 
on many rocky shores in autumn, and in the West 
of England it is abundant. The lesser Lichina 
(Lichina confinis) forms close tufts on rocks never 
inundated by the waves, but on which the spray is 
scattered at high-tide. Its dark patches, though 
small, crowd and darken the rocks so as to be 
visible at some distance. 

Most of our olive-green sea-weeds grow on rocks 
often left uncovered by the tide, and the majority of 
them disappear in the deeper water, when the base 
is never left exposed to the sun and air. When 



SEA- WEEDS. 113 

the tide recedes they hang drooping down and 
begin to dry, but the returning waters restore 
their freshness. It is not in the calm summer, 
when the sun has been for many days shining in 
all its brightness, and when the breeze 

" With careering wing, 
Plays like an unseen being on the water ;" 

it is not then that our beaches are strewed with 
their numerous black fronds. But when the leaden 
clouds seem to give their own deep dull tint to the 
once blue sea, and the winds rising gradually with 
hollow moan sweep angrily over it till ocean's 
voice drowns all other of the storm voices ; then 
the waves dash with tremendous violence against 
the rocks, tearing away the marine plants, and 
sending them out to float on the waters, to tell 
the approaching mariner that he is not far from 
the shore, or they strew them on the beach for our 
service or delight. Then when the storm song of 
yesterday seems hushed in the quietness of to-day, 
or is singing to us only in its low and gentle 
murmurs, and we can stray again by the shore, 
what treasures do we find there 

" Crusted shells, 

Rich mosses, tree-like sea-weeds, sparkling pebbles 
Enchant the eye, and tempt the eager hand." 

Two common plants, which may be easily described, 
are almost sure to be among the offerings brought 
to our feet by the waters. These are the Sweet 
and the Digitate Laminaria, or Oar-weed. The 
former of these consists of a frond or leaf, gene- 
rally about three or four feet long, and about four 
or five inches wide ; but when in its young state 
we may find it not more than two inches, while 
I 



114 SEA- WEEDS. 

some fine specimens are ten feet long. It has a 
thick tough stem, and is of an olive-green, and of 
leathery texture. In the young plant it is some- 
times like a thin flat leaf, but when older, its edges 
are puckered like a frill, and it has a number of 
raised projections down the middle, being what 
botanists call bullated or blistered ; while a muci- 
laginous substance, with which it is covered, comes 
off on the hand. This sea-weed has a large fibrous 
root, if, indeed, that can be called a root, which is 
never intended to penetrate the soil, but only to 
hold the plant fast to the surface of the rock. It 
we examine the fibrous root of a land plant (one 
of the grasses, for example), we find it adapted not 
only for keeping the plant firm in the ground, but 
also, by tapering points, and minute orifices at the 
extremities of its fibres, suited for deriving nutri- 
ment from the earth. The sea-weeds, however, 
are little affected by the soils on which they grow, 
and they seem to require their roots, almost en- 
tirely, as means of holding them attached to it. 

The Sweet Laminaria (Laminaria saccharina) 
is called by fishermen the Sea Belt. If washed, 
and hung up in the sun to dry, it becomes covered 
with an efflorescence of a white colour, and of a 
flavour at once of salt and sugar, which is not, 
however, very agreeable to the palate. This is not 
the only sea-weed which deposits these crystals ot 
sweet powder, which are in the form .of needles, and 
which were by Dr. Stenhouse discovered to be man- 
nite, the characteristic principle of manna, differ- 
ing from cane sugar, but resembling that procured 
from grapes. The quantity of this mannite is very 
great. Dr. Stenhouse found that one thousand 
grains of the sea-weed yielded, by means of a 



SEA-WEEDS. 115 

simple process, about twelve per cent, of mannite ; 
which Dr. Landsborough describes as very beau- 
tiful, as purely white as loaf sugar, and almost as 
sweet; and as having retained its properties for 
four years from the time of the experiment. 

The Sweet Laminaria is eaten, boiled, when in 
a young state, but it can be the food of those only 
who are almost destitute of any other provision, 
for it is neither palatable nor nutritious, though 
valuable for manure, and for the kelp which it 
affords. 

The people of Japan, according to Thunberg, 
call this plant Komb. This traveller found it in 
great abundance on the Japanese shores, and very 
long and broad. When dried and cleansed from 
impurities, it is used for several purposes, and 
tough as it is, it is eaten occasionally, especially 
when the people meet together to drink their 
liquor called sakki. It is cut into pieces, which 
by boiling become much thickened, and it is then 
taken with other food. Sometimes it appears on 
their tables uncooked, after having been well 
scraped and cut into slips about two inches long, 
which are folded in the form of a square, and tied 
over with a narrow slip of the sea- weed. When 
presents are made, about half a score, or even 
a score of these squares are strewed about among 
them. It is customary here, as elsewhere in the 
East, to make many gifts, and it forms part of the 
ceremonial to accompany them with a compli- 
mentary paper, as it is termed, which is folded and 
tied, and at each end of this is affixed a slip of the 
Laminaria, about an inch broad. It is not always 
easy to guess at the import of ceremonies of 
nations whose tone of thinking and feeling is so 
i 2 



116 SEA- WEEDS. 

different from our own ; but figurative as are the 
language and customs of Eastern people, the 
opinion of Barrow is highly probable, that this 
practice is significant of the resources of the sea 
to those who choose to avail themselves of its 
benefits. 

We have said that the Sea-belt is common 
every where around our island, and both this and 
the Tangle, or Fingered Oar-weed, often lie in 
heaps on the beach, ready to be carried away for 
the lands. Both of them, too, are brought every 
summer inland, by hundreds of visitors to the sea, 
who hang them up in their houses as hygrometers, 
and they afford good indications of approaching 
rain, by their damp flagging state when the atmo- 
sphere is moist. 

The Tangle or Fingered Oar- weed (Laminaria 
digitata) is a long flat leaf of an olive- green colour, 
which, when young, is eaten, but after its early 
stage it separates into a number of segments like 
ribbons, from the point of the leaf, to within a 
few inches of the stem. Children run about the 
beach with handfuls of these waving ribbons, at 
our sea-side towns, and the first idea which one 
might have, would be that these plants were torn 
into shreds by the waves ; but on examining them, 
the edges are found smooth as if cut by a knife, 
and not rudely rent asunder. This sea-weed is 
known on our coast as the Sea Girdle and Sea 
.Hanger. In the Orkney Isles it is called Red 
Ware, and the Scottish Highlanders term it Sea- 
wand. The dried stalks, often thick and woody, 
and several feet long, are burnt for fuel on the 
Orkney and Shetland Islands, and the fronds and 
stems are boiled in Nordland as food for cattle. 



SEA-WEEDS. 



117 



The young plants are also eaten by the people of 
Scotland and the south-west of England, and 




numerous tribes of shell-fish find their food in 
this large plant. This sea-weed, mingled with 
another called the Pepper Dulse, is still sold in 
Scotland, or was, at least, a few years since. Dr. 
Greville remarks, that he has heard the cry in the 
streets of Edinburgh, " Buy Dulse and Tangle." 
It is only while young that the plant is at all fit 



118 SEA-WEEDS. 

to be eaten, for the fully grown fronds have stems 
as thick as walking sticks, and about as digestible. 
These stems become so shrivelled and hard by 
long exposure to the air, that knife- handles are 
sometimes made of them. These are tipped with 
metal, and when polished are scarcely to be dis- 
tinguished from hart's-horn. Dr. Johnston says of 
the plant, " In some parts of the western isles of 
Scotland, it forms even a sort of soil on the peb- 
bles of the beach, on which the natives sow barley ; 
and as the sea-weed rots, the grain drops with it 
into the interstices, so that when the harvest is 
ready, it seems growing on a surface of polished 
pebbles." 

We have five British species of Laminaria, all 
flat leaf-like sea- weeds, and it is in allusion to this 
that they received their botanic name from Lamina, 
a thin plate. One other kind only will be noticed 
here. This is the bulbous Laminaria (Laminaria 
bulbosa], a plant not nearly so general as the other 
two species, though thrown up in large masses on 
some parts of >ur coast, chiefly on the south and 
western shores of England, and in some places on 
the Irish and Scottish shores. In the Orkney 
Islands, where it abounds, it was long valued for 
its supply for the kelp-furnace, for it is so large 
a plant that a mass of the weed growing from 
a single root is often a load for a man. It has a 
short stem, and like most of this family, a fibrous 
root at first, but this swells at length into a bulb, 
and forms a distinction of the species. Mrs. Grif- 
fiths measured a specimen of this plant which was 
gathered from deep water at Torbay, and found 
the bulb to be a foot in diameter; while the 
whole fronds, when spread over the ground, 



SEA- WEEDS. 119 

formed a circle, whose diameter was at least twelve 
feet. Like the fingered species, it is cleft into 
ribbons, but it is much larger than any other of 
our native kinds. Our fishermen call it Sea-fur- 
belows, and Furbelowed Hangers, on account of 
the waved margin of the plant at the base, which 
resembles a frill or furbelow, and at once distin- 
guishes the species from all others. It grows only 
in deep water, and is, on account of its size, a 
valuable plant for manure. It ts the largest 
European kind. 

The Laminaria tribe have been well called the 
giants of the marine flora, but large as are our 
native plants of this family, those of some other 
seas far exceed them. On the west coast of South 
America, some of the tribe are a most important 
resource to the poor, furnishing them, as some of 
them do also the aborigines of Australia, with 
instruments, vessels, and' food. In the seas near 
these shores, they form a forest-like vegetation 
under the waters ; among whose long leaves lie 
the treasures of the deep, the pearls of ocean, 
and the gems of mines : and more precious still, 
the forms of thousands, once gifted with light 
and love, which the sea shall hold till it gives up 
its dead. 

That very singular production, known by the 
name of Sea-trumpet, is one of this family. When 
its large fronds are seen floating on the waves, the 
sailor knows that he beholds a sure indication of 
the vicinity of the Cape of Good Hope. The 

Smng Hottentots, as well as the children of the 
utch settlers, make trumpets of its long stalks, 
and Thunberg, who calls it the Trumpet-grass, 
says that the land-birds often come and sit upon it. 



120 SEA-WEEDS. 

This plant is well known to contain a larger 
quantity of iodine than any European sea- weed. 
Iodine is the powerful remedy used in cases of 
those swellings in the neck termed goitre ; and 
Professor Lindley observes, that it is a curious fact 
that the stems of a sea-weed are sold in the shops 
and chewed by the inhabitants of South America, 
wherever goitre is prevalent, for its cure. This 
remedy is by them termed goitre-stick, and appears 
to belong to the Laminariese. To the same tribe 
belongs also that wonderful sea-weed, called Ever- 
lasting Bladder-thread (Macrocystispyrifera), which 
navigators have described as being from five hun- 
dred to fifteen hundred feet long, and pieces of 
which have, by measurement, been proved to be 
three hundred feet in length. It is a remarkably 
elegant plant, its stalks not thicker than a finger, 
and its upper branches no larger than a packthread, 
with narrow leaves, seven or eight feet long, while 
at the base of each is a strong air-vessel, without 
whose aid it could not support its great length in 
the waters. It has a strong root, which holds it 
fast to its craggy rocky home. Yet, long as it is, 
it can grow in water less deep than might be sup- 
posed ; for as Meyan remarks, it does not grow in 
a straight direction from the bottom, but lies 
somewhat horizontally. This author observes 
of it, that it is distributed in the New World 
throughout all the zones, from the extreme north 
to the extreme southern point. Baron Humboldt 
brought it from the tropical seas, but it is 
found at Cape Horn of greater length than else- 
where. 

There is one other British genus of Laminariese, 
containing, however, only one species, the Esculent 



SEA-WEEDS. 121 

Alaria (Alaria esculenta), a plant which, though 
not common on all our coasts, yet on some, as 
the shores of Durham and Northumberland and 
Scotland, is abundant, and is found, though 
rarely, on some southern shores of England. It is 
indeed both general and plentiful on those parts 
of our isle washed by the Northern Pacific and 
Atlantic oceans ; but wherever it flourishes it 
usually grows in deep water. Many people of 
the northern countries of Europe use this plant as 
food, and the Irish and Scottish peasants gather it 
from the rocks, and seem to eat it with great relish. 
Its frond is a long green leaf, but it may be dis- 
tinguished from the oar-weeds by the midrib or 
vein up its middle. It has, besides, on its stem a 
number of slender leaflets from two to seven 
inches long, and it is these leaflets and the midrib 
which are eaten. We must not, however, expect 
to find the leaflets in its young state, as they are 
often not developed until the plant is a yard long. 
This sea- weed is of a thin substance, and of a pale 
yellowish green, and it sometimes attains a length 
of twenty feet, but we cannot find a perfect speci- 
men, as the end of the frond is sure to be torn by 
the action of the waves upon its somewhat frail 
texture. Dr. Johnston remarks, that a botanist 
found on the coast of Northumberland a variety 
of this sea-weed, with so broad a frond that it 
reminded him of the leaf of a plantain-tree ; while 
in another variety of the same coast, the frond was 
no wider than a common ribbon. It is called 
Badderlocks or Hen-ware in Scotland, and has 
also in the Scottish isles the name of Honey-ware, 
and in Ireland that of Murlins. Sir J. E. Smith 
remarks, that this sea- weed has, when first tasted, a 



122 SEA- WEEDS. 

pleasant flavour ; but that it leaves upon the 
tongue and mouth a disagreeable crust of greenish 
mucus. The midrib is eaten in its raw state, but 
it would not easily be digested by any but persons 
who can take robust exercise, for it is as hard as 
the raw carrot or turnip of our fields, and to many 
its fishy, coppery flavour is very unpleasant. 

Three species of Desmarestia are natives of our 
shores in the summer ; none are rare, but one 
kind, the spiny species (Desmarestia aculeata), is a 
very common and elegant sea-weed of most parts 
of our coast. Most persons accustomed to gather 
the sea-weeds know this, with its delicate, feathery, 
graceful branches. Sea- weeds, in general, show to 
greater advantage when waving in the water than 
when brought to land, and many lose their beauti- 
ful iridescent hues when removed from their native 
element. But it is the waving form of this, which 
bends with every ripple, which so much pleases us, 
and which we miss in the dried specimen. When 
young, it is of a pale delicate green, but as it 
becomes older it is of a deep olive tint. The 
fronds are sometimes one or two feet in length, 
without any vein up the middle, and not broader 
than a small leaf of the meadow grass. They are 
much branched; and when the plant is young, 
little bunches of green threads grow all down 
them, which, as the plant becomes older, fall off, 
and are succeeded by tiny sharp spines. If ga- 
thered while in a young state, it not only assumes 
a bright verdigris hue in drying, but it will impart 
that tint to the paper on which it is laid. 

The strap-leaved Desmarestia (Desmarestia 
ligulata), is a larger sea- weed, with a flat frond, 
from each side of which issue branches situated 



SEA-WEEDS. 



123 



opposite to each other, and the branches have on 
their sides slender narrow leaves ; it is olive-brown 
in the water, but becomes of a sea-green hue on 




exposure to the air: and the species called the 
green or flourishing kind (Desmarestia viridis) has 
the same peculiarity. This is a beautiful delicate 
sea-weed, with slender, hair-like, bushy fronds, all 
proceeding from one base, which is not thicker 
than a goose-quill. At first, it is in substance 



124 SEA-WEEDS. 

hard and rigid, but when exposed to the air, it 
droops and becomes soft, and in this state it closely 
adheres to paper. 

Leaving unnoticed several genera of the Melan- 
osperms, as being either too rare or too difficult of 
description without the aid of scientific terms, we 
proceed to a marine plant which on our rocky 
shores is common during the summer. This is the 
Dichotomous Dictyota (Dictyota dichotoma), which 
has flat fronds from about three to twelve inches 
long, irregularly cleft, and the segments narrower 
towards the extremities. It is of a clear olive- 
green colour, lighter in tint and thinner in texture 
than most of the olive-green sea-weeds. 

Two frequent plants of our shores may easily 
be recognised by him who gathers up the stores 
thrown up by the seas. They are the two species 
of Sea Whiplash, sometimes called by our sailors 
sea catgut and sea laces. One kind of this whip- 
lash (Chorda filum) grows attached to rocks and 
stones, and is of an olive-green colour, and carti- 
laginous substance. It waves about under the 
water like a number of strings, and has generally, 
at its tip, a bunch of thread-like sea-weed, which 
is parasitic upon it. This cord is hollow, and inter- 
rupted at intervals by transverse partitions, which 
are thought, by Stackhouse, to be designed to 
confine the air or elastic vapour within certain 
spaces, so as to act like air-vessels and increase the , 
buoyancy of the plant. The fronds extend to an 
amazing length, and always shoot upwards towards 
the surface of the waters. They are sometimes not 
more than a few feet long, and are spirally twisted. 
In its growing state, the whole plant is fringed 
with small delicate filaments, which render it very 



SEA-WEEDS. 125 

slippery to the touch. This species is very com- 
mon in the North Sea, where it is frequently 
found of the length of thirty or forty feet. Dr. 
Johnston finds it in the Bay of Holy Isle, about 
twenty feet in length. In Scalpa Bay, in Orkney, 
this sea-weed forms meadows, through which a 
pinnace with difficulty forces its way. And many 
an unwary swimmer has sunk, by means of this 
plant, to rise no more from the ocean bed. Often 
the calm quiet nook of water, whose sandy floors 
are covered with its long strings, seems to offer a 
delightful bathing-place ; but the entangling cords 
form masses, from which the bather finds it diffi- 
cult, sometimes impossible, to make his escape. 
In Shetland, it is known by the name of Lucky 
Minny's Lines : and the Highlanders dry it in the 
sun, and take off its skin, when it makes a good 
strong cord for the fishermen. It has also been 
much valued in the Orkneys for the produce of 
kelp. 

The Jointed Whiplash (Chorda lomentaria) is 
nearly as common as this kind, and abundant on 
the coast of Devonshire, as well as on the western 
and eastern shores of Scotland. It much resem- 
bles the other species in general appearance, but 
is smaller. Dr. Greville remarks of it, that it is 
very similar to the intestine of an animal, tied at 
certain intervals. It is found in summer and 
autumn, and is of a thin flaccid substance, and of 
a transparent olive-green colour. 

Another plant, which in the sea looks like fine 
strings, is the Whipcord Fucus (Chordaria flagelli- 
formis] ; but it is not, like the whiplash, composed 
of one long cord-like frond, but has a central 
stem, with long branches, scarcely thicker than a 



126 SEA-WEEDS. 

packthread, and equal in size throughout. It is 
very common in summer time on rocks and stories 
in the sea, and may be but a few inches long, 
though sometimes found of the length of three 
feet. It is a firm, dark olive sea-weed, and is 
solid in its centre. When seen under water, it 
appears to have a fine fringe of little colourless 
fibres, which render it very slippery to the 
fingers. 

Very common in the sea, both in summer and 
winter, on rocks and stones, are the spongy 
branches of the sponge-like Cladostephus (Cla- 
dosteplius spongiosus). It is not a very pretty 
sea-weed, for it has thick clumsy branches, of 
about the size of a cord, and about three or four 
inches high, densely crowded with little branch- 
lets. It is a dirty brown or olive-green colour, 
and so spongy in its nature as to be unlike most 
other of our marine plants. A tuft of this weed 
is often very useful to the naturalist, as it retains 
a good quantity of sea-water, and therefore will 
long preserve any living creature which he may 
wish to convey home for examination. The 
whorled Cladostephus is equally common, and is 
a larger plant, much like this, but less spongy in 
texture. 

With the description of one other of the olive- 
green sea-weeds, we must close this short account 
of them, leaving untold of many an interesting 
plant on which the imagination loves to linger. 
Some, whole families, parasitic on other plants, 
seeming scarcely more than tufts of brownish or 
greenish threads ; some with flat fronds like the 
sea endive ; and others, whose crowded fronds form 
a thick fringe on the leaves of large sea-weeds. 



SEA-WEEDS. 



127 




The most beautiful of all the Melanosperms must 
not be passed over in silence. It is not a sea-weed 
which is very general on our coasts, but any one 
who finds it may at once recognise it by descrip- 
tion. This singular 
production is the Pea- 
cock's Tail Pavonia 
(Padina pavonia), and 
is an autumnal plant. 
The old writers called 
it Turkey Feather ; 
and it was once con- 
sidered a sea fungus. 
Its frond is broadly 
fan-shaped, becoming 
narrow at the base, 
sometimes cleft at the 
edges, and marked with 
numerous concentric lines. The margin is fringed, 
and generally turned down or rolled backwards; 
and every one will admit that its appearance quite 
accords with its familiar name. This elegant sea- 
weed has been found in various parts of Devon- 
shire, on the Scottish shores, and also on several 
parts of the coast of Kent and Sussex, particularly 
at Margate and Ramsgate, and it has been occa- 
sionally seen at Dover. Its place of growth is 
usually in some of those clear rocky pools by the 
shore, where the water is still ; and it may then be 
seen in tufts of two or three fronds together, 
waving if but a zephyr stirs the surface of the 
waters. It is about two or three inches high, of a 
pale yellowish olive-green, with concentric zones 
of a deeper tint, generally covered with a whitish 
powder on one or both sides, and its edges are 



128 SEA-WEEDS. 

fringed with most delicate hairs. It has been 
observed of this lovely plant, that while it is 
growing it is not uncommon to see the rays of 
light decomposed as by a prism by this mass of 
minute filaments which fringe the margin. Dr. 
Harvey remarks of this sea-weed, that it is found 
pretty extensively in the seas of warm countries 
in both hemispheres, perhaps reaching its highest 
latitude on our shores. 

The red sea- weeds (Ehodosperms) are more com- 
mon in the seas of the temperate zone than in the 
colder regions or near the Equator, and among 
them are the kinds sought with most eagerness by 
the amateur collectors of sea- weeds on our coasts. 
They exhibit marine vegetation in its loveliest 
forms, and though not all strictly red, being often 
of purplish or brownish hue, yet they have among 
them the red colour in great beauty, sometimes in 
its palest or brightest rose tint, and in other cases 
of richest scarlet or crimson. Often they are like 
delicate fragile leaves, rent even by the touch of 
the finger, as we strive to unroll their plaits. 
Sometimes they are like little trees, with slender 
hair-like branches, all entangling each other as 
they hang dripping from the waters, but exhibiting 
the utmost regularity, and minute beauty of 
structure, when we dispose them on paper. The 
individual forms of several of our olive species, as 
the Laminaria, and especially the Alaria, are 
graceful and elegant; but when they prevail, as 
some of the commoner kinds often do, at the half- 
tide level, covering all the rocks and shores with 
a dark vegetation, they have a melancholy influ- 
ence on the scenery ; and when waves are rough, 
and clouds are dark, present a dreary waste. This 



SEA-WEEDS. 129 

kind of sea-weed usually lessens as we approach 
towards the low- water mark ; while, on the other 
hand, these are the plants which vegetate at 
greatest depth, and form submarine forests, into 
which the voyager, as he passes over the deep 
blue waters, looks down with wonder and delight. 
There he sees masses of sea-weeds whose trunks 
are as long as those of our highest trees, and whose 
leaves are like those of the Indian forests, and like 
them wave to and fro in grace and beauty, while 
their olive colour seems to deepen into blackness 
as the water becomes deeper. But many of the 
red sea-weeds need close examination to discover 
their beauty. No large masses cover our rocks or 
shores. Many are never seen at all by any but 
the marine botanist, who goes from the land and 
dredges them up from deep waters; and many 
need the aid of the microscope to detect one species 
from another. These sea-weeds seek the shade, 
and will not grow exposed to light and air ; and 
where, as in some cases, they may occasionally do 
so, yet their less perfect and brilliant colour shows 
us that this is not their natural and most favour- 
able condition. It is when far removed from light 
that they deepen into rich and glowing beauty, 
and strangely in this respect do they differ from 
the plants of our upper earth. We know well 
when the clinging ivy lends its greenness to the 
grey time-stained ruin, that should some branch 
creep through a crevice into the ruined darkness, 
it fades into a dull and sickly yellow or white. 
We know that our flowers lose all their beauty of 
colour when shut up where the sun's rays cannot 
reach them ; but it is not so with sea-weeds. In 
the depths the olive becomes darker, the red and 



130 SEA-WEEDS. 

purple are most perfect in hue; and Humboldt 
speaks of a beautiful marine plant which he found 
in the sea, near the Canary Isles, the Vine-leaved 
Fucus, which vegetates at the depth of one hun- 
dred and ninety-two feet, yet has leaves as green 
as those of the grass of the spring oak tree. On 
many of our shores the loveliest sea-weeds are 
never gathered, though everywhere some of the 
commonest kinds, as the Hair Flag, lie strewed 
about the sand or beach. And where there are 
rocky pools, we may gaze down upon some which 
redden in the shady nook formed by some little 
shelving eminence sufficient to protect them from 
the sun's brightest rays. 

The division of the sea-weeds into the olive, 
red, and green series, is not an arbitrary, but a 
natural one, for, in a great measure, with similarity 
of colour is connected a similar structure. It is 
not, however, so invariable as to be a perfect dis- 
tinction. Among the red sea-weeds we find every 
shade of purple tint, and of a few of the darker 
kinds we almost hesitate as to whether we should 
pronounce them to be red or olive-green; while 
exposure to air and light, in some cases, turns a 
red sea-weed into a dull yellow or a dirty white 
hue, or renders its crimson of a bright scarlet; 
and drying in the sun blackens almost all the 
olive-green species. Yet in practically studying 
sea-weeds, this presents little difficulty, for very 
generally we find the olive-green plants tough and 
leathery ; the red usually frail and delicate, while 
the grass-green are always of simplest structure, 
and of tint little liable to change. In this almost 
constancy of colour the Algce differ greatly from 
the plants of our upper earth, among which colou 



SEA-WEEDS. 131 

is almost useless as a characteristic, giving us 
scarcely any idea of the nature or properties of 
the plant, and varying under circumstances of soil 
or culture. Thus we see the wild hyacinth trem- 
bling in the spring wood, and we call it the 
blue-bell; but we step into the next copsewood, 
and there we find our favourite woodland flower 
arrayed in purest white. The "brown or purple 
heath" sometimes greets us unexpectedly with 
snowy bells, and white blossoms sometimes sur- 
prise us on the root where we expect to find the 
pink flowers of the Robert-leaved cranesbill. 

The fructification of the Alga is usually so 
minute, as to need the assistance of a microscope 
to detect it. Little wart-like excrescences, termed 
capsules, lie on the surface of the frond ; or spots, 
called granules, are imbedded in its substance, or 
scattered on its surface. Some plants bear both 
these kinds of fruit, in which case the marine 
botanist terms the capsules the primary, and the 
granules the secondary fruit; though both cap- 
sules and granules contain seeds (sporules), which 
can produce a new plant. The grass-green sea- 
weeds are remarkable for having seeds which 
possess a singular power of locomotion, in some of 
the plants of the series appearing to be voluntary, 
so that naturalists have not yet decided as to 
whether they may not be endowed with animal 
motion. 

The very commonest of all our red sea-weeds is 
the Hair Flag, or Landscape weed (Plocamium coc- 
cineum). So frequent, indeed, is this plant, that 
every one who visits the sea-side must have seen 
it, and it is seldom omitted in those drawings of 
marine weeds which accompany pictures of groups 

K2 



132 SEA-WEEDS. 

of shells. It is common also in the Atlantic, 
Pacific, and even Indian Oceans. Its generic 




name is derived from a Greek word, signifying 
hair, or a head of hair; but, as Dr. Greville has 



SEA-WEEDS. 133 

observed, it is not a very happy appellation, for 
finely divided as is the frond, it cannot be said to 
resemble hair. The frond grows in tufts, varying 
from two to twelve inches in length, very branched 
and bushy, the main stem irregularly divided, and 
seldom thicker than a coarse thread. All the 
smaller branches are set with uniform little 
branchlets, like the teeth of a comb. There are 
three or four on one side, and then three or four 
on the other. These produce a second series of 
three or four tiny branchlets from their upper 
edge ; and a third, or even fourth occur, each less 
than the preceding one, but of the same number, 
and always from the upper or inner edge. Though 
these are minute distinctions, yet they can be 
clearly seen without the aid of a microscope, and 
serve to mark this sea-weed from all others. It 
is often called the Scarlet Hair Flag, but it is 
rather between a crimson and a scarlet tint, and 
sometimes of a rose colour. Common as it is, it 
well deserves Dr. Greville's praise of it, as that 
writer says, it is " one of the most charming and 
symmetrical Algce in the world." 

Our beaches, after a stormy day, are strewed 
with specimens of this plant sometimes large 
enough to cover the palm of the hand, and now 
and then of sufficient size to spread over the sur- 
face of a half-sheet of post paper. Some years 
since, the poor people who lived on various parts 
of our coasts, were accustomed to make for sale 
very pretty landscapes of sea- weed ; and this was 
a very suitable plant for their purpose, as it re- 
tained its colour, and well represented a tree. 
This practice is less general now, but little groups 
of shells and sea- weeds are still occasionally offered 



134 SEA- WEEDS. 

for sale, and this elegant plant is generally selected 
to ornament the picture. Dr. Johnson says, that 
fancy work with this sea-weed was once a favourite 
amusement with the princesses, the daughters of 
George III. 

Scarcely less common than the hair flag is that 
very different looking sea-weed, the Dulse, or 
Palmated Rhodomenia (Rhodomenia palmata) ; and 




this, which so often bestrews the sands and beaches 
of our British islands, is consumed in various 
ways, both in the countries at the North of Eu- 
rope and in the Greek Archipelago, as well as on 
the Scottish and Irish coasts. Few of those who 
pick up the plant from our English shores to 
examine it, are aware how useful it is to others. 
In September and October, and indeed throughout 
the winter months, it may be found in abundance, 
growing either on the rocks or on larger sea-weeds. 



SEA-WEEDS. 135 

Its fronds grow in tufts of several together ; they 
are flat, of a purplish red colour, and the seg- 
ments so divided as well to represent fingers, while 
at the base, a portion remains undivided, forming 
the frond altogether into the shape of the human 
hand. When the sea-weed is old, it is hard and 
tough externally, but within soft and mucilagin- 
ous. The young specimens are thin, and of a 
lighter colour, and they are frequently seen of the 
form represented by our engraving, consisting of 
a central oval piece, surrounded by palm-shaped 
leaflets, and situated on short slender stalks, and 
reminding us, when laid out on paper, of a sprawl- 
ing insect with a small body and large limbs. As 
Sir J. E. Smith observes, this seems the most 
nutritious, and the most agreeable to the palate, 
of any species of sea- weed used in the northern 
hemisphere as food. Sir William Hooker remarks 
of it " On the Scotch coast, it is eaten raw by 
the natives ; and in the county of Caithness, in 
particular, I have seen a number of women and 
children gathering it from the rocks, and devour- 
ing it with great avidity." Both the Scotch and 
Irish also dry it in the sun, and roll it up and use 
it instead of tobacco. Nor is this dulse eaten only 
by the peasants. It is not indeed a general article 
of diet, as it once was, in any part of our kingdom, 
save on those remote shores to which, as yet, 
refinement has not brought new tastes and new 
dishes ; yet many who can afford to procure costly 
food relish it still, perhaps because it brings with 
it some associations of childhood, as some of us 
may now like the blackberries or other wild 
fruits, because they remind us of by-gone times, 
and happy hours in the woodlands. Many, too, 



136 SEA-WEEDS. 

eat this sea-weed before breakfast, because of 
its properties in cleansing the blood : and wisely 
do they thus adopt a plant containing the iodine, 
that powerful remedy in scorbutic affections. In 
Iceland, on the coasts of which island it is strewn 
in profusion, it is used largely as food for cattle, and 
also much eaten by the people; and indeed this 
and a few other sea-weeds were, in earlier times 
(particularly before the introduction of the potato,) 
almost the only vegetable food which the Ice- 
landers could procure. These marine plants were 
eaten either fresh or dried, and were certainly a 
nutritious food, though perhaps palatable only to 
those long used to them. The sea-weeds were at 
that time an article of their inland trade ; but we 
must rejoice with them, that they have now not 
only the potato, but the different varieties of cab- 
bage, even the cauliflower, and several kinds of 
turnip, growing in their gardens ; and though not 
so luxuriant as in our more genial climate, yet 
they add to the few vegetable luxuries which the 
Icelanders can enjoy, and render the dulse a less 
necessary article of diet. The dulse in that island 
is generally cooked; or, if eaten uncooked, it is 
prepared for their meal by long drying in the sun. 
Previously to this, it is usually washed thoroughly 
from all remains of the sea- water ; and during the 
process of drying, a fine white powder, of a 
sweetish taste, accumulates upon it. The plant is 
then packed in casks, and preserved to be eaten 
with fish and butter ; or it is cooked by boiling it 
in milk, mixed with rye flour. The Kamschatdales 
boil this sea-weed, and procure from it a pleasant 
fermented drink. 

This plant, which is the Dulse of the Scotch, 



SEA-WEEDS. 137 

is the Dillesk of the Irish, and the Sol of the 
Icelander. The Norwegians term it Sou soil, or 
sheep's weed, for the sheep are so fond of it that 
they are said to be often lost by having strayed 
to the coast to feed on it at the ebbing of the tide, 
and having rambled too far from the shore, have 
been washed away by the returning waves. The 
Highlanders have a very poetical name for it, for 
their word Duillisg is a compound of duille, a leaf, 
and uisge, water ; literally " the leaf of the water." 
It is used medicinally in the isle of Skye, 
and Neill observes of it, " There is a common 
saying, in Stronsa, that he who eats of the dulse 
of Guiodin, and drinks of the wells of Kildingie, 
will escape all maladies except black death." The 
people of the Isles of the Archipelago boil it in 
ragouts, and consider that it not only renders 
these nutritious, but that it gives them an agree- 
able flavour. Like several other sea-weeds, it has, 
when dried, an odour of violets, and it is said to 
impart this sweet scent to water if placed in it. 
It is the celebrated Saccharine fucus of the Ice- 
landers. It is abundant on our shores at low- 
water mark, and grows especially on the tangle 
stems. Several species of Rhodomenia are found 
on our coast, and one which is frequent on the 
English shores is termed the Ciliated Bhodomenia, 
because it is fringed with fine cilia or hairs all 
round the margin. It is usually more of a crimson 
tint than the dulse, but otherwise much like it. 

The plant called the Pepper Dulse (Laurencia 
pinnatifida], is one of our most common sea- weeds, 
its crowded tufts growing on the sides of the 
rocks, and hanging to them very closely. Several 
fronds spring from the same base, varying in 



138 SEA-WEEDS. 

length from one to fourteen inches, but a common 
specimen would about cover the hand. Some- 
times they hang in crowded clusters in the manner 
called by botanists imbricated, that is, lying over 




each other like the tiles of a house. The branchlets 
are all thickened and rounded at the end. It is a 
thicker and more juicy sea-weed while young than 
most of the red kinds, often iridescent, and very 
brittle. It is in colour of a yellowish or purplish 
red, being of so yellow a tint when growing in 
places exposed to the sun, that one unaccustomed 
to the marine plants, would probably place it with 
the olive series. There is also a variety which is 
quite green, and one which is yellow. This latter 
variety is common on the English coast, and grows 
in dense erect tufts in shallow pools much exposed 
to the light, while the plant in its usual form 



SEA-WEEDS. 139 

prefers a shaded situation, nearer the ebb-tide. 
This is the sea-weed which was sold in Edinburgh 
very generally with the dulse in former days. It 
is still carried about for sale in Inverness as the 
pepper dulse, and much relished in its raw state 
by the Highlanders. Lightfoot says that it was 
formerly eaten as salad. Dr. Johnston observes of 
this, that the custom is not likely to be revived, 
both the taste and odour of the plant being dis- 
agreeable ; to the English generally they are re- 
markably so, though the pungency in the young 
plants is very slight. 

But turning from a sea-weed which is less 
beautiful than useful, we must describe that most 
lovely of all our British marine plants, the Red 
Dock-leaved or Blood-coloured Fucus (Delesseria 
sanguined], a plant which may easily be recognised 
by a familiar description. It is in its most beau- 
tiful state during the summer, and a very common 
marine weed on most of our shores after rough 
weather. It has a stem scarcely an inch long, 
dividing thence into two or three branches about 
the thickness of a crow-quill, which bear a number 
of clear shining pink leaves, each with a vein up 
the middle, and about five or six inches long ; but 
in fine specimens ten inches in length. This 
plant is very lovely when waving its leaves about 
in the water, and if well dried it scarcely loses any 
of its beauty on paper. Like all the more delicate 
kinds of sea- weeds, it should be washed in fresh 
water, and then laid on paper, in a flat dish, in 
water about an inch deep. Care should be taken to 
dispose it in its natural form on the paper, with a 
needle or camel's-hair brush, and to remove any 
sand or other extraneous matter which may 



140 SEA-WEEDS. 

adhere to it. The paper should then be taken 
gently from the dish, and held up that the water 




may drain off. The sea-weed, on its paper, should 
next be laid between two or three folds of linen 
or blotting paper, and this plant, as well as the de- 
licate red and green sea- weeds generally, will by 
its glutinous nature, adhere to the paper, though 
there are some which must be attached by means 
of gum. The coarse olive sea-weeds need only to 
be well washed in fresh water, and dried between 
pieces of cloth or blotting paper. If this Delesseria 
is well pressed, it will lie so closely on the paper 
that its elegant transparent wavy leaves resemble 
a most beautiful painting. Turner justly remarks 
of this species, that in the elegance of its appearance, 



SEA-WEEDS. 141 

and the exquisite colour of its most delicately 
veined leaves, this fucus so much excels all its 
congeners, that it carries away the palm with no 
less justice from the vegetables of the ocean, than 
the rose, the flower of the poets, from its rivals in 
the garden. 

Equally common, or more so than this, is the 
Red Oak-leaved Fucus (Delesseria sinuosa), which 
often clings like some frail red flag around the 
stems of the tangle. It is, like the last-named 
species, a tuft of transparent pink leaves, "but its 
margin is more deeply indented, in some specimens 
so much so as to have great resemblance in shape 
to the leaf of our forest tree. It has, too, around 
its edges a number of small leaflets which suffi- 
ciently distinguish it. It has always a much 
broader leaf than the blood-coloured fucus, and is 
not nearly so brilliant in colour. 

Very frequent on our coasts, also, is the Winged 
Delesseria (Delesseria alata), which has a broad 
frond cut deeply into segments and veined like a 
leaf. This species is transparent and rose-coloured 
or dark crimson ; while the Proliferous Delesseria 
(Delesseria Hypoglossum), which is not uncommon 
on rocks and on the larger sea-weeds, resembles a 
mass of pale thin pink leaves, with smaller leaflets 
growing out of them. The frond or leaf is at first 
entire, several growing from the same base. It is a 
beautiful, clear, rose-coloured sea-weed, but though 
not rare is rather less frequent than either of the 
other species mentioned. 

A very pretty common little marine plant, and 
one easy of description, is the opuntia-like Cate- 
nella ( Catenella opuntia). Every one knows that 



142 SEA-WEEDS. 

succulent plant called the prickly pear or opuntia, 
which swells out into oval leaflets, contracting at 
each end. This is just the shape of our only 
species of catenella, which is jointed so as to 
remind one of a string of beads. It is to be found 
on most of our rocky shores, growing in small 
creeping tufts, densely matted and entangled, 
scarcely ari inch high, but the frond branched with 
erect branches. Its hue is not beautiful, as it is 
of a dull purple, almost approaching in some indi- 
viduals to black, but it is somewhat transparent ; 
it turns black in drying. 

Another sea-weed which soon darkens when 
removed from its native waters, and becomes so 
black as to resemble a dried plant of the olive- 
coloured fuci, is that frequent plant the much 
branched Forked Furcellaria (Furcellaria fasti- 
giata], which grows on rocks in the sea, and is 
scattered most profusely after a storm on the 
shore. It is of a pale pinkish purple, or purplish 
brown colour, rather rigid, and becoming quite 
crisp as it dries. It is well termed forked, as it 
branches off in a number of divisions, each like a 
two-pronged fork. During summer it is half 
covered with a sand-coloured crust, which is in 
fact a zoophyte, the crust being the home of many 
minute polypes. 

Our tangled plants are often very interesting to 
the marine botanist, on account of the number of 
delicate sea-weeds which grow on them. Some 
grow only on their stems, and many which are 
sometimes attached to other algae are often found 
especially crowding on this. This is the case with 
that pretty, delicate, rose-coloured plant, the Dotted 



SEA-WEEDS. 



143 



Nitophyllum (Nitophyllum punctatum) , which is so 
called from the little seed spots scattered over its 




transparent frond. This plant is exceedingly thin 
and clear, and when dried adheres well to the 
paper. It is not uncommon, though less frequent 
than the Lacerated Nitophyllum (Nitopfiyllum 
laceratum], which adheres so closely to the rocks 
by its waved edges, that its delicate thin fronds 
can scarcely ever be obtained in a perfect state. 
It clings also to the fingers, so that the botanist 
must manage it with skill, or he will tear it. The 
margin of this species is sometimes delicately 
fringed, and the plant is of a pinkish or brownish 
red. Every plant indeed of the genus Nitophyl- 
lum, is remarkably fragile, even among our red 
sea-weeds, and Dr. Greville named this group 



144 SEA-WEEDS. 

from two Greek words, signifying a bright or 
shining leaf, as most of the species seem, when 
dried, as if varnished. 

It is in summer and autumn that we find the 
greater number of our sea-weeds, but the Carra- 
geen moss hangs about our rocks, or grows in 
handsome tufts on the tangle, very early in the 




year; and there is no part of our shores where 
rocks are to be found on which it is uncommon. 
Often when a walk on the beach is scarcely 
possible because of the raging winds, and the 



to 



SEA-WEEDS. 145 

waves now dash forward, and then with deeper 
sound, are drawn back again over the stones, 
awakening an emotion almost akin to awe as we 
listen to their wild music ; often will they at such 
times bring up the fresh tufts of this plant, con- 
sisting of many fronds like that described by our 
engraving, all growing from one root. This 
carrageen moss is a tough leathery sea-weed, 
generally of a purplish brown colour, often tinged 
with red, and having, when in fructification, 
roundish capsules imbedded in the frond, and 
forming on one side small hollows, and on the 
opposite surface corresponding prominences. The 
segments into which this frond is divided are often 
so twisted as to make the name of the sea- weed, 
the curled chondrus, very suitable, but it is com- 
monly called Carrageen, or Irish moss, and is sold 
by the druggists under that name. Plentiful as 
this plant is on our shores, and nutritious as are 
its qualities, it is to be regretted that it is not 
more generally used by the poor as food. It is 
indeed often boiled into a jelly, and, made palatable 
by the addition of wine or lemon juice, is given to 
invalids and considered a good remedy for coughs 
and affections of the chest. But it is so gelatinous 
in its nature, that it serves admirably to thicken 
soup ; and a small portion of meat, accompanied 
by a good quantity of the carrageen moss, well 
boiled, would furnish a wholesome meal to many 
a poor family, who, at the same expense, could 
procure only a much less nourishing diet. The 
confectioner does not disdain to use it to thicken 
his blanc-mange, as well as some other dishes. It 
is also sometimes converted into size for the use of 



146 SEA-WEEDS. 

the house-painter, and Dawson Turner availed 
himself of its glutinous nature to form a glue by 
which he pasted on paper such sea-weeds as would 
not adhere to the papers on which he arranged 
them. 

Dr. Greville calls this plant the Proteus of the 
marine algse, for it varies so much according to 
its situation and the measure of light which reaches 
it, that the young botanist finds it almost im- 
possible to determine to which of the described 
varieties an individual plant belongs. The width 
of the frond is so different ; sometimes it is an inch 
across its widest part, sometimes not a twelfth 
part of that width. Then it divides itself into such 
various shapes ; sometimes the segments at the edges 
being round, in others acute or jagged ; or forming 
long slender points ; and if this sea- weed grows in 
a spot where it is exposed to the influence of fresh 
water, it alters so much, that an ordinary observer 
of marine plants would think it belonged to a 
different genus. Then its colour is variable. When 
growing in a shady pool it is iridescent ; when it 
has been lying in the sun it is bleached perfectly 
white, while it may be seen in all the intermediate 
tints between white and dark purple, often tinged, 
too, with green. Nor is it even constant in its 
place of growth ; for on the very shore where in 
one spring it lies in great profusion, it is not 
unlikely that in the following year a few speci- 
mens only will be found. 

Another common species, which is, equally with 
this, termed Carrageen Moss, and which exactly 
resembles it in its nature and properties, is the 
Chondrus mamillosus. This grows on rocks and 



SEA-WEEDS. 147 

stones in the sea, and is finest during the winter 
months. It is generally of a lighter colour than 
the former plant, and the segments of the frond 
are not flat, but channelled. The most obvious 
distinction from the curled crispus, however, is 
its producing on the surface of the broader seg- 
ments little capsules on short stalks, each about as 
large as a turnip seed, which contain a mass of 
red seeds. It is very variable in size and shape. 
It is of an East Indian species of this genus that 
the Chinese birds make those nests so much valued 
in the East, and which being sold at so high a 
price, are often procured at the hazard of life from 
some of the sea-caves. 

In the winter time, too, there is a common 




sea-weed on the English shore, called the Red 

Phyllophora (Phyllophora rubens), with a fine but 

L 2 



148 SEA-WEEDS. 

rather dull red tint, which is pale rose-coloured in 
the young shoots. Its frond is wedge-shaped, with 
a midrib or vein sometimes plainly marked; at 
others not visible. Towards the end of this frond 
arises one or more of the same shape, growing out 
of it as it were, and then from that proceed others, 
until the plant is sometimes five or six inches long. 
This is a very peculiar mode of growth ; and the 
sea-weed can scarcely be mistaken if compared 
with this description. 

There is a very lovely little sea-weed called the 
Feathery Ptilota (Ptilota plumosa), common on 
our shores in summer and autumn, and found 
more generally on the stem of the tangle than 
elsewhere. We shall only describe it as resem- 
bling a pink or dark purplish feather, having its 
branches all feathered with little rays or pinnge, 
seated opposite to each other on the main stem, 
just like the red plume of a robin, only that it 
'is more flexible. Dr. Greville remarks of this 
plant, " The finest specimens I have ever seen 
were communicated to me from the Orkney 
Islands. One of these, now lying before me, is a 
foot in length, and completely covers a large folio 
sheet of paper; many of the long branches lying 
over each other/' When left to dry on the shore 
the plant turns of a violet-colour, then to brick- 
red, and lastly, changes to green. 

That very abundant plant of our sea -side, the 
Scarlet Dasya (Dasya coccinea), will be sufficiently 
described by the engraving ; its stems vary from 
two to six inches in height, and are rough, with 
minute hair-like fibres, and generally of a deeper 
red than the branches. It is of a dull pink colour 
in the water, but on exposure to the sun, becomes 



SEA-WEEDS. 



149 




of a rich scarlet-crimson. It is not common on 
the Scottish shores. 

One of the more thick and substantial of our 
red sea-weeds, and one which is so constant in its 
general appearance as to be of easy recognition, is 
the Esculent Iridaea (Iridcea edulis), which, as its 
name imports, has often been used as a vegetable 
for the table. It is too tough to jbe a good food if 
eaten raw ; and indeed when cooled, is inferior to 
the true dulse, though it is often called dulse in the 
south-west of England. It is there eaten by the 
fishermen; and after having been pinched with 
hot irons, it is said to have the flavour of roasted 
oysters. It is not one of the sea-weeds in which 
the Scottish peasantry take much delight, yet it 



150 SEA -WEEDS. 

is sometimes roasted by them in the frying-pan 
and eaten. Dr. Greville thinks that its reputa- 
tion as an article of food, has arisen from its 
having been very generally mistaken for the true 
dulse, the Rhodomenia palmata. It is indeed much 
like that plant in colour, being of a deep blood-red, 
which as it grows older, changes to green or dingy 
white. It often becomes much darker in drying. 
It is a fleshy thick leaf, without any veins, flat, 
and the upper part somewhat egg-shaped, but 
narrowing off into a slender stem at the base. It 
is seldom in a whole state when the waves dash it 
on the shore, but is often split to the very base 
into several pieces, for its succulence renders it 
less flexible than many sea-weeds, and less able 
to resist the force of the waves. It is a favourite 
food, too, of the crabs and other living creatures of 
the deep ; so that its edges are often bitten, and 
large holes made in its frond by the depredations 
which they have committed; and when full of 
water, it bends by its own weight. 

This sea- weed grows on rocks in the sea, usually 
near low-water mark, and is one of our autumnal 
plants. It is frequent on our southern coasts, 
and also on the western coast of Scotland, but is 
less general than the true dulse. It is very pretty 
when young, as the fronds grow in tufts. When 
laid to macerate in water, it tinges the liquid with 
a fine purple tint ; and an excellent lake colour 
has been procured from an infusion of the plant 
assisted by alum. 

That firm, almost horny, sea-weed, the Horny 
Gelidium (Gelidium corneum), of a dark red or 
even blackish-purple colour, is common on most 
rocky coasts of Great Britain and Ireland, growing 



SEA-WEEDS. 



151 



on rocks in the sea, usually at the margin of those 
pools and hollows which are always filled with 
water by each returning tide. Equally common 
too is the Red Ceramium (Ceramium rubrum), 
with its pale pink fronds, with stems and branches 
about as thick as coarse threads. But we must 
pass it by as difficult of description, and proceed 




to another frequent plant of the genus, which will 
be recognised by the accompanying illustration. 
This is the Ciliated Ceramium ( Ceramium cilia- 



152 SEA-WEEDS. 

turn], a plant common on our rocky shores, and 
often attached to corallines. It generally grows 
in tufts about two inches long, sometimes of bright 
red, but at others more purplish. It is stiff and 
rigid, and has a singular structure, Most persons 
know those common plants of our moist lands, 
the Equisetums or Horse-tails. The rigid branch- 
lets of these weeds break off at intervals where 
they are jointed ; and this sea-weed snaps in pieces 
just in the same way at the joints ; and a circle of 
small clear spines surrounds each joint, rendering 
the plant very beautiful. 

A genus of our marine plants has been named 
Griffithsia, by Professor Agardh, in honour of 
Mrs. Griffiths of Torquay, whose investigations on 
British sea-weeds have contributed very largely 
to all that is now known respecting them. The 
coralline-like Griffithsia (Griffithsia corallina}^ is 
much like a coralline in its form, as the joints in 
the main stem are swollen, so as to give them a 
beaded appearance. It is of a bright pink colour, 
darker at the joints, and it stains the paper red on 
which it is placed. This plant is common on the 
southern shores of England, but becomes more 
rare as we advance northward. It is not so 
general as the bristly species (Griffithsia setacea), 
which is a rigid hard sea- weed of a rich crimson, 
changing to a dull orange colour. If placed in 
fresh water, this plant loses all its firmness, be- 
comes flaccid, and turns to a bright orange. This, 
however, is not the only change which it under- 
goes. When placed in fresh water for a few 
seconds, and then taken from it, it gives out a 
crackling or crepitating noise, which Dr. Drum- 
mond, who first discovered this peculiarity, de- 



SEA-WEEDS. 153 

scribes as like the sound caused by throwing fine 
salt into the fire. Besides this, when in fructifica- 
tion, the plant projects minute globules of water, 
or some fluid, to the distance of several inches. 
This phenomenon may be seen several times in 
the same specimen, by alternately putting it into 
the liquid, and removing it ; but as might be ex- 
pected, the crackling noise is less audible the 
oftener the experiment is repeated. There are 
now known thirty species of the GrifBthsia; one 
only belongs to tropical countries. Some very 
lovely kinds are found in the Mediterranean Sea 
and Australia, and several in the waters of the 
Cape of Good Hope and Western Africa. They 
are all, more or less, injured by being placed in 
fresh water, or even exposed to air; and when 
kept for a whole day in salt water, their colouring 
matter will be ejected with violence. Their 
favourite haunts are the perpendicular sides of 
pools, where they are well shaded by the long 
frond of the notched olive-green fucus, or the 
strap-shaped Himanthalia, which often wave above 
these and a number of other beautiful and delicate 
marine plants. One very interesting fact is noticed 
in one species, which grows on most of the rocky 
shores of the Atlantic, from high northern lati- 
tudes down to the tropical regions. When viewed 
beneath the microscope, its blackish purple tufts 
display strings of small pear-like substances, most 
beautifully and symmetrically disposed, each 
marked with a white cross, surrounded by a rich 
red colour. And so all nature has its hidden 
wonders its beauties revealed alone to the earnest 
inquirer, as if to bid us search more deeply into 
the works of God, and to come with humility 



154 SEA- WEEDS. 

even to the lowliest weed of the rock, to ask a 
lesson of his skill and care. 

The cause of the peculiar startings in the bristly 
GrifBthsia, are explained by Dr. Drummond. 
The joints of the sea-weed are full of a coloured 
fluid, and while in its natural condition, the 
partitions between the joints remain perfect ; but 
no sooner does it come in contact with the fresh 
water, than these partitions burst, and the con- 
tents of one joint is exploded into the next ; while 
at the same time the colouring matter loses its 
usual tint, and curdles into grains. From the 
force with which the fluids issue through the 
partitions in the joints, the sides also of some of 
them become rent, and then at every new starting 
a quantity of colouring matter rushes from these 
rents into the water. " The latter explosions/' 
observes Dr. Drummond, "present under a com- 
mon magnifier, an extremely interesting appear- 
ance. They are instantaneous ; and when the 
projected fluid has attained its extreme distance, 
the colouring matter suddenly settles in a crowd 
of dark grains, so as to give not an unlively idea 
of a bomb-shell in the act of bursting. Sometimes 
several of these occur in rapid succession, and 
again half a minute or more intervenes between 
them." It is most interesting to watch this pro- 
cess, which may be observed, in any fine specimen 
of the plant, with the naked eye or with a com- 
mon magnifying glass. Dr. Drummond observed 
a similar phenomenon in fresh specimens of the 
Dotted Nitophyllum. 

Our engraving represents the coralline-like 
Griffithsia (Griffithsia, corallina), a common sea- 
weed of a bright pink colour, the swollen joints of 



SEA-WEEDS. 155 

which are of so peculiar an appearance, that it 
may be easily recognised. It much resembles the 
common corallines of our shore. We often find 




this plant of a much paler colour, or sometimes 
tinted with green hue, by exposure to the sun. 

Several of the large genus Polysiphonia, are 
among the commonest plants of the sea-side. One 
especially is known to every observer of marine 
productions, by its frequency as a parasitic weed, 
on the stems of the large knobbed fucus. This is 
the Fastigiate species (Polysiphonia fastigiata), 
which forms thick bushy tufts, of dark rigid hair- 
like filaments, of a purplish-brown tint. In drying, 
the plant becomes black, and gives this sea-weed 



156 SEA-WEEDS. 

a remarkable appearance. In preserving speci- 
mens of the fucus, care should be taken to procure 
one on which this parasite exists, as it is almost 
peculiar to the knobbed fucus, and so frequent 
as to seem almost to belong to it. 

There is very great beauty in some of these 
Polysiphoneae, with their red or dark purple tufts 
of filaments. They were named "many siphoned," 
in reference to the numerous little canals by 
which the coloured matter is carried from one end 
to the other of the plant; and this colouring 
matter seems greatly affected by circumstances. 
When growing, these plants are brown, but when 
plunged in fresh water they become purple or 
pink. Several of the species are common, but all 
too much alike to admit of popular description. 
The Bushy Polysiphonia (Polysiphonia fucoides) 
is a frequent plant on rocks, and on other sea- 
weeds. It is from four to six inches long. The 
main stalk, which is about as thick as a coarse 
thread, is very rigid and dark at the lower part, 
and very bushy with numerous branches above. 
The superior branches are of a dull reddish-brown, 
and rather flaccid. Dr. Johnston observes of this 
species, that though subject to some variety, the 
practical botanist recognises it by the dark dull 
colour of its rigid stalk, its elongate flattened 
form, and by the bushiness of its superior branches. 

Another plant of this genus, the Lobster-horn 
species (Potysvpkomq elongata], is a firm, though 
slender sea-weed, with a main stem as thick as 
twine, and branches which somewhat resemble 
the horn of the shell-fish from whence it has its 
name. It is slightly marked with rings on its 
stem and branches. It is very common on rocks, 



SEA-WEEDS. 



157 



and so also are several other species. One of 
them, the dark Polysiphonia, sometimes covers 




rocks by the sea-shore with dense patches, and 
varies in height from a few inches even to two or 
three feet. 

A very common production of our shores, the 
strong-jointed Coralline (Corallina officinalis], is 
now placed, with the other species of the genus, 



158 



SEA-WEEDS. 



among the red series of sea- weeds. Our figure 
represents this plant, which is covered with a cre- 
taceous substance, so as 
to look more like some of 
our zoophytes, as the sea- 
fans and other corals. It 
is only of late years that 
this production has been 
well understood to belong 
to the vegetable kingdom. 
Ellis ascertained, that like 
the corals it effervesced if 
vinegar was poured upon 
it; but the entire absence 
of polypes, or of any indi- 
cation of animal life; and 
the fact of its yielding 
sporules, contained in re- 
ceptacles like those of the 
red sea- weeds, mark its 
vegetable nature. We find 
it sometimes covering the base or sides of rocky 
pools with its pale lilac, or pink, or ash-coloured 
sprays ; or its tufts are blown about by the winds 
on the shore till they lodge themselves in some 
nook, and then bleach to an ivory whiteness. If 
the plant is immersed in fresh water, it imme- 
diately becomes of a pink or bright orange-colour. 
There are several other species of the jointed 
corallines on our shores, but they are at present 
imperfectly defined, and the one here named is the 
most general. 

Many of our rocks are quite green with some of 
the Confervas tribe, which grow on them in such 
profusion as to render them so slippery that we 




SEA-WEEDS. 159 

fear to set our foot on their surface. Everywhere 
we find stones by the sea, as well as the stems of 
other algae, clothed with the long filaments of the 
green rock conferva, sometimes called the Arctic 
Conferva (Conferva rupestris), and with the paler 
green species (Conferva latevirens), with bushy 




tufts of a fine yellowish green colour, which, as 
they dry, become of a grey green, and are without 
any gloss. During a greater part of the year these 
plants are found in great abundance. The writer 
once heard a friend playfully describe some stones 
which were covered with them, as the "green- 
haired rocks," and their fibres might well be com- 
pared to tufts of hair, for multitude. When we 
gather a tuft, these fibres all hang drooping toge- 
ther, but a very small portion is sufficient for a 
dried specimen; as, when carefully preserved, the 
slender threads of a small tuft may be easily laid 
out so as to cover a large piece of paper like a 



160 SEA-WEEDS. 

miniature green tree. They will not, however, 
usually adhere to paper without the aid of gum. 

These plants belong to the group of grass-green 
sea-weeds, the chlorosperms of the marine botanist. 
They are found on the shore near high- water 
mark, and in the shallow pools into which the 
rising tide daily pours its liquid nutriment. They 
are the sea-weeds which have the simplest struc- 
ture, and are the least varied in species on various 
shores ; and they form the chief marine vegetation 
of the polar seas. Some of the green sea-weeds 
are known to all who have observed the marine 
plants on our rocky shores. 

The Ulvse, or Lavers, are flat green leaves, very 
transparent, and easily torn, and when laid on 
paper are scarcely thicker than gold-beater's skin. 
The broad green Laver (Ulva latissima], is of a 
bright, herbaceous tint, becoming tinged with 
brown as it decays. It has a broad, ovate, plaited, 
glossy leaf, and as it waves up and down in the 
water is extremely elegant. It is sometimes 
called green sloke, green laver, or oyster green. 
Gerarde tells us whence it received its latter 
name ; he says : " It is very well known even to 
the poore oister women, who carry oisters to sell 
up and down, who are greatly desirous of the said 
mosse for the decking and beautifying of their 
oisters to make them sell the better.' 5 These 
leaves keep their green tint so well, that they 
would indeed be highly ornamental to a fish- 
basket, only that their thin texture prevents their 
retaining the leaflike form. 

This laver is often brought to table as a stewed 
sea-weed. Sir J. E. Smith remarks of it, that 
within a few years past it has been " introduced 



SEA- WEEDS. 161 

to fashionable tables, being stewed and seasoned 
with lemon-juice, which lessens its saltish flavour 
and sea- weed scent ; nor is this dish unpleasant, 
after a short trial, to most palates. We suspect 
it to have been originally contrived with a medical 
intention, for the benefit of scrofulous patients: 
how numerous, alas ! in the gay circles of the 
opulent and great." This plant is not, however, 
the true laver. 

Tender and delicate as is the frond of the broad 
green laver, the species termed the Lettuce Laver 
( Ulva lactuca) is still more so. This is a smaller 
plant, and a less common one, though found on 
rocks, stones, and corallines, during May and 
June, on many parts of our coast. It is rarely 
six inches long, while the former species varies 
from that length even to eighteen inches. It is 
also lacerated, more or less, and at length irregu- 
larly cleft down to the base, and the jagged and 
cut appearance which it presents, somewhat similar 
to endive, originated its name of lettuce laver, 
though the broad green laver is really more like 
a lettuce leaf. None of the Ulvse are more beau- 
tiful when displayed on paper than this species. 

The species called ribbon-green Laver (Ulva 
Linza] has a long narrow frond like a slender 
leaf, about an inch, or an inch and a half in width, 
which is beautifully curled and waved. It be- 
comes paler as it grows older, unless growing on 
a spot well shaded from sunshine; but the dried 
specimen long retains its grass-like tint. 

Of the same clear green colour as the Ulvae, 
are the Enteromorphae, some of which, with their 
long slender grass-green leaves, wave about like 
so many shreds of bright ribbons, filling the clear 



162 SEA- WEEDS. 

pools, or hanging, with thousands of fronds, over 
the smooth rocks. One very common kind is the 
compressed Enteromorpha (Enteromorpha com- 
pressa], and it abounds on the shores of almost 
every land from the Arctic to the Antarctic 
Ocean. Useless as it is to us, except as its beauty 
may give us pleasant thoughts as we pause to look 
upon it, yet it is a valuable article of food to the 
poor natives of the Sandwich Isles, whose rugged 
rocks it covers with a verdant vegetation. Its 
fronds are from six to twelve inches long, from 
the fineness of a hair to half an inch in width. 
At first, the fronds seem but threads, but as it 
grows in deeper water they grow long and broad, 
and when the plant is fully grown, the frond is 
divided nearly to the root into many long branches, 
which produce others, all narrow at the base, and 
widened at the extremities. They are tubular, 
though more or less compressed. 

The intestine-like Entero- 
morpha (Enteromorpha intes- 
tinalis) is equally common, 
not only on our sea-shores, 
but in brackish and fresh- 
water ditches, and in summer 
time its fronds are often two 
feet or more long, and some- 
times two or three inches in 
diameter. It is tubular also, 
and inflated, and often waved 
/ ' IKfll I an( ^ wr i n kled, and is of thin 
f Wl | |f / texture and pale yellow-green 
^ colour, fading at last to white, 

though when very young its 
tint is bright as the meadow- 




SEA-WEEDS. 163 

grass. This species is not branched, and may, by 
this circumstance, be distinguished from the com- 
pressed kind. 

These are some of the beautiful grassy weeds, 
which render a walk by the sea at low tide so 
interesting to all who observe Nature, not alone 
in its vast magnificence of sea and sky, but in 
minute details, its rocky fringes of sea-plants, or 
its delicate glass-like shells, handfuls of which 
come up when we put our hands into the salt- 
water pools. On a calm summer evening it is 
delightful to linger among the smooth boulders, or 
rugged rocks, looking now at the minute beauties 
of the water, and then at their wide expanse, 
bounded by the rich horizon of a glowing sunset. 
Calder Campbell has well described such a scene : 

" The tide is out, and every wave that breaks 
Bids a brief farewell to the shelving shore ; 
Leaving pink weeds, white shells, and dripping ooze, 
In token that it shall return again ! 

Hocks, rough with limpets and brown tangle weeds, 
Jut here and there : whilst on the steady cliff, 
(Half hid in water, and half robed in weeds,) 
Its cable sure the crafty mussel spins, 
Lashing itself for safety to the rock. 

White are the sands before me ; here and there 
Speckled with slaky spots of green, that tell 
Where 'neath their emerald fringes cockles hide : 
Strange shells, the marvels of old Ocean's bed, 
Are strew'd around : Have they been always here, 
Or come they hither from far distant shores, 
Unwilling captives of careering waves?" 

But, beautiful as the green lavers, and resem- 
bling them in form and structure, is that lovely 
plaited reddish purple-coloured leaf, the Porphyra, 
or true laver (Porphyra laciniatd). A fragile thing 

M2 



164 SEA- WEEDS. 

it seems, as it waves hither and thither in the 
waters, or when we gather it thence, as it clings 
around our fingers, as if their smallest movement 
would rend it. Nor is it less beautiful when care- 
fully preserved on paper ; it often becomes of the 
most delicate amethyst tint, rivalling the pride of 
the marine botanist, the red Delesseria, in rich- 
ness of hue. Any one may recognise this plant 
by a familiar description ; and from spring to 
autumn it is a common sea-weed of most of our 
rocky shores. Its thin leaves grow together in 
numbers ; they are from three to eight inches 
long, very narrow just at the base, but widening 
immediately, and deeply and irregularly cut and 
waved, besides being very often torn into holes by 
coming in contact with some rough object, or by 
being eaten by shell-fish. The smooth glossy 
plants of this genus received their name from the 
Greek term for a purple colour, and all the species 
are, more or less, of this tint when in a perfect 
state, though when old they become tinged with 
green, and when very young they are sometimes 
of an olive hue, but still of the same transparent 
substance. 

A very useful plant is this purple laver, good 
enough in flavour to be esteemed by the epicure 
a delicious dish, and valued often by the poor as 
a vegetable delicacy. It is more eaten in Scot- 
land than in England, and on the coasts of the 
Western Islands, where it is abundant, large 
quantities are gathered for food. The Highlanders 
call it sloke kale, and also by the appropriate 
name of purple-green. They pound it and stew 
it in water into a kind of marine sauce ; it is after- 
wards made into a dish with pepper, with vine- 



SEA-WEEDS. 165 

gar and butter, or it is eaten stewed with onions. 
In England it is usually pickled with salt in jars, 
and when prepared for the table is stewed, and oil 
and lemon-juice added to it. Sometimes this 
pretty sea-weed is washed up by the waves cling- 
ing round the stems of other alga3 ; and at other 
times it hangs about the piles of wood which sup- 
port our piers. 

The Common Porphyra (Porphyra vulgaris) is 
not so general a sea-weed on all the shores of our 
sea-girt isle, but is very abundant on Scottish 
coasts. It is a large plant, its fronds being com- 
monly one or two feet in length, and two or three 
inches wide ; and Dr. Greville mentions having 
seen one plant which measured no less than three 
feet and a half. The margin is much less waved 
than in the former kind, so that the frond seems 
almost flat, and the colour is more brilliant, being, 
when dried, of a rich purple. It is very thin, but 
not nearly so easily torn as the purple laver. A 
very slender species of this genus, too, covers 
some few rocks on our shores. This is the narrow 
Porphyra (Porphyra linear is), which, though not a 
quarter of an inch wide, and usually but three or 
four inches long, is of a beautiful tint. Dr. 
Greville remarks of it, that it is a singularly neat 
little plant, invariably constant in its form, and 
adds, that covering the rocks beneath Peakhead, 
near Sidmouth, in great abundance, it rendered 
them purple by its delicate fronds. 

The Ulvse, as well as the different species of 
Enteromorpha, and of Porphyra, are found on the 
shores of every land save those bound up in the 
regions of perpetual ice and snow. They give 
their green fringes to the rocky shores of the 



166 SEA- WEEDS. 

Arctic Seas, and make many a little emerald 
island in the midst of the waters of tropical climes. 
One singular species of laver (Ulva thermatis), 
flourishes in the hot-springs of Gastein, where the 
water is at the temperature of 117 of Fahrenheit ; 
while the thin gelatinous leaf of the Crisp Ulva 
( Ulva crispa), growing in our land on moist ground, 
and covering the old thatched roof of the cottage 
with its wrinkled frond, was the last land plant 
gathered during the Antarctic Expedition, at 
Cockburn Island, 64 south lat, beyond which 
the land seems destitute of even the slightest 
vegetation. 

There are large genera of the Chlorosperms 
which must be left unnoticed here ; and although 
several contain common sea-weeds, yet they are 
not so likely to be observed by the rambler on the 
shores who may not have studied marine plants, 
nor are they easily described in familiar language. 
One beautiful and elegant green sea- weed, how- 
ever, the ornament of our rocky pools, must not 
be omitted. That graceful little plant, so like a 
bunch of soft green feathers, is the feathery Bry- 
opsis (Bryopsis plumosa) ; nor is it an unfrequent 
ornament of our sea-rocks and stones. It is usually 
two or three inches in length, with a thread-like 
stem, and generally without branches at the lower 
part. The branches then spread off, and are set 
with one or two series of the little feathers. The 
young plants, especially, resemble them. The 
plant is of a bright green, very tender and deli- 
cate, and when laid out on paper, to which it 
adheres very closely, it looks as if it had been 
covered with varnish, and the stalks become clear 
and colourless in drying. Its root consists of a. 



SEA-WEEDS 16T 

few threads, and its whole appearance well accords 
with the generic name, which is derived from two 




Greek words, expressive of the resemblance of the 
plants to some species of feather moss. Dr. 
Greville names a beautiful exotic species, the 
Bryopsis rosea, which he says is the loveliest 
plant of the genus, and which is twelve inches 
long, and was compared by Bory de St. Vincent 
to an Italian poplar in miniature. It is a native 
of the Falkland Islands. 




CHAPTER III. 

SHELLS AND .MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

" Even as the rainbow-tinted shell which lies 
Miles deep at bottom of the sea, hath all 
Colours of skies, and flowers, and gems, and plumes." 

IT is an interesting question, and one which 
yet is not fully answered, how far living creatures 
can exist below the surface of the deep. The 
wondrous architects of the coral reef cease to live 
at 100 feet below that surface, and so vast a 
number of shell-fish and crustaceous animals, of 
corallines and other zoophytes, dwell within a few 
yards of it, that the statement seems probable, 
that below the depth of a few hundred feet life 
ceases in the ocean, from the want of air and light, 
and from the pressure of the waters. 

Yet the words of the poet are true enough. 
Miles deep at bottom of the sea, must lie the 
structures of myriads of once living animals ; and 
shells of graceful form and glowing colours add to 
the constantly accumulating substance at the base 
of the ocean. Many are strewed upon our sandy 
shores, and so beautiful are they, that we wish, in 
our summer rambles, that the waves would bring 
them up to us in greater numbers, or that we 
could look down on a clear day into those recesses 
where 

" Buoyant shells, 

On stonnless voyages, in fleets and single, 
Wherry their tiny mariners." 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 169 

We gather up those which we find, and 
looking at their structure would fain know some- 
thing of the inmate of such a dwelling. All 
nature proclaims the goodness of God. We hear 
that the bird which wings its way over our heads 
has a song of joy ; the bee hums delightedly by 
us ; and the little shrimp which darts in the clear 
pool seems full of merriment. Was the inmate 
of the shell less cared for by its Maker ? No doubt 
the little builder had some sense of joy, as he 
framed from his own substance the house which 
excites our admiration. Doubtless his existence, 
short and sluggish as it was, had its own con- 
sciousness of pleasure ; and obscure as is his history, 
and little calculated as such a creature might seem 
to perform an important part in the economy of 
creation, yet we know that he had work to do, 
not only for the living creatures of the sea, but 
for the well-being of man himself. 

Those living mollusks which glide along in such 
multitudes in the waters, are among the appointed 
messengers of death to the smaller animals, whose 
numbers would else exceed their destined limits ; 
they, like other inhabitants of sea and earth, are 
the equalisers of life and death. In their turn 
they serve as food for the rich man, and are often 
the only meal of the peasant, or of the savage. 
The land bird stays his song, as he descends to 
pick up the limpet from the rock ; and the sea 
bird, white as the foam over which he skims, dips 
among the shell fish for his food ; while to fishes 
they furnish the daily meal. Thus much is evident 
to any observing person ; but science has revealed 
to us other important uses of shells. Those shells 
are made of carbonate of lime, which, by some 



170 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

mysterious process, the mollusk derived from the 
materials forming his food: materials which in 
themselves possess scarcely any portion of this 
substance, and yet which, when mingled with 
animal matter, serve to compose the calcareous 
habitation : and those towering chalk cliffs on which 
the short grass is now growing, or that long stra- 
tum of limestone, extending for miles away, is 
formed almost entirely of shells mingled with the 
skeletons of zoophytes and sea urchins, and other 
marine animals. The block of marble, hard as it 
seems, reveals, by the aid of a microscope, masses 
of shells, some of them perfect and unbroken, and 
rivalling in symmetry the loveliest shell in the 
cabinet of the collectors : while the myriads of 
shells lying in crushed heaps among the mountains, 
are hourly undergoing those processes by which 
they shall, after the lapse of ages, form the com- 
ponent parts of the gem to deck the coronal of 
princes, or the marble statue to be reared to the 
memory of worth or genius. Fossil shells were 
elegantly termed by Bergman the " Medals of 
Creation." The geologist reads in the masses of 
species of shells now extinct, histories of by-gone 
times and of earth's changes ; and distinctly 
deciphers traces of revolutions, of which, but for 
their aid, we should know nothing. Fossil shells 
are among the most valuable records of the earth 
on which we live. 

Though the study of the shells of land or sea is 
important to science, vet Conchology is much less 
popular than most 01 the other departments of 
Natural History. It may be that it is owing to 
the costliness of the pursuit. Foreign shells are 
expensive, and even a good collection of native 



LLfi AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 171 

sin -Us is riot to be procured without considerable 
trouUe, as there are many parts of the coast on 
which few marine shells can be gathered. They 
are not like the wild-flowers, which grace every 
way-side ; or the song-birds of the woodlands; or 
th<; insects of our summer pools ; and comparatively 
few are among the common things of earth. But 
perhaps the study of conchology has been in 
former times rendered uninteresting by the neglect 
of the animal inhabiting the shell. The collector 
had long prided himself on the beauty of the rare 
shells brought from distant seas, or on some well 
arranged cabinet of native species. He could des- 
cant on their rarity and beauty of form, and tell 
their names and classification ; but he had nothing 
to relate of the animal within. Until the labours 
of recent naturalists, scarcely anything was known 
respecting the structure or habits of the shell-fish ; 
and even yet, the details which can be given of 
them an- very few, not only from the difficulty of 
making observations, but from their having less 
activity and fewer modes of life than most living 
creatures with which we are familiar. Nor are 
they so easy of description as are most other 
natural objects; and the terms of science, often 
unpleasing and perplexing to all but the student, 
are almost necessary here, if we would convey 
a good idea in writing, either of the animal or its 
dwelling-place. And yet those who do examine 
the contents of the shell find matter of deep 
interest, and now that many are engaged in this 
pursuit, and monographs with beautifully coloured 
plates are publishing on different tribes of the 
molluscous animals, we shall gradually learn more 
of their nature and history. 



172 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS." 

. Most of the common shell -fish are of a greyish 
or brownish white, or of a straw colour, sometimes 
clouded with dark spots. Yet some of them ex- 
hibit great beauty of tint, in which every shade of 
red, and orange, and yellow, and blue, may be seen. 
A writer in Loudon's Magazine of Natural History 
says of our native Cowry (Cyprceaeuropcea), that 
it is a most beautiful creature viewed from beneath, 
with colours unrivalled among the order to which 
it belongs. " The proboscis is dark vermillion ; 
the tentacles yellowish red, spotted with yellow ; 
the upper part of the foot streaked longitudinally 
with yellow and brown, and the mantle greenish 
brown, edged with brownish red ; but notwith- 
standing, the shell is of a dull uniform white/' 

This writer tells us, too, of other shell-fish, which 
have fins or lateral expansions elegantly speckled 
with bright yellow, and the fleshy parts of the. 
body marked with pink colour : while another is 
dotted over with milk-white spots, and others are 
mottled with black and white. Then the part 
called the foot of the mollusk is, in some tropical 
species, of blackish red ; in some, green ; in others 
black ; in some, deep red, with faint designs resem- 
bling those of the shell ; and in others it is bright 
yellow and deep brown. The inmate of the 
beautifully marbled harp shell, he says, " glories 
in a rich vermillion-red skin." This writer also 
quotes a passage from a paper of Broderip in the 
Zoological Journal. ' " In the Mauritius," writes 
this gentleman, "it is the amusement of the place 
to watch over the trim apparatus of lines, hung 
over some sand-bank to tempt the various species 
of Oliva which there abound, or to wait for the 
more rare approach of the harp shell, till the 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 173 

rich hues of its inhabitant are seen glowing through 
the clear blue water in the rays of a tropical rising 
sun." Nor is the colour of these animals all that 
is remarkable. They have a beautiful and won- 
derful mechanism, offering continually objects of 
interest, from the delicate net-work, or gills rayed 
like flowers, which in some species serve the pur- 
pose of lungs, and the strong fleshy foot by which 
the cockle leaps up, to the tongue of the limpet, 
which is two or three inches long, and armed with 
hooked teeth, that serve as a rasp in fitting its 
food for nutriment. 

The large class of Mollusca comprises not only 
those animals which live in shells, but a great 
number of similarly constituted animals, which are 
destitute of this external covering. Their name, 
given by Cuvier, and derived from the Latin 
word mollis, soft, expresses the nature of their 
substance, and the oyster and snail are familiar 
examples of these soft fleshy creatures. Differing 
greatly in different tribes, yet they have some 
marked resemblances common to all. They have 
no internal skeleton, are all of a fleshy consistence, 
have no legs; and though their fins are often 
spoken of, yet these are mere expansions of a 
portion of their skin, and not separate appendages, 
though by their means the mollusks glide through 
the waters. The greater number among them 
have shells, either consisting of one piece or valve, 
like the periwinkle; or of two valves, like the 
oyster; or of more valves, as in the barnacle. 
When composed of two valves, the shell opens by 
means of a strong elastic hinge, and is closed, at 
the will of the animal, by means of muscles which 
pass from one valve to another. They usually 



174 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

present a development of skin, which, covering 
the body more or less, like a mantle, has received 
that name from naturalists. This mantle, in the 
greater number, secretes those beautiful shells, 
whose variety of form and tint is so pleasing to 
us ; while in other groups we have only the naked 
animal. 

A large number of the mollusca seem destined 
to remain near the spot on which they first entered 
into life, and clinging to the rocks, are fed by the 
draughts of sea-water which convey to them 
thousands of minute animals. There are, however, 
mong the bivalved groups, many which have an 
instrument of movement admirably adapted to 
their uses. Naturalists call this part a foot, and 
in the cockle and some others, this fleshy lump is 
shaped something like a human leg and foot ; but 
in most, it is an unsymmetrical mass of flesh. Its 
muscular structure is, however, very powerful, for 
it consists of a number of fibres so interwoven as 
to confer the power of movement in every direc- 
tion. Thus some bivalved mollusks half open 
their shells, and raising themselves upon them, 
urge themselves along in successive movements, 
by means of this foot, leaving a long tract in the 
sand or mud which they have passed over. Some, 
like the cockle, are enabled by this foot to leap to 
a great height ; while others, again, will by its 
means delve deep down into the sands. Some, 
as the scallop, swim along in the water with most 
wonderful quickness, opening and flapping the 
valves together as they go; while on the shore 
they can move onwards or backwards, by using 
the valves of their shell in a similar manner. 

The mouths of the shell-fish are formed accord- 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 175 

ing to their conditions ; thus, those which live on 
sea-weeds have horny jaws, or minute teeth : and 
those which, like the whelk, feed on flesh, have 
generally a long pliable tube, armed with teeth, 
by which they pierce the shells of their neigh- 
bours, and draw out their juices ; while such as 
are destined to be fed only by the minute living 
things of the water, are destitute of these organs, 
and have mouths formed only of a little aperture. 

Shells are of two kinds, porcelainous and mem- 
branous. Some are, like the cowries, which are 
brought from far distant seas to ornament our 
rooms, of a compact texture, resembling porcelain, 
and the surface is beautifully enamelled and va- 
riously tinted. The membranous shells, like that 
of the oyster, are formed of layers, composed of 
mother-of-pearl, and are often covered with a 
strong epidermis, or skin. All shells consist of 
carbonate of lime, mingled with animal gelatine, 
but the porcelainous kinds contain a far less pro- 
portion of animal matter than exists in the mem- 
branous shells. If the carbonate of lime contained 
in the last-named shells be subjected to acid, it 
will dissolve, and leave nothing but the thin mem- 
brane from which they take their name ; while the 
more brittle porcelainous shell has its substances 
more equally blended in a crystalline arrange- 
ment. 

Beginning at the lowest orders of molluscous 
animals, and gradually rising to the highest, we 
must select some of the common objects on our 
shores belonging to the class Cirrliopoda of the 
naturalist, the barnacles, which every sailor 
knows by their familiar name, and upon which 
most of us have often looked. The commonest 



176 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

kinds are the Acorn-shells, or Balani, which we see 
on all parts of the sea-shore, or on the shores of 
salt rivers, looking like shelly cones with the tops 
cut off, crowding over the shells of mussels, whelks, 
oysters, or on pieces of wood, and more or less im- 
bedded in the substance to which they attach 
themselves. These cones are formed of hard 
shelly pieces, most neatly and compactly fitted 
together, and becoming larger as the animal grows 
older and adds to their size by periodical addi- 
tions. A thin plate connects the cone with the 
substance to which it adheres, and at the summit 
is a small lid, which the animal can open or close 
as it pleases, when it needs to put out its arms in 
search of prey, or to withdraw them within the 
shell. Rocks near the sea are sometimes covered 
with these sea-acorns, and on pieces of wood drifted 
on shore they are clustered by thousands. The 
edges of the shells are very sharp, as those know 
well who have ever bathed in the floating-baths 
lying in salt rivers, when it is necessary some- 
times to go into the water with shoes and stock- 
ings, to escape the wounds on the feet which are 
inflicted by them. So quickly do they encrust the 
wood-work of these places, that it needs great care 
and diligence in those who attend to them to keep 
the sides and floor of the bath clear of them. 
The lalani are called sessile barnacles, to distin- 
guish them from the stalked barnacles, and there 
are several species of the genus. Some kinds even 
lodge in the coats of the whale, deeply imbedding 
themselves in the defenceless fish ; and others fix 
themselves on corals or sponges. We often see 
very large foreign shells of the sea- acorn in mu- 
seums, and these have been the homes of animals 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 177 

large enough to serve as food for man. The 
ancients regarded them as forming a dish for an 
epicure; and in the present day one species is 
cooked and eaten by the Chinese, and said to 
resemble the lobster in flavour. 

Sometimes when wandering along the shore, or 
stooping among the rocks to pick up the treasures 
which the naturalist finds hidden there, we alight 
upon, some stray piece of drift-wood. It may be 
but a part of a tree borne down long ago by a 
river to the spot, or it may be a piece of wood 
stranded from some wreck, awakening thoughts of 
pity as we look upon it, reminding us of 

" Shipwrecks and their spoils, 
The wealth of merchants, the artillery 
Of war, the chains of captives, and the gems 
That glow'd upon the brow of beauty ; crowns 
Of monarchs, swcrJs of heroes, anchors lost 
That never had let go their hold in storms ; 
Helms sunk in ports, that steer'd adventurous barks 
Round the wide world." 

But our piecs of drift-wood acquires another source 
of interest if ii; be covered, as it sometimes is, with 
the stalked, or duck barnacle (Pentelasmis anati- 
fera). Sometimes thousands of these creatures 
are crowded on a piece of wood but a few feet 
long, all twisting about, and presenting a moving 
mass of life, almost disgusting to any but the 
accustomed eye of the naturalist, who knows that 
among this mass he may find curious shells, coral- 
lines, and other objects which are not scattered on 
the shore. The growth of these animals must be 
very rapid, as the keel of a ship which has made 
but a short voyage will be sometimes entirely 
covered with them ; and in some cases they are so 
numerous as even to impede the course of a vessel* 

N 



178 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

When ships thus covered arrive in onr ports, the 
barnacles are eagerly scraped off by men who take 
them for sale as marine curiosities, or who make 
their delicate white porcelain-like shells into some 




kinds of fancy shell-work. The barnacles them- 
selves are eaten on some of the coasts of Africa, 
where they are very abundant. The shell of this 
animal is at the end of a fleshy stalk, generally of 
a purplish red, sometimes of a bright orange colour, 
and is of the form called multivalve, being com- 
posed of five pieces of valves, two of them on each 
side of the animal, and a narrow piece down the 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 179 

back. It is a pretty shell, clear and brittle, of a 
white colour, tinged with pale blue. The food of 
the barnacle consists of small crustaceous or mol- 
luscous animals ; and at times, when it is actively 
engaged in catching its prey, we may see pro- 
truding from its shell, its six pairs of arms, many- 
jointed and delicately fringed. They are most 
vigorous animals, and of so sensitive a touch that 
they can lay hold of the minutest object, and, 
entangling it in their feather-like arms, they can 
draw it to the mouth, seize, and devour it. 

Very curious transformations occur in the con- 
dition of the barnacle tribe during their brief lives. 
Seeing them as we do, fastened to the timber or 
the rock, or encrusting the oyster-shell, shut up in 
their little dwellings, and without any eyes, one 
would not imagine that they were, at an earlier 
stage of their existence, endowed with active facul- 
ties. When first emerging from the egg these 
animals have a large pair of limbs, provided with 
hooks, which they are not slow to use when they 
choose to fasten themselves to any objects ; then 
they have six pairs of swimming limbs and a jointed 
tail, the limbs acting like oars, and the tail also 
serving them as a means of motion, so that 
they are among the most active creatures of 
the sea. Their bodies, too, are at this period of 
their history covered with a shell of the na- 
ture of that of the crab, and they have large 
eyes set on stalks. In the course of time the 
limbs become changed into the fringed arms, and 
the shelly crust becomes a regularly valved shell ; 
the stalk in some of the species develops itself, or 
the cone arises from the wood, or shell, or rocky 
base. The whole animal is so different when 
N 2 



180 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

young, as that it would readily be supposed to 
belong to the crustaceous tribe ; but that excellent 
naturalist, Mr. J. V. Thompson, watched one of 
these animals through all the wondrous changes of 
its existence, and clearly ascertained and described 
them. 

When we see how common an object the duck 
barnacle is, we wonder how, age after age, the 
strange story came to be generally believed, that 
this shell-fish was the young of a species of goose, 
and that as it increased in size the goose gradually 
developed itself. Nor was this the notion only of 
the unthinking, unobserving portion of mankind. 
Scientific men of former ages believed it. The 
Doctors of the Sorbonne in Paris declared that the 
geese were not to be considered as birds, but that, 
having their origin in the sea, they might be eaten 
as fish on the fast-days. Old writers, not content 
with graphic descriptions of the animal, have left 
engravings representing barnacle-goose trees, on 
the branches of which hang the young half-formed 
ducklings, suspended by the bill, while the full- 
grown ducks are quietly swimming beneath the 
shadow of the boughs whence they have fallen. 
But those were days when, if men believed not as 
the ancients did, that the dew-drops which glis- 
tened on the grass were shed by the stars, yet 
they thought that they fell from the clouds, and 
had wondrous virtues when gathered at early 
morning ; and time, and study, and patient thought 
have been needed to bring us to our present state 
of knowledge of Natural History, incomplete and 
imperfect as it yet is. Gerarde, to whose memory 
all praise is due to the skill and intelligence of his 
great work, the " Historic of Plants," closes that 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 181 

valuable book with his own account of the bar- 
nacle-goose. He describes certain trees found in 
the north of Scotland and the adjacent islands, on 
which grew these geese in shells, " which shells," 
says our naturalist, "in time of maturitie, doe 
open, and out of them grow those little living 
things, which, falling into the water, doe become 
fowles, whom we call Barnakles : in the north of 
England, Brant-geese ; and in Lancashire, Tree- 
geese ; but the others that doe fall upon land, 
perish and come to nothing." This he asserts on 
the testimony of others, and he then proceeds 
gravely to declare, as he says, " what our eies have 
seen and our hands have touched ; " and describing 
the degrees of progress by which the fish is trans- 
formed into the bird, he tells us, "that as the shells 
gape the legs hang out, that the bird growing bigger 
the shells open more and more, till, at length, it is 
attached only by the bill, soon after which it drops 
into the sea." " There," he adds, " it acquires 
feathers and grows to a fowle." At what objects 
beneath the skies our worthy naturalist could have 
been looking when he fancied all this, it is difficult 
to tell; but it is strange to see how an earnest, and 
truthful, and intelligent man may have even his 
senses beguiled by the prejudices or prepossessions 
cherished from childhood. The poets followed in 
the train of the philosophers, and Du Bartas thus 
adverts to the common notion, and also to the 
fancy that the barnacle-goose sprang from a 
fungus : 

" So slow Bootes underneath him sees 
In the icy islands goslings hatch'd of trees, 
Whose fruitful leaves, falling into the water, 
Are tura'd, as known, to living fowls soon after ; 



182 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

So rotten planks of broken ships do change 
To barnacles. O transformation strange ! 
'Twas first a green tree, then a broken hull, 
Lately a mushroom, now a flying gull." 

Gerarde's picture is very amusing, as the young 
geese are represented as having their heads out of 
the shells, which are hanging on the branches, and 
seem as if calling to their companions gliding be- 
neath them. Our great naturalist, Ray, however, 
whose work was published in 1678, opposed the 
popular notion, and a writer has ridiculed it a cen- 
tury earlier. 

But leaving the barnacle tribe, we turn to some 
equally common molluscous animals which have no 
shells, but have a cartilaginous, flexible tunic, or 
outer coat. They are on this account called tuni- 
cated mollusks. Often in our rambles along the 
shore we pick up one of those strange looking 
things, commonly called sea-squirts (Ascidice), 
which have been thrown up from the sea by storms, 
or which sometimes seem growing on the stones, 
or large dark sea- weeds which lie among the rocks, 
If we press them ever so gently, we are imme- 
diately saluted by a jet of water. These animals 
consist of a shapeless sort of bag, sometimes of a 
pale brown colour, though often marked with 
beautiful and bright tints, and they have so little 
the appearance of animals, that we should at first 
hardly recognise them as living things, were it not 
for their habit of ejecting the liquid. This water 
issues from two openings in the rough skin. They 
feed on the contents of the water, which are brought 
to the mouth by the current. As yet the habits 
of these Ascidias are little understood ; but it has 
been ascertained, that while in an earlier stage of 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 183 

life, the animal is not the helpless creature which 
we find hanging to the sea- weed. When young it 
somewhat resembles the tadpole of the frog, though 
it is extremely minute, and it swims actively in 
the water, by quickly moving its tail. When in- 
clined to fix itself to the rocks, a few fibres spring 
from it, which form a holdfast, and it then gra- 
dually changes into the condition in which it meets 
our eye on the beach. Some of these Ascidians 
are valued in China as articles of food, and are 
probably relished by a people who seem to have a 
singular taste in articles of diet, though their ap- 
pearance is not such as would recommend them as 
fit for the table. In their internal structure, they 
much resemble the mollusks which form bivalve 
shells, the flexible tunic, or case, being analogous 
to the shell. 

There is one group of Ascidiae, which, unlike 
the sea-squirts, are not single individuals, but 
consist of a number of aggregated beings, forming 
one living mass, in some measure resembling the 
zoophytes, though they do not secrete either a 
stony or horny framework. Some of the commoner 
kinds may be found on our shores in plenty ; and 
many of the tribe Botryllidae form a jelly-like 
crust on some of our olive-green sea-weeds, or 
other marine substances, almost covering the stems 
of the marine plant, and presenting a beautiful 
array of starry objects, of the most delicate blue 
tints, or rich in every variety of red or purple, 
or of all the bright hues of the glowing sunset. 
These star-like objects on the surface of the jelly, 
contain about ten or twelve individual creatures, 
whose structure is found to resemble that of the 
sea-squirt, and the jelly-like substance is common 



184 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

to them all. Our figure represents the starry 
botryllus (Botryllus stellaris), of its natural size, and 
a magnified single group. Other families of the 




Ascidise move through the waters, linked in chains, 
giving out their lights in the darkness; and to 
this tribe belongs the wondrous Pyrosoma, whose 



greenish phosphorescent light gleams at night from 
its living shoals, upwards of a m: 



mile in breadth, and 

as the vessel dashes among them, illumines the sea 
with gleams of light. 

Interesting and wonderful as are some of the 
shell-less mollusks, yet the forms which are found 
in greatest number and variety are enclosed in 
their beautiful ornamental coverings. The bivalve 
mollusca compose the class termed Conchifera. 
Our shores are strewed with multitudes of the 
common kinds ; our limestone rocks and chalky 
cliffs are full of the double valves of animals of 
past ages. The dredge brings up many of those, 
which we know must be lying in countless myriads 
in the deep sea. Gaze into the rocky pools among 
the crags, and we see them among the thousands 
of living creatures revelling there; and, perhaps, 
no spot exhibits in so small a space so many 
individual and varied forms of life. The large 
sea-weeds have, tangling about their fibres, or 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 185 

among tlieir matted fronds, masses of shell- fish ; 
and the remarks which Darwin has made on 
that wonderful sea- weed, the everlasting bladder- 
chain, is, in a lesser degree, applicable to others. 
He observes, that a great volume might be 
written, describing the inhabitants of a bed of this 
marine plant. " Almost all the leaves, excepting 
those that float upon the surface, are so thickly in- 
crusted with corallines as to be of a white colour. 
We find exquisitely delicate structures, some inha- 
bited by simple hydra-like polypi, others by more 
organized kinds, and beautiful compound Ascidiae. 
On the leaves also, various patelliform shells, Trochi, 
uncovered mollusks,and some bivalves, are attached. 
Innumerable Crustacea frequent every part of the 
plant. On shaking the great entangled roots, a 
pile of small fish, shells, cuttle fish, crabs of all 
orders, sea-eggs, beautiful Holuthurise, Planariae, 
and crawling nereidous animals of a multitude of 
forms, fall out together." Life may not be so 
abundant among our masses of sea-weeds, yet those 
only accustomed to the use of the microscope, on 
some of the contents of salt pools, or the objects 
among the mass of marine vegetation, can form 
any idea of its abundance in these places. 

The animals of the Conchiferous tribe are head- 
less mollusks, and are affixed to their valves by 
muscles which stretch from valve to valve. Shut 
up in their shelly homes, destitute of organs of 
vision, and with very limited means of moving from 
place to place, they can have little communication 
with objects around them. Many are fixed to 
the rocks; some, like the oyster, lie in compact 
beds ; some fasten themselves firmly, like the 
mussel, to the rock, by means of chains spun out 



186 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

of their own bodies, and some by the help of a foot 
shoyel out the sands, and bury themselves in a hole 
of their own making. The hinge which unites the 
valves of the shells has a saw-like edge, or little 
teeth, which fit exactly into corresponding cavities. 
The beautifully constructed elastic hinge binds it 
together, and is designed for opening the shell; 
while the animal is endowed with one or more 
muscles, by which it can close it, and keep it firmly 
shut. The valves of some bivalve shells are forme'd 
exactly alike, while others are dissimilar. Some- 
times one is smooth, the other rough ; frequently, 
one is flat and the other convex, and often one 
shell is shorter than its companion. 

Among the most common of our bivalves are 
those deeply violet-tinted shells of the common 
mussel (MytHus edulis), which are found in great 




abundance on rocky shores, fastened by no slight 
hold to the rocks, and, however wildly the waters 
may dash over them, are rarely loosened from their 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 187 

moorings. But though abundant chiefly on rocky 
shores, yet we may find mussels, too, on low, rock- 
less strands, lying about sometimes in such numbers 
as to render the shore very unpleasant by their 
decomposing masses. The peasants of many lands 
are accustomed to eat them, though on the coasts 
of Yorkshire the belief in their unwholesome pro- 
perties is so general, that they are universally 
rejected by the inhabitants. The fox is said some- 
times, when pressed by hunger, to leave his lurking- 
places and come down to the coast, to make a 
meal of these and some other bivalve fish, which 
he may chance to find there. Mussels are eaten, 
too, by sea-birds, and are of great use as baits for 
fish. They are certainly eaten, year after year, 
with impunity by the people of some of our island 
shores. That, however, the mussel is, under some 
circumstances, of a deleterious nature, there are 
too many well authenticated cases on record for 
us to doubt. Dr. Combe gives an account of a 
circumstance which occurred in the town of Leith, 
in June. 1827, at which time numbers of poor 
persons became ill in consequence of eating mussels 
which they had gathered from the docks. So great 
was the excitement occasioned in the town by this 
event, that the magistrates issued orders, pro- 
hibiting their use as food. About thirty persons 
suffered from having partaken of them ; some were 
severely affected, and two died. Some writers 
have thought that the illness arising from eating 
this food would not have occurred had not the 
mussels been in a state of putrefaction; others 
have ascribed it to the little crustacean, the pea 
crab, often found in the shell of the mussel. There 
is no doubt that the flesh of the mussel is at all 



188 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

times indigestible, and probably the ordinary cases 
of illness are sufficiently accounted for by the fact, 
that the persons rendered ill by them were in a 
state of health little fitted for the digestion of food 
of this nature ; but this will not account for every 
case. The best mussels are procured from Ham- 
bleton, a village in Lancashire, at which place, 
having been taken from the sea, they are put in 
the river Weir, where the tide can reach them, 
and where they become plump and of a delicate 
flavour. 

The byssus, or silky beard, by which the mussel 
moors itself to the stone, is a familiar object of 
our sea rocks. It is, in its nature, like the silk of 
the silkworm, or the silvery thread woven by the 
spider, and it exudes, in a glutinous state, from an 
organ at the base of the foot. A groove extends 
along this part of the foot, the sides of which fold 
over to form the little canal, along which the 
glutinous substance runs, which shortly acquires 
the consistence of a silky thread. The animal 
then protrudes its foot, and fastens the thread to 
the rock ; then a fresh thread is again formed in 
this little groove, until the mussel has made enough 
for his moorings. The animal can spin many 
hundreds of these strong and durable silken cables, 
but it does not waste its powers, but skilfully 
adapts their numbers to its condition. When 
attached to a rock over which the sea-wave rushes 
wildly, it spins a strong and many-threaded cable ; 
but when lying on some sheltered spot, where its 
dwelling is in no danger of being torn away, it 
spins but few. Daniel, in his " Rural Sports," 
mentions an instance in which the mooring of the 
mussel was useful to effect a purpose which human 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 189 

skill could not accomplish. A large bridge, with 
twenty arches, in the town of Biddeford, in 
Devonshire, crosses the Towridge river, near the 
spot of its juncture with the Taw. The tide flows 
so very rapidly here, that it was found impossible 
to keep the bridge in repair by means of mortar. 
"The corporation therefore," says this writer, 
" keep boats in employ to bring mussels to it, and 
the interstices of the bridge are filled by hand 
with these mussels. It is supported from being 
driven away by the tide, entirely by the strong 
threads these mussels fix to the stone-work ; and 
by an act or grant, it is a crime liable to trans- 
portation for any person to remove these mussels, 
unless in the presence and by the consent of the 
corporative trustees." 

The Indian tribes of America, when deliberating 
on important matters, ratify their agreements by 
an interchange of strings or belts of wampum. 
The string is simply a cord, on which are strung 
several square pieces of mussel- shell. The belt 
consists of many of these strings, and each has its 
appropriate meaning. When intentions are not 
pacific, defiance is expressed by a figure of the 
tomahawk, rudely sketched on the piece of mussel- 
shell. And then follow the savage war-whoop 
and the wild dance, and all the precursors of bar- 
barian warfare, the records of which would fill us 
with unmingled horror, but that we have some- 
times to contemplate instances of an heroic spirit 
triumphing over bodily suffering, which, in a 
better cause, were worthy of highest admiration. 
The mussel-shell, too, is, among these tribes, often 
the record of past treaties, and is brought forth 
occasionally, year after year, that the old man 



190 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

may remember, and the young may learn, the 
history of his tribe ; and as it is handed round the 
assembly, each one reads the hieroglyphics traced 
there, significant to the savage as is the written 
document to the civilized man. 

The shell-fish called the Pinna is less common 
on our coasts than the mussel, and has a frailer 
shell, the two valves of which gape open at one 
end. It is of a fan shape, and larger than the 
mussel-shell. Indeed, the Huge Pinna (Pinna 
ing ens], a native of the British seas, has a shell 
twelve inches long, almost triangular in shape, 
and horn-coloured. The threads by which the 
different Pinnae attach themselves to rocks in the 
sea, are much larger than those spun by our com- 
mon mussel, and in Italy are woven into a silken 
fabric. They are of a fine glossy brown colour. 
The ancient Romans greatly prized articles manu- 
factured from this byssus, and at Naples and 
Palermo, stockings, gloves, and a silky-like fabric 
have, even of late years, been made from it. The 
Italians have also fabricated a substance of it, in 
some measure resembling our broadcloth, but it is 
so expensive that a coat of this material costs 
about ten pounds of English money. Stronger 
still is the byssus of that shell of the Indian seas, 
called the Great Clam, whose silvery inside often 
shines among the shells of grottos. The cable 
attached to this sometimes supports a shell of the 
weight of four hundred pounds, and repeated 
strokes of the axe are needed, ere the animal can 
be dislodged from its hold. 

But of all the common shells which the tide 
throws over the shore, none is more general than 
that of the oyster (Ostrea edulis). There it lies. 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 191 

whitened by sunshine and rain to the colour of 
snow, crowded sometimes with the twisting shelly 
tubes of the Serpula, or pierced in a thousand 
holes by minute sea-worms, or forming a ground- 
work for a little grove of plant-like corallines, or 
for the mossy tuft of sea-weed. A strong and 
tough shell it is also, and useful, as we see, to other 
animals besides the one which made it for its 
dwelling. We all know the worth of the inmate. 
The Greeks and Romans valued the oyster very 
highly, and their epicures spared neither trouble 
nor expense to procure those which they considered 
the finest flavoured kind. They were good judges 
too, if we may trust the satirist Juvenal, who, in 
describing an epicure, says : 

" He, whether Circe's rock his oysters bore, 
Or Lucrine Lake, or distant Bichborough's shore, 
Knew at first taste." 

They procured them from the Dardanelles, from 
Venice, from the Bay of Cumse, and from England, 
and valued most those which were brought from 
different lands, and afterwards fattened in the 
Lucrine Lake. It was a Roman also, Sergius 
Grata, who first thought of this plan of making 
artificial beds, and turning oysters into " natives." 
Oysters dwell in the ocean, some lurking in the 
sands, others adhering to rocks; while on the 
shores of the West Indies, a species attaches itself 
in thick clusters to the large roots of the mangrove 
trees, which grow in groves around the sea. The 
finest edible oysters are those of Britain, and they 
are frequent on many parts of the shores of this 
island. At Milton, in Kent, as well as many 
other places, large beds are formed of them. They 



192 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

lie there with their flat shells uppermost, that the 
animal may breathe by opening its shell, and 
gather in thus its food from the water; and the 
fishermen who have looked down through the clear 
waters into these oyster-beds, state that the ani- 
mals are so sensitive, that if even the shadow of a 
boat passes near them, they instantaneously close 
their shells. Designed as they are to be the food 
of man, as well as of fishes, birds, starfishes, and 
zoophytes, they are most wonderfully prolific. It 
is stated by Poli that one of these shell-fish con- 
tains 1,200,000 eggs, so that a single oyster might 
furnish enough to fill 12,000 barrels. 

The structure of the bivalve mollusks is beauti- 
fully fitted to their condition. On gently opening 
the shell of an oyster, we find within, a membrane, 
in some species having a delicate fringe of little 
threads. This membrane is the mantle from which 
the animal secretes the outer layers of its shell, 
in such manner as to admit of its being made larger 
as the shell-fish grows. Between the leaves of 
this mantle lie four delicately fine membranous 
leaves, composed of slender fibres. These are the 
branchiae or gills, the aerating organs, and the 
mouth is placed between the innermost of these 
leaves. But these gills have another office to per- 
form, besides that of preparing the blood for use. 
They are the organs by which the mollusk procures 
its food. Shut up in its cell on the sea-rock, 
or lying, during life, on the bed where it grows, 
the oyster might seem to be little fitted for making 
any effort to secure its prey. But the filaments 
of these gills are thickly covered with minute cilia, 
or fringe-like hairs. The incessant action of these 
cilia causes successive currents of water around 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 193 

them ; and thus the animalcules, with which the 
water is full, are brought to the lips of the animal, 
which are so sensitive, that they admit or reject 
what would nourish or what would Ibe useless. 
Small as the cilia are, they are visible only when 
seen by the microscope, and none except those 
accustomed to make microscopic observations can 
imagine their use, not to molluscous animals 
merely, but to zoophytes, jelly fish, and a vast 
number of marine creatures. The strong and 
rapid currents which these cilia make in the water 
cannot be imagined by those who have not wit- 
nessed the little whirlpools caused by their perpe- 
tual motion. Even after the shell is closed over 
water previously admitted, their vigorous action 
never ceases ; and when a portion of the branchiae 
is cut off, still the cilia move up and down, as 
long as any vitality remains, and, acting as paddles 
to the part on which they grow, they row it through 
the water so quickly, as that one might fancy the 
detached piece to be a separate and living animal. 
In the mass of the body lie the heart, the stomach, 
the liver, and other viscera ; and such, with some 
slight variations, is the general structure of the 
great number of bivalve mollusks. 

That beautiful mother-of-pearl, or nacre, of 
which so many ornamental objects are made, with 
its glistening silvery surface, tinted with rainbow 
hues, consists of layers of membrane in conjunction 
with particles of lime. These bright colours have 
been proved to be the effect of the parallel grooves 
which are caused by the regular arrangement of 
the successive deposits of shells. A similar effect 
may be produced with other materials similarly 
arranged, and casts of the surface of mother-of- 




194 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

pearl, made of gum arable, sealing-wax, or shell- 
lac, have been made to assume the shiny appear- 
ance of that substance. Pearls are secreted, not 
only by the oyster and mussel, but also by 
several bivalve mollusks ; and they are of the 
same substance as the nacre, consisting of animal 
matter and carbonate of lime, arranged in con- 
centric layers around a nucleus. They appear to 
be originated by some local interruption to the 
comfort of the animal. Thus small grains of 
sand by some accident get in between the valves 
of the shell, and become encrusted with layers of 
nacre, slowly increasing and assuming the round 
shape of these beautiful gems ; or the annelidous 
worm pierces a hole in the shell, and the oyster 
forms a little plug to stop up farther intrusion. 
Linnseus said that he could make pearls at plea- 
sure, by perforating the shell with a pointed wire, 
and introducing grains of sand. 

" Pearls." says Mr. Gray, " are usually of the 
colour of the part of the shell to which they are 
attached. I have observed them white, rose- 
coloured, purple, and black, and they are said to 
be sometimes of a green colour. They have also 
been found of two colours ; that is, white with a 
dark nucleus ; which is occasioned by their being 
first formed on the dark margin of the shell, 
before it is covered with the white and pearly coat 
of the disk, which, when it becomes extended over 
them and the margin, gives them that appearance." 

The frequent mention of pearls by the Scripture 
writers, shows how highly they have ever been 
esteemed among Oriental nations. Indeed, in the 
East, they seem to have been prized even more 
than the brilliant diamond. " In the West," says 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 195 

Heeren, " the passion for the elegant luxury was 
at its height about the period of the extinction of 
Roman freedom, and they were valued in Rome 
and Alexandria as highly as precious stones. In 
Asia this taste was of more ancient date, and may 
be traced to a period anterior to the Persian 
dynasty. A string of pearls, of the largest size, 
is an indispensable part of the decorations of an 
Eastern monarch. It was thus that Tippoo was 
adorned when he fell before the gates of his capital; 
and it is thus that the present ruler of the Persians 
is usually decorated." Pearls have one disadvan- 
tage, however, that they lose their lustre in the 
course of years, especially if worn near the skin. 
The pearls found in our native species of oysters 
are far inferior to those brought from the Persian 
Gulf, from Ceylon, or any of the Oriental pearl 
fisheries, and have, generally, a milky and more 
opaque appearance. 

We have several British species of oyster, and 
the shells of some of those of distant countries are 
highly prized by conch ologists. A shell termed 
the hammer-oyster (Malleus vulgaris), from the 
Indian seas, is not uncommon in collections, and 
in some specimens the shell is shaped so much like 
a hammer as to lead to its immediate recognition. 

Several species of the scallop are abundant in our 
seas, and their shells are strewed about on our 
shores. Cuvier called these shells the butterflies 
of the ocean, not so much because, when the two 
valves are expanded, they in some respects resemble 
the wings of our summer-insect, as that they ex- 
hibit such various and beautiful colours. Numbers 
of the little shells belonging to the speckled scallop 
(Pecten varia), are to be found on almost any part 
o2 



196 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

of the sea-side, where a ridge of sand borders the 
ocean. They are often about two inches and a 
quarter long, variously clouded and speckled with 
a variety of colours, most generally of an orange 
brown tint, though sometimes of purple or violet, 
and marked with about twelve ribs. 

Our wood-cut represents the large scallop 
(Pecten maximus\ which, though not general on 




all our coasts, is plentiful on many ; and its fish, 
as well as that of several other of the species, is 
used for food. In former days its flat valve 
served for the dish, and its hollow one for the cup, 
at the feast to which the less polished inhabitant 
of our island once invited his friends, when, in the 
words of Ossian, "the joy of the shell went 
round." Either this shell, or the species termed 
Pecten opercularis, was also, in former days, the 
badge of pilgrimage, when men travelled wearily 
to the sites of the histories of Scripture, there to 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 197 

perform some superstitious vow, or, perhaps, with 
the view of making merchandise. This pilgrim 
shell, affixed to the front of the hat, is frequently 
adverted to by our older writers. Thus we have 
Ophelia' s song : 

" How should I your true love know 

From another one ? 
By his cockle-hat and staff, 
And hy his sandal shoon." 

And in that quaint old poem of Sir Walter 
Raleigh's, entitled " The Pilgrimage," beautiful, 
but fanciful, we have an allusion to this : 

" Give me my scallop-shell of quiet, 
My staffe of faith to walk upon ; 
My scrip of joy (immortal diet) , 
My bottle of salvation ; 
My gowne of glory, hope's true gage, 
And thus I'll make my pilgrimage. 
Blood shall he my body's balmer, 
While my soul, like a peaceful palmer, 
Travels towards the land of Heaven." 

After a stormy day, when more shells than usual 
have been dashed by the waves on the strand, we 
may often pick up some of the different species 
of Anomia, or silver oysters, as they are called by 
people on the Kentish coast. This shell has one 
valve flat, and the other gibbous, and one of the 
valves has often a small hole just at the base. 
These shells are so transparent and wrinkled, that 
if we found only one valve, we might almost 
imagine it was the pearly lining of an oyster-shell, 
detached from its place. The waved anomia is 
about one inch and a half wide, marked with fine 
irregular thread-like lines crossing curved ones, 
and it is inside of a beautiful pearly green colour. 
In some parts of France its fish is esteemed a 



198 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

delicacy. Both this and the saddle anomia (Ano- 
mia epipTiippium) may be met with attached to 
the oyster and other shells. The mollusks fasten 
themselves thus to shells, stones, or sea-weeds in 
the sea. The latter species sometimes sufficiently 
resembles a saddle to deserve its familiar name. 
The upper valve is convex, the under flat. The 
inside of the shell is beautifully pearly, exhibiting 
very lovely tints of green, purple, or yellow. It 
is of a much larger size than the waved species. 

Some species of the Noah's Ark shells are found 
on various parts of our coast, but they are not 
very general, though we may often find, in our 
rambles on the sandy shore, the little species 
called the silvery ark (Area nucleus), with its 
somewhat triangular and slightly convex shell. 
This is covered with a smooth olive-green skin, 
and when this is removed, the shell is seen to be 
white with olive rays from the beak to the margin, 
and often marked with flesh-coloured and bluish 
tranverse bands, and a few coarse ridges. It is 
usually rather less than half-an-inch round, and 
its internal part is beautifully white and silvery. 
The larger Noah's Ark (Area Note), so common 
in collections, of a deep umber colour outside, and 
having a pure white interior, is also found on our 
coasts ; but the largest specimens, of two or more 
inches broad, are brought chiefly from the shores 
of the Atlantic. 

Every one who has noticed the rocks about our 
sea-shores, within reach of the tide, must have 
seen how they are often pierced with large holes, 
which seem as if the rock had at one time been 
soft, and that these smooth hollows had been made 
by putting some round object, as a stick, into 



SHELLS AXD MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 199 

them. The apertures which lie exposed to the 
surface are often empty, or contain shells in 
which the fish are dead ; but break away a crag 
from these pierced rocks, and we shall find numbers 
of living shell-fish shut up within. These are the 
different species of Pholas, well-named from the 
Greek vrord. pholeo, "to hide," for they live and 
die buried in their homes in the rock, save when 
some naturalist brings them out for observation, 
or the fisher goes and collects them for bait. It 
is wonderful to look at their frail delicate shells, 
and see how they can make their way into rocks, 
hard clay, limestone and wood, enlarging their 
cavity as they increase in size, and clustering in 
multitudes in the wood-work of piers, sapping the 
foundations of jetties, boring into the hulls of 
ships, and, if their ravages are unperceived, 
causing the shipwreck of the mariner, and the 
destruction of the works of man's art. How 
creatures apparently so helpless, and with such 
fragile shells, should accomplish this, is yet a 
mystery. Hidden as they are, within their rocks, 
our means of observation on their habits are very 
limited. Some naturalists think that they pierce the 
hole by the rotatory movements of the shell within 
the cavity, yet one would think that a slender 
shell would rather break than force its way into a 
hard rock. Others, familiar with the action of 
minute cilia in causing currents in the water, have 
thought that the Pholas, by producing these cur- 
rents, wore away the stone. Yet this force, power- 
ful as it is in entangling animalcules, is not great 
when directed against a firm object, and one can 
hardly imagine that the forest tree, lying on the 
shore, and filled with these piercers a tree whose 



200 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

wood was hard and firm, and whose constituent 
fibres adhered so closely can have been per- 
forated thus. Other naturalists believe that 
some chemical solvent is possessed by the animal, 
which exudes from it, and causes the cavity by 
dissolving the rock. But this idea has its diffi- 
culties too ; and we ask how the solvent which 
destroys carbonate of lime, should leave the shell 
uninjured, and how the same chemical substance 
which dissolves limestone should act in a similar 
manner on wood and clay. Each solution of the 
mystery has its difficulties, and it remains yet an 
unsettled question, by what means these dwellers 
in the rock effect their purpose. 

The Pholades emit a most remarkable light. 
This secretion not only shines during darkness, 
but illuminates whatever it touches or happens to 
fall on. " There is," says Dr. Priestley, "a remark- 
able shell-fish, called Pholes, which forms for itself 
holes in different kinds of stone. This fish illumi- 
nates the mouth of the person who eats it, and it 
is remarked, that contrary to the nature of other 
fish, which give light when they tend to putres- 
cence, this is more luminous the fresher it is, and 
when dried, its light will revive on being moistened 
either with salt-water or fresh ; brandy, however, 
immediately extinguishes it." 

Whether this light is, or is not phosphorescent, 
yet that this secretion does not effect the cavity 
seems apparent, because, as it is always present, 
it would be perpetually decomposing the rock ; 
whereas the size of the cavity is increased at 
the will of the animal, and is only made so large 
as to enable it to move round in it. Our figure 
represents a group of the common stone-piercer, or 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 201 

prickly pidduck, or prick- stone (Pholas dactylus), a 
valuable animal to the fishermen of our coasts, as 
it is extensively used for bait. In some countries 
it is eaten as food. Indeed, all the mollusks of 




the bivalve family might be eaten ; as there are 
none which are known to be poisonous, though 
many are somewhat indigestible, and a few are of 
unpleasant flavour. A general description of the 
shell of this species will suit, more or less, several 
others of the genus Pholas. It is so fragile, that 
it may be easily broken, and a thicker shell would 
only encumber an animal shut up in the rocky 
seclusion. It is white, thin, and in its early stage 
transparent, about one or two inches in length, 
and the two large valves, instead of fitting into 
each other, are open at both ends. Just inside of 
each of these valves is a little spoon-shaped piece. 
Besides this, the shell has several lesser pieces, or 



202 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

valves near the hinge, which, however, sometimes 
fall off, and are so easily broken, as that they 
cannot be relied on as characteristic. The shell is 
marked with ridges set with prickles, which are 
thicker and larger at one end than the other. 
The animal has a long siphon, and if we place a 
stone-piercer in a vessel of water, it will elongate 
this wonderfully. 

The Pholades are not the only family of mollusks 
which pierce their way into stone and wood. Not 
less remarkable are the boring powers of some of 
the genus Mya, and the Rock-boring Venus, and 
others which dwell in cavities exactly fitted to 
their shells. The well-known Ship-worm ( Teredo 
norvagicus, or navalis, as it is often called) , is very 




destructive to submerged wood, insinuating itself 
into the bottom of ships, even when the oak is 
perfectly sound, and by its ravages destroying 
many a noble vessel, a valuable floodgate, or sub- 
stantial pier. The teredo works with astonishing 
rapidity, and will completely riddle a hard and sound 
piece of wood, in the space of five or six weeks. 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 203 

The ravages of this animal were so extensive in 
the dockyard at Plymouth, that in the course of 
four or five years it became necessary to remove 
the wood which it had penetrated. The very 
submersion of Holland has seemed at times pro- 
bable, from its destructive effects ; and in the 
years 1731 and 1732, great alarm was excited in 
the United Provinces, by the discovery that the 
teredo had so injured the piles which support the 
banks of Zealand, as to threaten them with entire 
destruction. Happily, however, after a time, it 
disappeared, no one could tell why, unless it 
might be, that the winter having been unusually 
severe, it was unable to live in that latitude in 
such extreme cold. 

Linnseus called the teredo the Calamitas navium, 
and common as it now is in all the seas of Europe, 
yet it was formerly believed to have been intro- 
duced into them, during the last century, from 
the East, though several species are now con- 
sidered as natives of Britain. On examining the 
piers and woodwork about our harbours, we shall 
too often find specimens of this animal embedded 
in it. Little canals are formed by it in the wood, 
sometimes one or two feet long, not always 
straight, but bending according to the grain of 
the wood. Inside of these the worm-like animal 
lies enclosed, usually in a shelly case, secreted by 
its mantle, but to which it is not attached by any 
muscles. The true shell is at the end of this 
ivory case, and consists of two valves, by means 
of which the teredo cuts its entrance into the 
wood. The body is a long worm-looking object, 
and is merely an extension of its two siphons, or 
tubes. Happily, the teredo, like many other 



204 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

marine animals, cannot exist in fresh water. A 
species lives in the hardened mud on the shores 
of the Indian seas, which, however, never bores 
into wood. 

The shelly tube of our common ship-worm 
varies in thickness in different circumstances. 
Mr. John Mummery, of Dovor, who has made 
many observations on the habits of the marine 
animals of that coast, informs the writer that he 
possesses specimens taken from a portion of an 
old wrecked vessel, lying on the sandy shore at 
the north of Deal, in which the calcareous tube is 
scarcely thicker than lawn paper. " But, in a 
specimen," adds this gentleman, " procured from a 
jetty near the railway terminus at Dovor, the 
wood- work of which jetty has been almost de- 
stroyed in the course of a few years by the 
teredo, the calcareous lining, when removed from 
the wood, I find to resemble more nearly the shell 
of a serpula than the ordinary coating secreted by 
the former animal. It is nearly one-eighth of an 
inch in thickness ; and I attribute the increase in 
substance to the fact, that the water was always 
turbid with the immense quantity of chalk sus- 
pended in it, consequent upon the extensive masses 
of cliff which were thrown into the sea by the 
railway excavators. The animal being thus sup- 
plied with unusually abundant material, was 
enabled to secrete a solid crystalline and extremely 
hard shell, instead of the ordinary fragile depo- 
sition. I have similarly thick cases from the 
tropics, where lime is much more abundantly 
present, either in solution or suspension, as may 
be inferred from the greater number of calcareous 
corals in those seas than in ours." 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 205 

The common cockle (Cardium edule) is one of 
the most familiar objects on our shores, lying often 
by hundreds, with the valves opened, because the 
fish within has died ; or we may see the living 
fish hastily scooping out a hole in the sand, just 
below the surface, that it may bury itself, now that 
our presence threatens danger. Nor is this the 
only office performed by its strong fleshy foot, 
bent, elbow-like., about the middle. When the 
cockle wishes again to rise to light, it will double 
up this foot, and, pushing it downwards against 
the sand beneath, it can easily, by this process, 
emerge from its hiding-place. By means of this 
foot it can also leap so vigorously, that it has 
been known to jump over the gunwale of a boat. 
The number of the shells thrown on our sandy 
shores, proves how numerous are these common 
cockles in our own seas ; and the cockle tribe 
abound also in the seas of temperate climates, as 
well as in those of warmer regions. The fish is 
eaten either raw or boiled in our land, and im- 
mense numbers are sold for food in Holland during 
winter, while it forms a truly valuable resource in 
lands less provided with other means of food. The 
shells of many of the species are also highly prized 
by conchologists for their beauty. A small shell, 
called the smooth-keeled-heart shell, is so valuable, 
that Wood, in his work on conchology, states that 
Dr. G-. Fordyce, who had one in his cabinet, 
valued it so highly that he refused to take fifty 
pounds for it. Several of the cockle species are 
covered with spines, which probably serve to resist 
the action of the waters, and hold their shells fast 
in their sandy beds. Unlike the mussel, it has no 
means of mooring itself, but all the species have 



206 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

firm strong shells, which might be dashed up and 
down in the waves without injury. 

Another common genus of mollusks, whose shells 
lie about on sandy coasts, contains the different 
species of Solen, or Razor-shells. The animal is 
provided with a cylindrical foot, admirably adapt- 
ing it for burrowing in the sand. This organ 
tapers at the end, and is, however, more shaped 
like a tongue than a foot. Destitute of a cable 
to move it, or a strong shell to protect it, this 
little foot supplies all needs of the mollusk ; and 
the depth into which, by its help, this animal can 
retreat into the sand, is truly wonderful. It often 
buries itself several feet below the surface, ren- 
dering its capture scarcely possible. When about 
to enter the sand, the foot of the Solen takes the 
form of a shovel, with a sharp, pointed end. With 
this it digs a hole, turning its point into the form 
of a hook to facilitate its descent, and again widen- 
ing it into the spade-like shape to shovel away the 
sand. If it wishes to remove to a little distance, 
the Solen can double up its leg into the form of 
a ball, which prevents it from slipping back, while 
the action of powerful muscles impels it forwards. 
Supplied with so admirable an organ, the Solen is 
by no means an easy captive, and, buried upright 
in the sands, the fishermen who catch them need 
both skill and practice. The fish is sometimes 
eaten by the poor inhabitants of sea-side places, 
but it is of especial value as bait. In Ireland, 
however, one species, the Solen siliqua, is in so 
much request, that the Irish peasantry have a 
song, which* they sing in chorus, when they go 
out to catch it. The fishermen take the Solens at 
high tide, and plunging a slender iron rod into the 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 207 

sand, pierce the animal, and bring it to light. The 
slight motion of the sand, made by the foot, 
sufficiently alarms the fish to induce it to throw 
out jets of water, or it would lie secure enough, 
for the holes are not often easily discovered. In 
some cases salt is thrown into the cavities, which 
so irritates the fish, that it immediately comes to 
the surface ; but the eye must be watchful, and 
the hand must be ready, which is to secure it, as, 
if not seized instantly, it plunges down again, and 
no subsequent irritation from the salt will induce 
it to come out to face farther danger. The French 
call the Solen Manche de couteau, from the shape 
of its shell. Several species are found on our 
coast. Our figure represents the common Kazor- 
shell (Solen ensis). 




Not less difficult of capture, from the depth in 
which they bury themselves in the sands, are the 
different species of Mya or gaping-shells ; so called 
because at one end the shells, instead of meeting, 
gape open. The sand mya (Mya arenaria) is a 
common shell-fish on our sandy coasts, making- 
holes under the sand, which it betrays by occa- 
sionally putting out its proboscis. This genus is 
interesting, as including the pearl mya (Mya 
margaritifera), sometimes called Unio elongatus, 
which, however, is not a marine animal, but a 
native of rivers. The pearls produced by this 
fish are very valuable ; several pearls of great size 



208 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

have been procured from the rivers in the counties 
of Tyrone and Donegal, in Ireland. " One of 
them," says Captain Brown, quoting from the 
Philosophical Transactions, " weighed thirty-six 
carats, and would have been worth 40L but owing 
to its being impure, it lost much of its value ; 
other pearls from the same places have sold at from 
4J. 10s. to 10/. each. One of the latter price was 
sold a second time to Lady Glenlealy, who had it 
placed in a necklace, and refused 80/. for it." This 
writer adds, that there was a great fishery for 
pearls in the river Tay, and that pearls sent from 
thence for the years 1761 to 1764, were worth 
10,000/., while the pearls in the Scottish crown, 
forming part of the Regalia, exhibited in the Castle 
of Edinburgh, are the produce of the river Tay. 
County tradition tells us that a pearl found in this 
pearl my a in the river Conwy in Wales, was pre- 
sented by Sir Eichard Wynne of Gwydin to the 
Queen of Charles II., which was afterwards placed 
in the royal crown. 

Our engraving exhibits a very pretty shell, the 




Chione Venus (Venus chione), very common on the 
coast of Cornwall, and often found, too, on many 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 209 

parts of our shores. It has a thin glossy skin over 
it, of a chestnut brown colour, but when this is 
rubbed off, we see it to be beautifully marked and 
of a pale purple tint ; and it is capable of receiving 
a high polish. Several other species inhabit the 
British seas. The Golden Venus ( Venus aurea) is 
a shell, about one inch and a half long, of a beau- 
tiful golden yellow. Several of the species of this 
genus pierce stones and masses of coral, and the 
boring rock Venus is a native of many of our 
rocky shores. 

Some very pretty little shells of the Donax 
family are among the very commonest of those 
which we meet when we ramble along the sands. 
They may be described as triangular, flattened and 
wedge-shaped. These shells bury themselves in 
the sand, often to the depth of sixteen fathoms, 
with the short end of the shell uppermost, in order 
to admit the entrance of the sea-water, through 
the respiratory siphons of the animal within. 
Our figure represents a shell often found when the 
tide has receded from the 
sands, and there are few sandy 
shores along our island, where 
it is not plentiful; it is the 
truncated Donax (Donax trun- 
culus], an oblong, glossy shell, with fine thread- 
like lines, from the base to the hinge, which are 
crossed by purple bands, and also rayed with purple. 
The interior is white, often tinged with a purplish 
hue, and the edges of the shell are finely notched 
with little rounded notches. It is, on this account, 
commonly called the saw-shell. Some other of 
our British Donaces are more distinctly wedge- 
shaped than this. They are all small shells. 





210 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

Several species of Tellina are also among our 
common shells, and are generally found with the 
Donaces buried in the sand, or left by the waters 
on the shore. Many of them are much thinner 
and clearer shells than the Donax, and beautifully 
marked with pale or deep rose-colour, and various 
shades of purple, yellow, and 
buff. Our figure represents the 
common Tellina (Tellina car- 
naria}, usually called the butter 
shell, and marked with pale flesh- 
coloured bands. It is a thicker, 
firmer shell than most of the 
genus, and among the most frequent on our sandy 
shores. 

More highly organized than the inhabitants of 
bivalve shells, are the univalve mollusks, com- 
posing the class Gasteropoda. This name refers to 
the broad expansion on the under part of the body 
of the animal, which is called a foot ; and the snail, 
as it creeps over our plants, makes use of this 
organ, and exhibits its form to us. The Gastero- 
poda is a large class, including not only the 
univalved shell-fish, but a number of animals, 
which, like the slug, have not a calcareous habita- 
tion. The mollusk of this class is far more 
symmetrical in form than that of the Conchifera. 
It has a clearly marked face, with two or four 
tentacula, like the horns in the snail, which have 
either eyes at the summit, or, as in most of those 
belonging to the sea, at the base of these organs. 
Zoologists arrange this class into several orders, 
according to the form and situation of the gills 
by means of which they breathe. Those which 
breathe air, like the snail, have a delicate network. 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 211 

like the lungs of other animals destined to inhale 
atmospheric air ; but the Gasteropoda, formed to 
inhabit the sea, have gills or branchiae placed on 
different parts of their bodies. The structure of 
some of these gills is exquisitely beautiful. In some 
they form a number of rays, like a lovely flower, 
on the back of the animal : in others they are like 
long rows of leaflets : while in many they are 
shaped like the teeth of a comb, thus forming 
good characters for a scientific classification. 

Every one is familiar with some of the common 
shells of the animals of this class. Our beaches 
are strewed with them, they lie among our rocks, 
and some are found on our sandy shores. Many 
little shells of great beauty lurk in the heaps of 
drifted sand, or hang about the roots of sea-weeds, 
needing a microscope for their examination. Not 
a lake, or pond, or ditch but has its own tribes 
lying among the mud at its base, or hiding among 
the plants which surround it, or forming a carpet on 
its surface. Land shells, too, of this order exist 
everywhere ; and the bitten leaves of our choicest 
garden flowers, too often leave the silvery traces 
of the snail or slug, which has remorselessly made 
its meal upon them during the rainy day or the 
moist evening. The sea itself has its myriads of 
these animals, and a greater number of genera 
and species belong to this class than to the 
Conchifera. 

All who have wandered among the rocks on 
our shores, know that univalve so frequent upon 
them, the common Limpet (Patella vulgata], which 
adheres as firmly to the rock as if it were a portion 
of it, while its empty shells, like so many little 
cups, lie strewed around. It is often completely 
p 2 



212 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

embedded in a cavity which it makes, of exactly 
the size and form fitted to hold its shell. So firmly 
can it attach itself, that if by any movement of 
the hand we allow the animal to guess at our 




intention of taking it, it becomes almost impossible 
to tear it away, unless by putting the blade of a 
knife between it and the stone. The power of 
holding itself thus is owing to the great number 
and strength of the fibres of its foot, which, by 
raising the middle part, form a hollow in the 
centre and act as a sucker. This means of 
adhesion protects the limpet not only from the 
violence of the waves, but also from the strength 
or skill of the numerous birds and animals which 
relish it as food. There are many species of limpet, 
but even the practical conchologist finds some 
difficulty in distinguishing them from each other, 
on account of the power which the animal has of 
altering its shell to suit its circumstances, adapting 
the rim to the shape of the substance on which it 
is found. Thus, when a limpet makes a dwelling- 
place on the leaf of a large sea-weed or on a flat 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 213 

stone, the base of the shell is flattened, and the 
mouth roundish ; but if it grows attached to some 
crag, or on the cavity of some refuse shell, the base 
is flat and internally convex, and as the limpets 
move from place to place, several changes may 
occur in the form of the same individual shell. 
Some species seem to move continually from one 
reef or rock to another, but others are fixed, and 
appear to depend for sustenance on such food as 
the wave may bring them. Yet it is generally 
believed that they can eat marine plants, and the 
long and curiously formed tongue of our common 
limpet, armed with spines and tiny hooks, is a 
wondrous piece of mechanism, admirably adapted 
for sawing the sea-weeds into little pieces. 

The Patellse are found on rocky coasts, on 
almost all shores, excepting those of the Arctic 
seas ; and as they grow to a much larger size on 
tropical rocks, they form a most valuable article 
of food. Even our smaller native species are of 
great value in some parts of this kingdom, and 
the peasantry of the Western Isles of Scotland 
look to the periwinkles and limpets which abound 
on their rocks for their daily meal, often, for long 
seasons, subsisting almost entirely upon this 
humble food. In the Isle of Skye the inhabitants 
are often, at one time of the year, without any 
other source of provision. Darwin, in his Journal 
of Researches, describes the poor people of Tierra 
del Fuego as living almost entirely on the mol- 
luscous animals which they can gather from their 
rocks. " Whenever," says this writer, " it is low 
water, winter or summer, night or day, they must 
rise to pick up shell-fish from the rocks ; and the 
women either dive to collect sea eggs, or sit 



214 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

patiently in their canoes, and with a baited hair- 
line, without any hook, jerk out a little fish." 
These poor creatures often suffer severely from 
famine, when, by a succession of strong gales, 
they are prevented from reaching the rocks on 
which the limpets grow. 

Nor was the limpet destined for the food of 
man only. The sea-gulls and ducks feed on them, 
while the pied oyster-catcher receives its name 
from its habit of devouring the oyster and common 
limpet. The bill of this bird is admirably con- 
stA acted for opening the valves of the one, and 
loosing the other from its hold on the rock, while 
the crow, not thus favoured, has recourse to a 
device for getting at the shell-fish. " A friend of 
Dr. Darwin's," says an interesting writer in 
London's Magazine of Natural History, " saw 
above a hundred crows on the northern coast of 
Ireland, at once preying upon mussels. Each 
one took a mussel up in the air twenty or forty 
yards high, and let it fall on the stones, and thus 
broke its shell. Many authorities might be 
adduced in corroboration of this statement. In 
Southern Africa, so many of the shell-fish are 
consumed by these and other birds, as to have 
given rise to an opinion that the marine shells 
found buried in the distant plains, or in the sides 
of mountains, have been carried there by their 
agency, and not, as is generally supposed, by 
eruptions of the sea." Crows, even, and vultures, 
as well as aquatic birds, carry off these shell-fish, 
and Mr. Barrow, who is of this opinion, says that 
shells are thus carried to the very summit of the 
Table Mountain. He adds ; " In one cavern at 
the point of Mussel Bay, I disturbed some thou- 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 215 

sands of birds, and found as many thousands of 
living shell-fish scattered on the surface of a heap 
of shells, that for aught I know, would have filled 
as many thousand wagons." 

The shell of our common limpet is sub-oval, of 
a yellowish or greenish ash-colour, and marked 
with many ribs. Should the reader .happen to 
find on the frond of the Oar- weed, or any other of 
our large olive sea-weeds, a beautiful clear little 
shell, shaped something like that of the common 
limpet, of an olive-green colour, with blue inter- 
rupted rays, he may recognise it as the Pellucid 
limpet (Patella pellucida). 

Then there are the shell-fish, commonly called 
the Key-hole limpets, of the genus Fissurella, some 
of them frequent, and all easily known by the 
aperture at the summit of the shell, shaped exactly 
like a key-hole. This aperture is exactly over 
the breathing apparatus, and serves to conduct the 
water necessary for respiration. 

On the rock on which we find the limpet, we shall 
probably also see some one of the several species 
of the canoe shell, as they abound on rocks between 
the high and low- water marks, often being com- 
pletely embedded in them. They also attach them- 
selves to the stems of the coarser sea-weeds, and 
to the hulls of ships. These Chitons have a very 
remarkable shell, formed of eight distinct portions, 
arranged in a row down the back, and so similar 
to the plates of ancient armour, that this animal 
is often called coat-of-mail. When we take it up 
in the hand, it rolls up in a ball like the common 
wood-louse. It has very sharp little teeth in its 
mouth, with which to nibble sea-weeds or other 
food. The species are difficult to determine, as 




216 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

the only certain character is afforded by the 
number of little notches on the sides of the valves, 
and these cannot be ascertained but by taking the 
shell to pieces. The tufted canoe-shell (Chiton 

fascicularis) is one of the 
commonest kinds, and 
very plentiful on our 
southern coasts, and may 
be known by the little 
tufts of hair around the 
margin of the shell. The 
whole surface of the valves, when seen through a 
microscope, appears to be covered with fish-like 
scales, excepting the beak, which is smooth, and 
of a yellower colour than the other part. The 
Emarginate canoe-shell ( Chiton marginatus) is also 
a frequent species, and is of a dingy brown or 
reddish colour. These shell-fish are much larger 
in hot countries. 

Sometimes, when wandering among the rocks 
near the low water mark, we find, among the 
groups of sea -weed, that singular molluscous 
animal, the Sea-hare (Aphysia depilans). It is a 
kind of soft slug, of a blackish colour, tinged with 

Eurple, not of an attractive appearance, and 
aving, besides, an unpleasant odour. A sub- 
stance exudes from its skin, which in days of 
superstition was believed to cause the hair to fall 
off from the person who only touched it. The 
ancient writers told, that from it was produced 
the poison by which tyrants destroyed their 
victims, and relate that Nero mixed it with the 
food of those whom he hated, and that Titus used 
it to destroy Domitian. But the charges of 
antipathy to man, so repeatedly urged by them 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 217 

against this little animal, were most unfounded, 
for the sea-hare is guiltless of either intent or 
power to injure, though, like the cuttle-fish,^ it has 
a means of defence against its enemies, in the 
dark purplish liquid with which it can surround 
itself, when threatened with danger, or when 
caught by the fishermen. 

Our engraving represents a shell which is also 
very frequent on some parts of our island, and 




commonly called the Torbay night-cap, or Hun- 
garian bonnet (Pileopsis ungarica). It fastens 
itself to rocks or stones, like the limpet, delving, 
by some mysterious means, a cavity in the sur- 
face. This shell is usually about two inches in 
diameter, covered with a fawn-coloured skin, and 
inside very smooth and glossy, of a white or rose 
colour. 

The shells hitherto described are without a 
regular spire, but many of the univalves are tur- 
binated or spiral shells, like that of the common 
periwinkle (Turbo littoreus}. This shell-fish, Le 
Vogneau of the French, is too well known to 
require any description. It abounds on rocky 



218 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

coasts, and the shore near them is often strewed 
with its dark olive-green shells. This fish is 
indigestible as food, though, like the limpet, it 
forms an important article of diet to many people. 
In some places the fish is called Pin-patch, because 
the lid or operculum is so generally removed with a 
pin when it is eaten. This cartilaginous substance 
is attached to the foot of the animal within, and 
acts as a lid or door, protecting it from the intrusion 
of its enemies, and exactly closing up the aperture 
of the shell. The large whelk is also furnished 
with a strong similar lid, as are other species of 
univalves. Some of the turbinated shells have 
lids of this kind of a more thick and solid nature, 
and calcareous substance, and these were once 
much valued for medicinal purposes. Pennant 
tells us that the Swedish peasant believes, that 
when these shell-fish crawl high up the rocks, a 
storm is brewing in the south ; but Linnaeus 
quotes a Norwegian writer, who says that when 
the periwinkle climbs thus high, it foretells the 
coming of a land wind, and a calm in-shore. 

A shell of a dull red, or fawn, or drab colour, 
very thick and shaped like that of the periwinkle, 
the Turbo rudis, is not unfrequent on our rocky 
shores. It is about three-fourths of an inch long, 
and its outer lip thick and glossy within ; and 
several other British species may also be found in 
similar places. 

The foot of the animals of the genus Turbo, as 
well as some others of this class, is so compressed 
as to serve as a kind of paddle in the water, while 
its breathing organs are little tufts like plumes on 
the back. These animals feed on vegetables, and 
are provided with a tongue, armed with very small 




SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 219 

hooks, by means of which they catch and tear their 
food. 

That very common shell, the Muddy-red 
Trochus (Trochus Ziziphinus) , has, as well as the 
other species of the genus, an in- 
mate similarly formed to the peri- 
winkle, and like it, is a spiral shell. 
It is of a dull grey hue, marked 
with dashes of a reddish flesh- 
colour, or brownish pink. It is 
generally about an inch long. This 
genus received its name from the 
resemblance of the shells to a top. We have 
several native species, some of them among our 
commonest shells. 

The grey Trochus (Trochus cinerarius) is very 
much smaller than the last-named kind, and is of 
an ash colour, varied with darker spots, .and its 
spire is not so pointed; while the little spotted 
Trochus (Trochus maculata) is smaller still, and is 
called by children on the coast, Pepper-and-salt 
shell, perhaps because its colour resembles that of 
the cloth of that name, worn some years since. 
They are both very frequent on our sandy 
shores. 

A singular shell of this genus, called the Carrier 
shell (Trochus phorus), a native of Eastern shores, 
is in great request among conchologists. It 
attaches to its outer surface, as it increases in size, 
a variety of foreign objects, as stones, shells, and 
corals. The species of Trochus are very numerous, 
and some of them may be found in almost all seas. 
Fossil Trochi too are very abundant ; some of 
them of existing species, as our muddy-red and 
grey kind ; others of species now extinct. 



220 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 




Another frequent shell of our coast, is the 
common False wentletrap (Scalar ia communis), 
which is generally of a whitish colour. ^ Its form 
is sufficiently described by our engraving; the 




ribs are somewhat thick and smooth, and they are 
sometimes marked with purple spots, while the 
whole shell has occasionally a pinkish purple 
tinge. More than eighty species of wentletrap 
are described by naturalists. The Royal Stair- 
case wentletrap (Scalar ia pretiosa) was once a 
rare object among collectors, and a fine specimen 
is known to have been sold in France for a 
hundred louis, and in England for twenty or thirty 




SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 221 

pounds ; but the shell, though beautiful, was 
prized chiefly because it was rare, and now that 
plenty can be obtained, a few shillings will suffice 
for its purchase. 

There is a shell lying about most of our beaches 
and sandy shores, commonly called the Sea Snail- 
shell (Natica monolifera}. It is shaped like that 
of the garden snail, but highly 
polished, and of a bright brown 
colour marked with darker 
streaks. The eggs of the Na- 
tica are most singular. They 
resemble thin cakes of biscuit 
several inches in diameter, 
which, if held up to the light, 
seem composed of a number of cells covered with 
sand. 

Still more like our garden snails in the form and 
brittle texture of its shell, is the beautiful and 
fragile Oceanic Snail (Janthina fragilis), which is 
found too rarely on our shores to be named among 
their common productions, though it is abundant 
in warmer latitudes. Its shell is of a beautiful 
violet colour, and the little animal within is 
remarkable for the beautiful apparatus by which 
it floats gracefully along in the waters. This con- 
sists of an assemblage of air-cells, and resembles 
a frothy mass. This singular float has no organic 
connexion with the little mollusk. "It is pro- 
bable," remarks Captain Cook of this animal, " that 
it never goes down to the bottom, nor willingly 
approaches any shore, for its shell is exceedingly 
brittle, and that of few fresh-water snails so thin ; 
every shell contains about a tea-spoonful of liquor, 
which is most easily discharged upon being touched, 



222 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

and which is of the most beautiful red purple that 
can be conceived." 

But returning to the commoner objects of our 
native shores, the accompanying figure will at once 
recall to every one who has strayed along the sandy 
margin of ocean the form of a familiar object. 
Perchance it may recall the hours of childhood, 
when we gathered up the cowries as treasures, and 
long prized them for their beauty, and because 
they told of velvety sands on which the waves 
washed over them, making sweet music as they 
passed. The large foreign cowries too, the Map 
cowry with its brown or yellow marks and lines, 
and the Spotted cowry, and the common white 
Poached- egg cowry, and many others, well known 
by their uses in adorning our chimney-pieces, even 
to those who live inland, can bring their memories 
of childhood, when we held them to the ear lis- 
tening to the music of the sea shell, so like that 
of the moaning surges, and dreamed that they told 
of the rising tide. Our philosophic poet Words- 
worth alluded to this : 

" 1 have seen 

A curious child, who dwelt upon a tract 
Of inland ground, applying to his ear 
The convolutions of a thick-lrpp'd shell, 
To which in silence hush'cl, his very soul 
Listen'd intensely; and his countenance soon 
Brighten' d with joy ; for raurraurings within 
Were heard ; sonorous cadences ! whereby 
To his belief, the monitor express'd 
Mysterious union with its native sea." 

The little white-ribbed cowries, which are plen- 
tiful on our coast, are commonly called pigs, from 
some fancied resemblance in their form to that 
animal. The different common species are much 




SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 223 

alike, the Louse-pig cowry, or Nun cowry (Trivia 

pediculis), represented by our engraving, being very 

general. It is of a pale reddish colour, 

with six square black spots on the 

back. The flesh-coloured Pig cowry 

is thinner and clearer, of a beautiful 

rose tint; and the European Pig 

cowry has ribbed ash-coloured or pinkish shells, 

marked down the back with a white streak and 

three black dots. 

The cowries live at the base of the sea or along 
the shore in sands, and their beautifully polished 
surfaces are preserved free from any extraneous 
matters, by means of a membrane with which the 
animals are provided, and which they throw over 
the shells. They are found in greater number in 
the Tropical than in European seas ; and in climes 
in which all the colours of nature deepen into 
richer and more glowing hue, they are far more 
highly tinted. The foreign species have been 
prized from time immemorial for their beauty, and 
the little Money cowry (Cypraea moneta) is used 
for current coin in many parts of India, in Siam, 
and on the coast of Guinea. Though inferior in 
value to gold or silver, yet so long as the shell is 
unbroken it will pass for money, and accounts are 
kept in cowries in some departments of business. 
The cowry is obtained from the Philippine Isles, 
and it is very common in this country. It is called 
the trussed chicken, which object it much resembles 
in shape. The shell is yellow or white, with a 
yellow ring. 

Among the commonest of our marine mollus- 
cous animals is the waved whelk (Buccinum 
undatum). Its large firm shell frequently lies in 



224 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

large numbers among the beach stones, and the 
hard indigestible fish, boiled and placed for sale in 
saucers, is a well-known object in London shop 
windows. In our walks along the shore, we see 
the whelk creeping about in quest of food, and he 




seems to have an extraordinary appetite, making- 
sad havoc among the shells of his neighbours, 
which he pierces through, and then sucks out the 
juices of the fish within. The mouth of this 
mollusk is provided with a long flexible proboscis, 
moveable in many directions. At the end of this 
is a spiny tongue, with which he drills and rasps 
away the hole, and reaches the animal within in 
spite of a calcareous covering, which would have 
seemed a sure safeguard. This whelk is often 
called, by the fishermen, the Conch, or the Buckie. 
The shell is about four inches long, of a brownish 
or yellowish white colour. 

Scarcely less common on most parts of our 
coast, is the Stone, or Dog whelk (Buccinum la- 
pillus), sometimes called the yellow-bandy, from 
the spiral bands of dark orange or yellow which 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 225 

often surround the shell. This is usually about 
an inch in length, of yellow, white, chestnut, or 
dull orange colour: in its perfect state much 
wrinkled, but often worn smooth. This whelk is 
found on rocks at low water, and its fish is in- 
teresting, because it is believed to have been one 
which afforded that rich dye by which the ancient 
Tyre, whose merchants were princes, was so 
enriched. The ancients included under the 
word which we translate purple, a variety of 
tints, and applied it to the crimson and scarlet, 
and much paler shades of these hues, derived from 
shell-fish, as distinguished from vegetable dyes. 
Pliny, from whose writings much information is to 
be gathered on this subject, tells us that the juice 
being extracted from the small sac in the throat 
of the fish, was mingled with salt and boiled. The 
flesh which adhered to it was strained off, and the 
wool plunged into the liquid dye. Several shell- 
fish, doubtless, contributed these purples, but 
Pliny ranges them all into two classes, one of 
which, he says, was found on cliffs and rocks, and 
yielded a dull blue dye which he compares to the 
tint of the raging sea; the other, the Purpura, 
the proper purple shell, taken by fishing in the sea, 
yielded the rich crimson hue, which he likens to that 
of rich red roses, or to coagulated blood. This was 
the valued ancient purple colour. There is no doubt 
that the ancient Tyrians used a species of rock-shell 
common all along the shores of the Mediterranean, 
the Murex trunculus, in their dye, as Wilde found 
a concrete mass of the shells in some of the ancient 
dye-pots, sunk in the rocks of Tyre. The dye 
was very costly, owing to the small quantity which 
could be procured from each fish, and to the many 

Q 



226 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

processes which were used in the dyeing. In the 
time of Augustus, one pound of wool dyed with 
the Tyrian purple, could not be bought for thirty 
pounds. But when once stained, the colour was 
permanent, for Plutarch relates that the Greeks 
found in the treasury of the kings of Persia a 
large quantity of purple cloth, which was still rich 
and beautiful, though it was one hundred and 
ninety years old. 

It was not until the year 1683, that our common 
dog whelk was known to furnish the purple dye. 
In that year, Mr. William Cole, who is described 
as a lover of Natural History, heard that a person 
living at a sea-port in Ireland had dyed fine linen 
of a deep and durable crimson colour; he, upon 
inquiry, ascertained it to have been yielded by this 
whelk. He found that the juice, when taken 
from the vein in the neck of the fish, and squeezed 
on silk, acquired, on exposure to the sun, a pale 
yellowish-green hue ; that it then changed to 
blue, finally to a deep purple tint, and that on 
washing the cloth with scalding water and soap, 
it became of a rich crimson. When the linen was 
marked with the juice, it yielded a strong odour, 
like that of garlic and asafcetida, and as a similar 
scent is stated by the ancient writers to have 
attended the process of their purple dyeing, this 
seemed to confirm the idea that this shell-fish was 
at least one of those iormerly used for this purpose. 
The eggs of this mollusk are very remarkable. 
They are found in little clusters, and look like a 
number of little vases on stalks, all standing near 
each other. They are of the colour and size of 
grains of wheat. 

One other common kind of whelk is well known 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 227 

it is the Netted whelk (Buccinum reticulatum), a 
firm shell, much smaller than the preceding species, 
though shaped much like them. Its surface is 
marked with lines from the "base to the summit, 
and again with lines around it, which crossing each 
other, gave it its name. It is of a yellow colour, 
often tinted with an ashy grey, and about an inch 
long. Several of the different species of rock-shell, 
or Murex, are common on our shores. The shells 
are somewhat similar to the whelks in form, but 
thicker and more wrinkled. Like the whelks, 
they seem destined in an especial manner to pre- 
vent the bivalve mollusks, and other shell-fish of 
their own class, from becoming so abundant as to 
fill our seas. They are all carnivorous, and con- 
sume a large amount of prey, which they get at 
by boring holes in the shells of the helpless 
creatures destined for their food. Some of them, 
as the Humble murex (Murex despectus}> common 
on our shores, serve the fishermen for bait. 

Our figure represents a very pretty shell, not 




uncommon on some of our rocky shores. It is the 
Pelican' s-foot strombus (Strombus pes-pelicanus) . 
This shell, in its younger state, has not the 
Q 2 



228 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

spreading portion, and is often mistaken for that 
of some species of whelk. Even in a later stage 
of progress, it is again very dissimilar to the fully 
formed shell, and we might pick up three specimens 
so differently formed, as that an inexperienced 
conch ologist would deem each to be of a different 
species. Some of the foreign kinds of Strombus 
are very large and handsome shells, and some 
species are known to have produced pearls. 

Another common univalve may be easily de- 
scribed. This is the Tooth-shell (Dentalium entalis), 
which is just like a little horn in shape, hollow, 
slightly curved, open at both ends, about an inch 
and a half long, and of a white or yellowish 
colour. Its polished surface is sometimes marked 
with rings of yellow or brown. It is found on 
sandy shores, placed in a perpendicular position in 
the sand or mud. Some species of the Tooth- 
shell are found in the seas of almost all countries. 
The animal which inhabits this shell is of a conical 
form, with an elongated fleshy foot. It has beau- 
tiful thread-like tentacula on the back of its neck, 
which are its breathing organs, and serve to en- 
tangle its prey. 

But we must pass on to another order of Mol- 
lusca, the cuttle-fish tribe, Cephalopoda, which 
exhibit a far higher order of organization than the 
animals of any other division of this large class. In 
these only are to be found the rudiments of aix 
internal skeleton. There is a skull containing the 
brain, distinct organs of hearing and smelling, and 
eyes very superior in structure to that of any other 
of the mollusca. The term Cephalopoda signifies 
head-footed, the feet of the animal being placed 
round the head. These feet are of great strength, 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 229 

and have horny suckers in rows, there being in 
the common cuttle-fish no less than two hundred 
and forty distinct suckers on each of these flexible 
and muscular limbs. By means of these the 
animal seizes its prey, and firmly holds any object 
within its grasp. This tenacity of hold renders 
some of the species of this group so dangerous, 
that they have power to excite terror in the 
breasts of those not easily dismayed by the sight 
of the monsters of the deep ; and the prey of 
the cuttle-fish can often be extricated from its 
clutches, only by cutting away the limbs which 
encircle it. 

One of the commonest kinds of cuttle-fish, the 
Poulpe or Preke (Octopus vulgaris], is a familiar 
object on many parts of our coast; but its ap- 
pearance would not invite to a farther acquaintance. 
It has really a fierce and evil look, as, with a fixed 
gaze, it stares at us from the sands, moving its 
long muscular arms in all directions. Nor would 
it be very desirable to come within the grasp of 
these arms, for their touch is said to cause pain 
and inflammation to the human limb; and as to 
the luckless fish which they encircle, no power of 
escape remains to it. Held fast by the suckers, it 
is dragged to the mouth, and voraciously eaten. 
The mouth of all the species is furnished with a firm 
strong beak, like that of a parrot, and with this 
the Poulpe breaks into the hard shell of the crab, 
rending its coat of mail in pieces, and swallowing 
the defenceless prey, watching with its staring 
eyes, until another and another crab has come 
within its reach, and satisfied present hunger. 
Among all the molluscous animals the cuttle-fishes 
stand pre-eminent for their voracity. The different 
species of Octopus crawl along the bottom of the 



230 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

sea, feeding even upon the largest crustacean 
animals, which have no chance in a contest with 
them ; and the fishermen of the Mediterranean 
dislike them so much, that they regard them almost 
as the evil spirits of the waters. In the summer 
season, few of these .animals can be drawn up from 
the ocean without showing, by their mutilated 
condition, the enemies with which they have con- 
tended. The early naturalists believed that the 
cuttle-fishes entrapped their prey, in some measure, 
by stratagem ; and a writer in London's Magazine 
of Natural History quotes Holland's Pliny on this 
old notion. Of the cuttle, he says, " And albeit, 
otherwise, it be a very brutal and senseless crea- 
ture so foolish withal, that it will swim and come 
into a man's hand yet it seems after a sort to be 
witty and wise, keeping of house and maintaining 
a familie ; for all that they can take, they carry 
home to their nest. When they have eaten the 
meat of the fishes, they throw the empty shells 
out of dores, and lie, as it were, in ambuscade 
behind them, to watch and catch fishes that 
swimme thither." Pliny also adds, that the 
Cephalopoda are " most desirous and greedie of 
cockles, muscles, and such-like shell-fish, and in 
order to get them they lie in wait to spie when 
the said cockles gape wide open, and put in a little 
stone between the shells ; but yet beside the flesh 
and bodie of the fish, for feare lest if it touched and 
felt it, she would cast it forth again. Thus they 
thieve, and without all danger, and in securitie, 
get out the fleshie substance of the meat, to devour 
it. The poor cockles draw their shels together 
for to clasp them better (as is above said), but all 
in vaine, for by reason of a wedge between, they 
will not meet nor come neere together. See how 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 231 

subtle and craftie, in this point, those creatures be, 
which are otherwise most sottish and senselesse." 
Alas ! for these old romances, they have all passed 
away as the light of science has increased, and we 
must be content to believe that the marvels per- 
formed by the cuttle-fish, are wrought rather by 
dint of his strong arms than his cunning head. 

None of the Cephalopods are, in our seas, dangerous 
to man, but the natives of the shores of the Indian 
seas have good reason to regard them with dread, 
never going out in a boat without providing them- 
selves with an axe, by which they may cut away 
their formidable arms. Even on the shores of 




CUTTLE-FISH (Sepia officinalis.) 

Sicily, Mr. Swainson saw cuttle-fish, two of which 
would be a good load, their arms being as thick 
as those of a man ; and in the hotter latitudes, 
gigantic creatures of this family spread terror 



232 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

wherever they appear. Men who have been 
rescued from their grasp have afterwards become 
delirious and died. 

Scarcely more pleasing in appearance than the 
common poulpe, is the Cuttle-fish (Sepia officinalis) 
so frequent on our shores. Its form is oblong, 
and its colour a dull white, spotted with red 
and brown. It is about a foot long, and of 
a soft jelly-like substance. The shell, instead 
of being like that of the other shell-fish, an outer 
covering, is, in this animal, an internal plate, en- 
abling the fish by its buoyancy to rise in the 
water, and also giving firmness to its soft and 
jelly-like body. This shell is well known to all 




accustomed to walk on our shores, on many parts 
of which it is, in rough weather, strewn in great 
numbers. One side is a white firm shell, but the 
under part is formed of thin delicate layers, of a 
shelly nature. This was formerly much used for 
pounce, and. the ancients attributed to it great 
medicinal virtues. It is still sometimes powdered 
and used as a dentifrice. The sharp, strong, 
pearly eye of the cuttle-fish is worn in some parts 
of Southern Europe as an ornament, and, strung 
in numbers, makes a necklace of pearls, so that 
the animal, like the 

" envenom'd toad, 
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head." 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 233 

Besides his offensive and destructive weapons the 
strong arms and the hard beak the cuttle-fish has 
also a valuable means of defence. It, too., has its 
enemies ; for in the economy of nature, one race 
of animals serves as prey to another, or earth and 
sea would not be large enough to contain them. 
The grampus and the cachelot lie in wait for it, and 
the fishermen entrap the cuttle-fishes for bait, and 
for purposes of commerce. When attacked, this 
animal can throw out an inky substance, which 
darkens the water around, and in its cloud it 
eludes its pursuers; but this very ink forms the 
pigment called sepia, which is so valuable to 
painters in water colours, and thus becomes an 
additional cause of its being sought. This is a 
very thick brownish-coloured substance. Cuvier 
made his drawings of the cuttle-fish from the sepia 
procured by himself from the animal. Even the 
contents of the ink-bag of fossil cuttle-fishes retain 
their colour and properties ; and Dr. Buckland has 
drawings of species now extinct, executed with the 
colour taken from the remains of these once living 
animals. Our cuttle-fish yields as good a pigment 
as the foreign kind; yet our sepia is generally 
prepared from a species found in the Indian seas. 

That singular cluster, so like a bunch of grapes, 
and commonly called by the fishermen Sea-grapes, 
is a group of the eggs of the common cuttle-fish. 
We often find it on the shore attached to some of 
the larger sea-weeds ; and if, during the summer 
months, we look into the baskets of shells and 
sponges, and other marine curiosities, carried by 
boys for sale, we shall often see it. The colour is 
a dark purple, like that of the grape, and the outer 
covering of the egg is flexible and tough, like 



234 SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS. 

Indian rubber. No sooner does the young cuttle- 
fish emerge from the egg, than it darts hither and 
thither, with the greatest rapidity ; and if we only 
stir the water, by putting the finger into it, it 
immediately pours forth its ink in a cloud about it. 
The common Calamary or Sea-pen of our shores 




(Loligo vulgaris) is a very frequent object of the 
sea- side. Our engraving represents this animal 
as lying on a stone, while opposite to it are the 
glaring eyes of the poulpe. The sea-pen has a 
longer and narrower body than the common 
cuttle-fish, and is so called from the slender form 
of its transparent internal support. The animal 



SHELLS AND MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS, 235 

is naturally of a green colour, but can change itself 
to a dull brown hue. It is so rapid in its flight, 
that it is often compared to a flying-fish ; while 
an allied species has received the name of Sagitta 
from its arrow-like movements. Our common 
pen-fish is called by fishermen the sleeve, or hoe- 
fish, and is a valuable article for bait. It is said 
that one half of the cod of Newfoundland is 
caught by its use. On those chilly shores it is 
found in abundance in the early part of the month 
of August. The Capelin the fish which is used 
for bait when this is not in season is at this time 
not to be found, so that the two kinds of bait alter- 
nately serve as a supply to the fishermen. Hun- 
dreds of tons of these animals are thrown up during 
the stormy weather on the flat beaches, where they 
lie in a decomposing mass, emitting an insufferable 
effluvium, and the cod is considered to be in the 
best condition when it has fed upon it. 

The beautiful Nautilus, or Argonaut, belongs to 
the Cephalopod tribe, though its shell is not internal, 
but forms for it a light and elegant dwelling. 




CHAPTER IV. 

ZOOPHYTES. 

cc Elongated like worms they writhed and shrunk 
Their tortuous bodies to grotesque dimensions ; 
Compress'd like wedges, radiated like stars, 
Branching like sea-weed, whirl'd in dazzling rings, 
Subtle and variable as flickering flames, 
Sight could not trace their evanescent changes, 
Nor comprehend their motions, till minute 
And curious observation caught the clue 
To this live labyrinth where every one 
By instinct taught, perform'd its little task ; 
To build its dwelling and its sepulchre, 
From its own essence exquisitely raodell'd ; 
There breed and die, and leave a progeny, 
Still multiplied beyond the reach of numbers." 

MONTGOMERY. 

FEW who have read the records of travels made 
by intelligent naturalists in the warmer latitudes 
of the world, are quite unacquainted with the 
nature and labours of zoophytes. We read of tree- 
like fabrics, interweaving their branches, and pre- 
senting the exact image of a stony forest far down 
in the depths where the fan-coral waves in the 
clear blue sea ; and isles and even continents are 
gradually formed by the united labours of myriads 
of tiny architects. There the coral rock or reef 
rises to the surface of the waters, till the sea throws 
up its mud and sand, and forms a level; or till 
some volcanic action brings it up to light and to 
man ; and the island of the ocean is clothed with 
verdure and beauty, and the succulent .plant, whose 
seeds were borne thither by ocean winds, prepares 



ZOOPHYTES. 237 

a soil for the brilliant flower and the stately palm 
tree, and soon thousands of living creatures are 
creeping among its verdure ; and as the winds 
play amid the "boughs, they stir the plumage, and 
awake to song, the birds which have made them 
their dwelling-place. Man conies and finds a 
home of beauty, and among its lights and shadows 
dwells on the coral isle, nor dreams that he owes 
it to the humble architects whose labours were 
directed by the will and guidance of the great 
Creator. 

" The turf looks green where the breakers roll'd, 
O'er the whirlpool ripens the rind of gold ; 
The sea-snatch'd isle is the home of men, 
And mountains exult where the wave hath been." 

There are many, however, who are not aware 
that on our own shores, delicate and beautiful 
zoophytes, many of them like plants, are brought 
up by the waves to their feet continually, and are 
lying almost on every beech, or grow among our 
rocks, or creep by entangling fibres or sand- 
coloured patches, over our sea-weeds, or are 
dredged up by the fishermen in multitudes. It is 
true, that the corals of the British coast are few 
and inconsiderable, but the skeleton of zoophytes 
from which the polypes which made them have 
died away, are among its commonest objects ; and 
picked up often, and looking like plants, they 
puzzle the inexperienced marine botanist, who 
wonders that he cannot find their description in 
his work on sea-weeds. Nor is it much more 
than a century since, that men of science thought 
these zoophytes were vegetables, and led by their 
plant-like appearance, their fixed place of growth, 
the discs or tubular fibres which constitute their 



236 ZOOPHYTES. 

point of attachment, they hesitated not to describe 
them as sea-weeds or mosses. They could discover 
in their leaf-like expansions, in their graceful 
sprays, no similarity to any living creature yet 
known as the resident of earth or air, or of the 
deep waters; and they had not as yet unfolded 
that page of Nature's book, which, after a series 
of patient and diligent investigation, has revealed 
to modern observers a new world of wonders, a 
new lesson of Almighty skill and design, as indi- 
cative to the thoughtful mind of the work of God, 
and as sublime in its influence over our spirits as 
are the teachings of the stars and suns of the lofty 
skies. 

In the few pages to which we must limit our 
remarks, little can be done beyond describing some 
few of the commonest zoophytes of our shores, and 
naming such facts respecting them as may awaken 
an interest in the subject, and lead the reader to 
seek for further information. The zoophytes are 
well described as plant-liks animals, the greater 
number of them being also compound animals. 
Thus when we speak of a zoophyte, we usually 
include the stony, or horny, or membranous fabric 
or case, and the polypes, the little living creature 
which dwells in these structures, which make 
them, and are indeed a part of them. In these 
skeletons or polypidoms, it may be that thousands 
of individuals exist, all united by a living thread, 
running through every part, and constituting a 
common circulation. Different individuals are 
they, and yet the same; their feelings, their in- 
terests, and labours, all under the influence of one 
harmonious instinct; and yet each flower-like 
polype having so far independent consciousness, 



ZOOPHYTES. 239 

as to shrink if touched, while the other polypes 
seem quite unaffected by the movement, and fear- 
less of harm. It is these cases, or polypidoms, 
which so often attract us on the beach or sands, 
where they lie ; blown about by every wind, or 
finding a resting-place in some hollow among the 
stones. Beautiful horn-coloured sprays, like little 
fir-trees, or resembling brittle withered leaves, or 
forming crusts on sea-weeds, we see them every 
day in our summer rambles on the shore, and per- 
haps admire their graceful forms, and see how they 
are adapted to bend before the wave ; but when 
we behold them through the microscope, and 
discover their wondrous living inmates, their 
active star-like polypes, all instinct with life and 
vigour; their beautiful cup-like, or bell-shaped, 
cells ; their vesicles, now resembling a pomegra- 
nate flower, now shaped like some antique model 
of a vase, we feel how much there is of beauty 
lying unperceived by us even in common things, 
and bow in humble reverence before the Almighty 
Maker, to whom the little and the great seem 
alike deserving of his wondrous skill, alike the 
objects of his constant care. 

Interesting as are the permanent fabrics of the 
zoophytes, the sea-fans, of far distant seas, the 
corals of commerce, or the white stony mushroom- 
like corals which greet us in museums ; and ele- 
gant as are the horny branches on our sands, yet 
the little polypes, unseen by the naked eye, are 
no less beautiful, and present a far more wondrous 
structure than the skeletons themselves. Let us 
gather up from the beach one of those horny 
sprays, which the wind blows hither and thither, 
and place it under a good microscope, and down the 



240 ZOOPHYTES. 

side of every branch, or in some species on botli 
sides, we see a number of little horny cups, some 
close to the branch, others raised on stalks, and 
constituting, it may be, some hundreds or even 
thousands of cells. If our specimen is fresh and 
living, we may see, at the opening of these cups, 
the tentacles of the active polypes, arranged like 
rays around the centre, looking like so many 
daisies or other rayed blossoms, and, in fact, 
forming so many mouths and stomachs to feed one 
common body, placed within the horny spray, and 
each retiring, if alarmed, within its own -cell. 
Every little thread-like branch, and every stem, 
is hollow; and the pink fleshy substance of the 
zoophyte, like a mere thread, may be seen filling 
up every part, and this is the living portion to 
which so many mouths are furnishing the needful 
food, when moving their active feelers about in 
the water, they catch the living prey which every 
drop of ocean contains. 

If we gather up our specimen in spring-time 
we may in some species, easily, with the naked 
eye, discover a number of clear little vesicles, which 
look like seed-vessels ; and are quite distinct from 
the cells in which the polypes reside. These con- 
tain the germ of the polypes, and from these pro- 
ceed new structures; each horny fabric originating 
in a single polype. When viewed beneath a micro- 
scope, even these minute objects are found to be 
most beautifully varied ; each species having vesi- 
cles of a form peculiar to itself. Thus in one 
common coralline we find them ovate or pear- 
shaped ; in another they resemble an oblong pouch, 
marked with numerous and crested ribs. One 
species has vesicles reminding us of a swollen pod, 



ZOOPHYTES. 241 

girded round with from five to nine bands, and 
rising into short spines ; another has them covered 
over, at top, with a rounded lid. The germs 
within these vesicles, or seed-vessels, are seen by 
the aid of the microscope to be very small gra- 
nules, their surfaces covered with minute hairs 
(cilise), and actively floating within these vases. 
They are extremely irritable, and if they come 
in contact with a hair, a grain of sand, or other 
small substance, they are capable of contracting 
their bodies into various forms. They whirl about 
in constant motion, until they select some point of 
attachment, where they fix themselves, and thence, 
in course of time, arises the goodly spray which 
delights our eye. 

Zoologists arrange the zoophytes into two large 
classes; the Anthozoa, which- have symmetrical 
bodies, capable in every part of contraction, with 
a single aperture for food ; and the Polyzoa, 
sometimes called Bryozoa, whose bodies are un- 
symmetrical, and incapable of contraction. The 
Anthozoa contain the larger animals ; but those 
forming the Polyzoa, have the more perfect organ- 
ization, and are in a higher scale of animal life. 

A few common examples of the first class, to be 
described, will, by the aid of our engravings, beat 
once recognised by every one accustomed to the 
shores of our island, as objects long familiar. 

A very frequent and pretty zoophyte, is that 
called the Small Coryne (Coryne pusilla), which 
may be found on old shells, or on stones or sea- 
weeds, between the tide marks. It differs as to 
size, but is not often more than an inch in height, 
adhering to the shell or other substance on which 
it grows, by means of a fibre, which creeps over it. 

K 




242 ZOOPHYTES. 

With this fibre the zoophyte commences, and an 
erect stem rises, from which shoot branches in all 
directions, each terminated with a little 
fleshy shining red knob or head, on 
which are a number of short thick 
tentaenla or arms, which are very 
vigorous, ever moving up and down to 
catch such prey as comes within their 
reach; and each tipped with a little 
globular end. These are the polypes ; 
the mouths of the fleshy living thread 
which runs through every portion of the zoophyte. 
The tentacula, though always moving, yet do so 
very slowly ; and it is most interesting to watch 
the gradual motions of this little creature. It may 
be preserved for some time in salt water, if the 
liquid be frequently changed. The stem of this 
coryne is horny, tubular, somewhat clear, wrinkled 
and ringed. Occasionally this zoophyte is para- 
sitic on other species. When growing on another 
coralline, the Tubularia, it sometimes gathers all 
about the stalks, covering them with little horny 
threads, not thicker than such as are used for sew- 
ing. It is also itself sometimes covered with small 
parasitic sea-weeds, composed of slender threads ; 
so that Dr. Johnston remarks of it, that he has 
seen specimens so completely overrun with this, 
that they appeared, under the microscope, nearly 
as mossy and glandulous as the stalks of the moss- 
rose. Our figure represents the coralline in its 
natural size. 

There is a genus of zoophytes called Tubularia, 
from the tubular-like pipes of which they are com- 
posed. The fibres of this family are all hollow and 
erect, and a soft pulp runs through them ; while 



ZOOPHYTES. 



243 



at the extremity the fleshy polypes, surrounded with 
their thread-like arms, protrude like a starry flower. 
Our figure describes the Tubu- 
lar Coralline (Tubularia indi- 
visa), a very common zoophyte 
on shells and stones, from deep 
water ; and it may often be 
found entangled among sea- 
weeds, cast up by the waves 
on the beach. Many who are 
accustomed to pick up sea- 
weeds, and other marine ob- 
jects, are perplexed by this 
zoophyte, as it seems a bundle 
of fibres, which, at first ap- 
pearance, resemble a root 
torn from some sea-plant. On 
closely examining it, however, 
even without a microscope, 
the hollow pipe-like nature is 
clearly evident. Ellis compared it to oaten straws 
with the joints cut off ; and except that the diameter 
of the tubes is often smaller, this well describes it. 
In fine specimens they are quite as large as an oaten 
straw, but more commonly they are not larger than 
the stalk of a primrose. These tubes are of the colour 
and texture of thin horn, sometimes divided at 
the base, and twisted into serpent-like forms ; and 
they are occasionally ten or twelve inches high. 
A reddish pink pulp, which unites all this singular 
family of polypes into one animal, runs through 
the tubes, from the open ends of which issue the 
polypes. A scarlet knob, forming itself above 
into a kind of proboscis, is surrounded by a num- 
ber of short scarlet tentacula ; and at the base of 
R 2 




244 ZOOPHYTES. 

the body, is another circle of much longer ones, 
and thirty or forty in number. None of our 
common zoophytes are better for examination, 
when picked up from the shore, than this. In 
scarcely any of the others, unless brought up by the 
dredge, and carried home immediately to be placed 
in salt water, can we discern the living wonders. 
A few hours on the beach will usually deprive 
them of life. But this coralline, if placed in a 
tumbler of water, will often, some hours after, ex- 
hibit its living flowers in full vigour ; and he 
must indeed be indifferent to grace and beauty, 
who could look upon them without interest. 
After being thus kept for some time in the house, 
its decline is apparent ; and the starry head drops, 
as would the daisy flower, if some ill wind snapped 
it from its stem. Let but an interval of a week 
or more pass over it, however, and again a new 
head appears, though in a less perfect condition 
than the original one. The stem is always length- 
ened by the new formation ; and numerous heads 
may also be produced by cutting the tubes into 
several pieces. Thus twenty-two heads were 
derived, in the course of five hundred and fifty 
days, from the sections of a single stem. A species 
of Tubularia (Tubularia dumortierii] , growing not 
in clusters, but in unbranched solitary tubes of 
horny colour, and unwrinkled and narrowed at 
the base, seems somewhat like the last-named 
species in miniature, but it is not common. 
There are, besides, two other species of the genus, 
and the engraving will sufficiently convey an idea 
of the general appearance of the whole, to lead to 
their recognition as members of this family. The 
graceful Tubularia (Tubularia gracilis), is often 



ZOOPHYTES. 245 

parasitic in tufts upon our common Tubular Coral- 
line. A beautiful species of the Indian seas 
(Tubipora musica], resembles a cluster of organ- 
pipes, with several transverse floors or stages run- 
ning through it. The pipes are of a rich red 
colour, and the polypes of loveliest crimson hue, 
with arms of bright green. 

There is a curious British zoophyte belonging to 
the Tubulariadse, which, though not frequent, de- 
mands notice from its great beauty. The Cory- 
morpha nutans is about four and a half inches long, 
and its stem about half an inch in diameter. When 
young, part of its stem is enclosed in a thin horny 
tube, which afterwards disappears: it grows rooted 
in the sand, and has a clear white stem, delicately 
tinged with pink, and pinkish brown lines running 
down it. A head terminating in a pink trunk, 
and surrounded by tentacles of pure white tint, 1 
above which are placed numerous orange-coloured 
processes, completes this beautiful animal. Forbes 
and Goodsir thus describe an individual which they 
found in the Bay of Stromness, Orkney: u When 
placed in a vessel of sea-water, it presented the 
appearance of a beautiful flower. Its head grace- 
fully nodded, bending the upper part of its stem. 
It waved its long tentacula to and fro at pleasure, 
but seemed to have no power of contracting them. 
It could not be regarded by any means as an 
apathetic animal, and its beauty excited the admi- 
ration of all who saw it." 

But turning from this rarer beauty, to some 
common species, known to all familiar, with the 
sea-side, we proceed to the family of Sertularia, 
many species of which are generally taken for sea- 
weeds. Our engraving will enable the reader to 



246 



ZOOPHYTES, 



identify one of the most frequent, the common 
Sea-fir (Sertularia abietina) ; its elegant sprays clus- 




tering often upon shells and stones, or snapped off 
by wind or wave and thrown upon the shore, has 
met the eye of every rambler there, who observes 
the objects around him. It grows upon any kind 
of shell, and it is seldom that oysters can be 
dredged up from the sea, without having some of 
their number adorned with this graceful coralline. 
It rises upright like a little fir-tree, or it resembles 



ZOOPHYTES. 



247 



a branch of the plume-like brake of our woods and 
heaths in shape, and tiny shells often hang about 
its branches. It is of a horn colour, becoming 
more clear and transparent in drying, and placed 
in the herbarium it seems 
like a branch made of amber* 
It varies in height from four 
to twelve inches. The stem 
is slightly zigzag, and some- 
times the branches have 
other branches on them. 
Even when seen under a 
common magnifying glass, 
such as naturalists usually 
have about them, we can dis- 
cover in the little teeth which 
are adown the branches, a 
minute aperture, which is 
the opening of the polype 
cells, the little tube or flask- 
shaped dwellings of the 
animals. In the winter 
time the little vesicles or bladders containing the 
germs, are thickly scattered over the branches. 
Sometimes the sea-fir is tinged with a red hue, 
which in some cases remains on the shining stems 
of the dried specimens. Other species of Sertularia 
are also occasionally tinged with this hue, though 
the cause of this peculiarity is undiscovered. 

Very often, on examining the Knobbed, or 
Serrated, or Bladder Fucus, we find growing on 
its frond the horny shoots, scarcely larger than a 
sewing thread, of the zoophyte called the Sea-oak 
Coralline (Sertularia pumila), which received its 
familiar name from its frequency on the bladder 




MAGNIFIED BRANCH OF SEA-FIR 



248 ZOOPHYTES. 

fucus, known in old times by the name of Sea-oak. 
The shoots often cover a large portion of the sea- 
weed, originating from a slender hollow thread, 
which is a link between them all. This small 
coralline is very common, being sometimes found 
on other species of our marine plants. Few who 
look at this little horny thread, would think that 
it was the production and home of innumerable 
living flower-like polypes, each provided with 
fourteen arms, by means of which it can catch prey 
for the food of the corn-muni ty; and which, though 
low in the scale of animal organization, yet seems 
to have been created for active enjoyment. 

Another delicate and elegant coralline, often 
found on old shells on the stems of Tangle, and 
also as a parasite on other zoophytes, is the Lily 
or Pomegranate-flowering Coralline (Sertularia 
rosacea). It is of a white or pale horn colour, 
very slender, and only one or two inches high. 
Its vesicles are most elegantly formed, and Ellis 
compared them to a lily or pomegranate flower 
just opening. 

There is a pretty zoophyte, so common, that if 
our engraving or description convey a just idea of 
it, every one frequenting our shores will remem- 
ber to have seen it, perhaps to have placed it 
among a collection of sea-weeds, or brought some 
of its delicate tufts home as an ornament for the 
mantel-piece. It has the same horny texture, 
the same plant-like appearance, as all the other 
species of this interesting family of zoophytes. 
The common Sea-hair (Sertularia operculata) grows 
in long tufts of fine horny threads, on several of 
the sea-weeds, but especially on the Digitate 
Tangle. It is sometimes even twelve inches high, 



ZOOPHYTES. 



249 



but more generally the tufts vary in height from 
four to five inches. Ellis remarks of it, " This 
very neat and most regularly formed coralline, 




consists of long trailing branches, with very sharp 
teeth placed exactly opposite ; each pair seems to 
be jointed into the next. The slender branches 
grow in tufts like branches of hair." Sometimes, 
when of a pale horn colour, and dripping with 
the sea-water, it looks almost like tufts of silver 
thread. There is a little cover or lid to the vesi- 
cles of this species, and hence its scientific name, 
from operculum, a lid. In summer time the tufts 
are covered with these little clear vesicles. Our 
figure represents them both in their natural size and 
magnified appearance. The sea-hair is generally 
placed among our finer sea-weeds, in those little 
landscapes sold in the shops in sea-coast towns. 

An elegant zoophyte on shells in deep water, 
called the Bottle-brush Coralline (Thuiaria Thuia), 
is so like that domestic implement that it received 



250 



ZOOPHYTES. 



there, particularly 
1 is called Squirrel's 



its name from the fishermen on the northern coast 
of England. It is common 
about Scarborough. Another : 
Tail (Sertularia argented)^ because it is so like the 
tail of our woodland animal ; but as neither of 
these is a very general coralline, we will proceed 
to one well known to every one at all used to sea- 
side productions. This is an elegant species 




ZOOPHYTES. 251 

familiarly known by the name of Sickle-beard 
(Plumulariafalcata). It is common every where, 
on shells and stones, or often torn from its native 
spot of growth, lies about the shore, becoming the 
sport of every wind and wave, when we may find 
it lying with its stems twisted into diffuse and 
distant coils, like a lady's ringlet. On a slender 
spiral stem, usually about four or five inches high, 
though in extraordinary specimens attaining the 
height of twelve inches, are feathery branches 
with little branchlets, about as thick as a common 
needle, and a quarter of its length. The cells 
which contain the polypes are not on the main 
stems, but on the branches and branchlets, where 
they are placed down the side in rows of little 
teeth, which bend inward like a sickle. Our en- 
graving represents them in their magnified con- 
dition, and the coralline in its natural size. 

The Podded Coralline (Plumularia cristata), 
though not so general as the sickle-beard, yet is 
not an uncommon object on our sea-side stones 
and shells. It is found, too, sometimes on sea- 
weeds, especially on that common one, the podded 
halidrys. It has an erect instead of a spiral 
stem, and is usually smaller than the last-named 
kind, and being generally of a deeper yellow 
colour it is much prettier. Ellis compares the 
polype cells to the flowers of the lily of the valley, 
and they are indeed like our favourite spring flower, 
being shaped like bells, with the rim cut into about 
eight equal segments, while in front there is a 
strong spiny process, which does not project 
beyond the cell. The vesicles, or little bladders, 
plainly seen in this coralline with the naked eye, 
are described by Dr. Johnston, when seen under 



252 ZOOPHYTES. 

a magnifying glass, as resembling a swollen pod 
girded round with from five to nine cristated ribs 
or bands. A quotation given also by that valu- 
able writer from another, will here show how 
deeply interesting are these little common pro- 
ductions of our seas, to those who have carefully 
examined them. " Each plume," says Mr. Lister, 
in reference to a specimen of the podded coralline, 
" might comprise from 400 to 500 polypi, and a 
specimen of no unusual size, before me, has twelve 
plumes, with certainly not fewer cells on each 
than the larger number mentioned: thus giving 
6,000 polypes as the tenantry of a single polypidom. 
Now many such specimens, all united, too, by a 
common fibre, and all the offshoots of one common 
parent, are often located on one sea-weed, the site 
then of a population, which nor London nor Pekin 
can rival. But Plumularia cristata is a small spe- 
cies, and there are single specimens of Plumularia 
falcata, or Sertularia argentea, of which the family 
may consist of 80,000, or 100,000 individuals ! " 
Surely if we could gain, here below, any idea of 
the infinite Creator, it would be when we con- 
sider wonders like these, and were it not that they 
are facts susceptible of actual demonstration, such 
statements would demand as great a degree of 
faith as even the sublime declarations of the mys- 
teries of Revelation. 

A very pretty coralline is common on the sea- 
weeds which grow near low- water mark. It is 
often parasitic on the fronds of the tangle, or 
podded halidrys, though not confined to them. 
Sometimes its tiny knotted roots creep about the 
broad tangle leaves, like a regular piece of net- 
work, and, as Mr. W. Thompson has remarked, 



ZOOPHYTES. 



253 



" the meshes are of different sizes, with their junc- 
tions tied in a knot as it were by fairy fingers." 
From each knot, in due time, springs the knotted 
thread coralline (Laomedea geniculata). This 
zoophyte is about an inch in height, very little 
branched, and sometimes not at all so, of a very 
clear white colour, now and then tinted with red. 
Minute as is this animal, it presents under the 
microscope an exceed- 
ing beauty. Its po- 
lypes may be seen, in 
a fresh specimen, pro- 
truding like so many 
daisy flowers, and in 
summer time when the 
vesicles are plentifully 
scattered about, we see 
objects which" appear 
like antique vases, 
sculptured into most 
graceful and elegant 
form. This coralline 
is often found on the 
common grass-wrack 
of our shores. 

Almost as common 
as this, is the Gelati- 
nous Laomedea (Lao- 
medea gelatinosa], one 
of our most elegant 
zoophytes. Our figure . 
represents part of ^ 
specimen about eight 
inches long, which was 
p. eked up on the beach at Dover, but it is seldom 




254 



ZOOPHYTES. 



more than three or four inches long, with a stem 
about as thick as small twine. Figure g describes, 
however, the more common appearance of this 
zoophyte. " It occurs thus/' says Dr. Johnston, 




" in Berwick Bay, growing gregariously on the 
sides and under surfaces of stones, lying in shallow 
pools between tide marks, and seemingly giving 
a preference to shores that contain an impure and 
brackish water. The shoots are all connected 
with one another by the radicle fibre which creeps 
in an irregular manner on the rock, rarely above 
an inch in height, simple or sparingly branched, 
consisting of a single tube of a light horny colour, 
ringed above the origin of the long twisted thread- 
like stalks on which the polype cells are raised." 
The vesicles are urn-shaped. 

Both the species of Laomedea are remarkable 
for the luminous properties which appear to be 
more or less exhibited by all the transparent 



ZOOPHYTES. 255 

zoophytes. Dr. Johnston, as well as other writers, 
quotes Mr. Hassall's interesting remarks on this 
subject. Speaking of the phosphoric light emitted 
by corallines, Mr. Hassall remarks, " This fact I 
first discovered in a specimen of Laomedea gela- 
tinosa, and subsequently in a great variety of 
other species. If a portion of it, adhering to the 
sea-weed to which it is attached, be taken from 
the water, and agitated, a great number of bright 
phosphorescent sparks will be emitted; these 
sparks proceed from each of the denticles of the 
coralline containing polype, and the phenomenon 
is equally apparent, whether the specimen be in 
or out of the water." In another work this writer 
adds, " I lately had an opportunity of beholding 
this novel and interesting sight of the phos- 
phorescence of zoophytes, to great advantage, when 
on board one of the Devonshire trawling-boats 
which frequent this coast. The trawl was raised 
at midnight, and great quantities of corallines were 
entangled in the meshes of the network, all shin- 
ing like myriads of the brightest diamonds." Mr. 
Hassall also states, that once each week he re- 
ceived from the master of a trawling vessel on the 
Dublin coast, a large hamper of zoophytes in the 
fresh state. In the evening these were taken 
into a darkened room, in which several persons 
were assembled to witness this beautiful exhibition. 
"I then," says this writer, "used to gather up 
with my hands as much of the contents of the 
hamper as 1 could manage, and tossing them about 
in all directions, thousands of little stars shone 
out brightly from the obscurity, exhibiting a spec- 
tacle, the beauty of which, to be appreciated, must 
be seen, and one which it has been the lot of but 



256 ZOOPHYTES. 

few persons as yet to have looked upon. Entangled 
among the corallines were also minute luminous 
annelides, which added their tiny fires to the ge- 
neral exhibition." The light given out by the 
polypes seems caused by irritation. 

There is a beautiful little coralline, called by 
Ellis the Small-climbing coralline, with bell-shaped 
cups (Campanularia volubilis), which creeps, like 
so many threads, over sea- weeds, and often also 
over other corallines, and which is well worth 
observation with the microscope. Its polype cells 
are graceful little bells, and so beautiful is its 
construction, that each little cup has at its base, 
a delicate joint or hinge, which is thought to have 
been designed, by the great Creator, for the pur- 
pose of enabling this delicate and fragile creature 
to bend before the force of a wave, which else 
would dash it into atoms : but we must pass by 
this lovely little object to some more easily de- 
scribed, and which cannot fail to attract the notice 
of every passer-by. 

The horny, hollow-jointed shoots of the Lob- 
sterVhorn coralline, or Sea-beard (Antennularia 
antennina), lie about in summer-time, upon every 
shore. They have been rent away from their 
place of growth on the stones which lie among 
the sea-sands, or perchance from the sands them- 
selves, on which they often grow in erect clusters. 
The polypidoms of this species are straight shoots, 
growing together in a cluster of about a dozen in 
number, sometimes as much as seven or eight 
inches in height, of a clear yellow horn colour ; 
and the fisherman knows them well, for they 
crowd upon the oyster-shells in profusion. The 
shoots are surrounded with hair -like branch- 



ZOOPHYTES. 



257 



lets, in numerous whorls, a whorl to each arti- 
culation. The number of these branchlets in 
each whorl varies from five to nine; and Mr. 




Hassall has remarked, that in the same specimen, 
the number usually remains the same throughout. 
When magnified, these hair-like processes present 
the form of sickles, and bend in, towards the main 

s 



258 ZOOPHYTES. 

stem. The specimens which are found on the 
beach, after rough weather, are generally much 
broken, and their whorling branchlets often torn 
away; so that the zoophyte, in that condition, 
more nearly resembles the horns or antennae of a 
lobster than when perfect. 

The branched Antennularia (Antennularia ra- 
mosa) differs little from the foregoing species, 
except in the fact of its having branched instead 
of straight shoots. It is found on old shells and 
stones, in deep water; and most visitors of the 
sea-side have seen it lying about the shore. Some 
writers think the two species should be considered 
but one. 

As Ellis has observed, the greatest variety of 
corallines are to be found on what are generally 
called rock oysters, or upon those beds of oysters 
for some time disused or neglected. In places 
like these, they sometimes cluster in such quan- 
tities as to look like little fairy groves. If we can 
procure them immediately after being dredged 
up, and, taking them carefully from the oysters, 
place them in dishes full of sea-water, they will 
soon recover from their temporary alarm, and we 
shall shortly see the polypes expanding their ten- 
tacula fearlessly, like living flowers. Observations 
are best made in summer, as in winter the ani- 
mals become torpid and contracted. 

It would not be often that a dredge of oysters 
would come up, during the summer season, without 
having, on some of the shells, that pretty and 
common species, the Herring-bone coralline (Ha- 
lecium halecinum) which grows on stones and 
shells, in the deep parts of the sea. The young 
zoophyte is of a deep yellow hue; but it soon 



ZOOPHYTES. 



259 



loses this brighter tint, and as it increases in size, 
it assumes a dingy brownish colour, like that of 
wet sand. It is very brittle, and irregularly 




branched, and from four to ten inches in height, 
growing upright from numerous fibres matted 
together like a piece of sponge. 

A large number of these pretty plant-like 
zoophytes must be left unnoticed here ; nor shall 
we linger long over the division of the large class 
Anthozoa, called the Asteroida. Zoophytes of 
this order consist of a calcareous or horny axis, 
or internal skeleton, surrounded by the fleshy 
parts of the compound body. Our British species 
are all natives of the deeper parts of the sea, and 
cannot, therefore, be considered as common ob- 
s 2 



260 ZOOPHYTES. 

jects of our shores ; though several of them are 
well known to our fishermen, and also to the in- 
habitants of sea-side towns, from being frequently 
brought up in the dredge. It is in this division 
that we find those beautiful sea-fans which most 
of us have seen among the curiosities brought 
home from the tropical seas, and which, looking 
to us like so many stony sprays of sea-weed, yet 
convey little idea of their beauty in their native 
haunts. Waving about, under the emerald- 
green waters, like willow-trees before the wave, 
bending in most graceful attitudes, and coloured 
with brilliant hues of violet and purple, and paler 
blue, they may well attract the young voyager 
who stoops over the side of the vessel to look down 
into the deep ; and we wonder not that he hastens 
to the coral reef, where they are waving, and re- 
turns with bleeding feet from their sharp ridges, 
rich with the spoils of the sea. Cuvier, in his 
" Theory of the Earth," describes the beauty of 
these lithophyta, which abound in the seas of the 
tropics, and are propagated with great rapidity, 
their tree -like forms being variously interwoven, 
and often forming frightful snares for navigators. 
We have four British species of these Sea-fans 
(Gorgonia}, and one of them is common on the 
Devonshire coast ; but they are far inferior in 
beauty of colour, as well as in size, to the natives 
of warmer latitudes. Our fishermen may well 
call them sea-shrubs, for few would look upon 
them without deeming them some plant, encrusted 
with lime. The sea-fan branches out into a com- 
plete network, the whole mass of which is or- 
ganized and living, and receives its food and 
means of increase from the food abounding in 



ZOOPHYTES. 261 

every drop of ocean, and gathered in for the sup- 
port of the whole body by the vigorous polypes, 
whose arms, expanded like flowers, convey the 
prey into their stomachs. Yet the axis of this 
sea-fan is not, as we might at first suppose, of a 
stony nature; it is horny, and covered with a 
fleshy substance or crust, the living link which 
unites the numerous polypes into one harmonious 
whole. As this crust dries, it becomes friable and 
porous ; and it is in this state that we see it when 
we look at the sea-fan in the museum, or place it 
in our houses for ornament. Nor is the flat and 
fan-like shape of the zoophyte a mere accidental 
figure. The prevalence of this form in submarine 
vegetation long since attracted the attention of our 
great naturalist Kay, who, in his work on the 
" Wisdom of God in Creation,' 7 thus remarks on 
it : " That the motion of the water descends to 
a good depth, I prove from those plants that grow 
deepest in the sea, because they all generally 
grow flat, in the manner of a fan, and not with 
branches on all sides, like trees, which is so con- 
trived by the providence of nature, for that the 
edges of them do, in that posture, with most ease 
cut the water flowing to and fro ; and should the 
flat side be objected to the stream, it would soon 
be turned edgewise, by the force of it, because in 
that site it doth least resist the motion of the 
water : whereas did the branches of these plants 
grow round, they would be thrown backward and 
forward every tide. Nay, not only the herbaceous 
and woody submarine plants, but also the litho- 
phyta themselves, affect this manner of growing, 
as I have observed in various kinds of coral and 
pori." 



262 ZOOPHYTES. 

Then there are, in our seas, the Sea-pens, 
shaped so much like our writing implements, that 
if our fishermen brought them up from the mud 
in which they are sticking, the reader would at 
once recognise them. There is but one British 
species known, and this the fishermen call the Cox- 
comb, for it has a broader expansion than some 
other kinds, and consequently has a less perfect 
resemblance than some others to the feathered 
part of a quill. The Phosphorescent Sea-pen. 
(Pennatula pkosphorea) is about three or four inches 
long, of a purplish red colour, tapering, and naked 
at the lower end, and feathered about half-way 
down, with closely set pinnae. Here, along the 
margins, are placed the polype cells, and hence 
may be seen their clear white arms, eight in 
number, protruding themselves, in search of prey. 
The pinnae are curved backwards, and move up 
and down, sometimes altogether, sometimes with 
separate motion, so that this zoophyte has been 
said by some zoologists to have the same oar-like 
motion as that given to fishes by their fins. This 
lovely object is remarkably phosphorescent, as 
are all the species of Pennutalidce. It appears to 
be luminous when it chooses, and apparently only 
emits its light when under some irritation. Dr. 
Johnston calls the zoophytes "Will-o'-the-wisps 
of the sea, put out to frighten feeble assailants." 
When plunged in fresh water, this beautiful sea- 
pen scatters sparks in all directions. 

The Virgularia, which the fishermen call Sea- 
rush (Virgularia mirabilis}, is a less frequent 
marine production, but is found on the eastern and 
north-eastern shores of Scotland, as well as on 
some other parts of our coasts. It varies in length 



ZOOPHYTES. 



263 



from six to ten inches, and is like a quill, stripped 
of its feathers. 

But quitting rarer for familiar objects, we must 
proceed to that common zoophyte of our coast, 



iamiliarly called Dead Men's Fingers, or Dead 
Men's Toes, because it is sometimes found divided 
into lobes somewhat re- 
sembling those parts of 
the human frame. The 
Alcyonium digitatum is 
very often a shapeless 
mass, and sometimes a 
mere crust on an oyster 
shell. It is of a deep 
orange-colour, with a 
tough, leathery skin, 
filled inside with a jelly- 
like substance. Its first 
appearance is rather 
uninviting, the more 
especially as, even in its 
fresh state, its odour is 
most disgusting ; yet if 
we take it home, and 
place it in a tumbler of sea-water, we shall soon 
become not only reconciled to it, but filled with 
admiration at its beauty. Gradually, the mass 
imbibes the fluid, and swells to a larger size; 
and, looking down closely upon it, we find its 
surface thickly scattered over with starry figures, 
divided into eight rays, from which emerge the 
eight tentacles of each polype, all moving about 
with great activity, and forming a most beautiful 
assemblage of animal-flowers, arranged round a 




264 ZOOPHYTES. 

clear cylindrical tube or column. This zoophyte 
may be found on almost any part of our coasts, 
adhering to stones or shells brought up from deep 
water, and in some places is so common, that if 
a dredge of oysters were to be brought up from 
the deep, not a shell or a stone but would exhibit 
one or more of the conspicuous tufts of this in- 
teresting zoophyte. 

Perhaps the zoophytes best known as such to 
visitors at the coast, are the beautiful Sea Ane- 
mones, which offer their loveliness to every eye, 
and need no microscope to reveal their tints or 
forms. Clustered by thousands on sea-side rocks 
or sands, adorning the sides of rocky pools, with 
flowers which resemble marigolds or China-asters 




in their form, but which are brighter in their colours 
than any flowers which our garden can show ; 
redder than roses, of richer purple than the violet, 
and wearing the rainbow hues of the gorgeous 
cactus flower, which the painter in vain essays to 



ZOOPHYTES. 265 

copy, there are few objects in nature more calcu- 
lated to attract our notice than are these living 
flowers. There they grow 

" Rooted and slumb'ring through a dream of life," 

making a little isle of beauty of the rock where 
they abound, waiting, with the dark, lank sea- 
weeds, the return of the tide; and perchance 
awaking in the mind of many a poet such thoughts 
as arose in that of Southey, when he described 
them, in his poem of " Thalaba;" 

" Meantime, with fuller reach and stronger swell, 

Wave after wave advanced : 
Each following billow lifted the last foam 
That trembled on the sand with rainbow hues ^ 
The living flower, that, rooted to the rock, 

Late from the thinner element, 
Shrunk down within its purple stem to sleep, 

Now feels the water, and again 

Awakening, blossoms out 

All its green anther-neck," 

We may find these sea anemones on almost all 
parts of our coast; but we must not go out to 
look for them when the shades of evening are 
soon about to gather over the ocean, or when the 
bright moon is silvering over the waters. They 
delight in sunshine ; and their clear white, or orange, 
or scarlet, or pink arms, moving about to catch 
the food within their reach, can be seen only 
under the cloudless sky. Beautiful as they are 
beneath our summer noon, yet they cannot com- 
pare with the species peculiar to those warmer 
latitudes, in which every tint brightens into more 
glowing hues. When in a state of repose, the 
sea anemones lose all that is attractive in their 
appearance. They assume the form of a wrinkled 



266 ZOOPHYTES. 

fleshy cone, or they lengthen themselves into a 
flabby cylinder, with only a small aperture at the 
summit. The surface of the cone is in some 
cases smooth, in others covered over with little 
bead-like prominences. Sometimes it is glossy, 
like silk, or it may be covered, as with a coat of 
velvet. Some of these animals encase themselves 
with bits of broken sand or gravel, or other things 
within their reach, making for themselves a coat of 
mail, to compensate for the want of that protection 
which is given to some polypes by their horny or 
calcareous polypidoms. It is not easy to detach 
them from the rock without injury; but, by in- 
serting the blade of a knife carefully under them, 
we may unloose them from their hold, and bring 
them away, and long preserve them. By the 
next day they will have recovered from the shock, 
and in the dish of salt water we may see their 
numerous tentacula, surrounding the central disc 
in clear and lustrous beauty. By changing the 
water frequently, they will live for many months 
in-doors, though, after a time, we perceive that 
they become more languid. Sometimes we may 
see these large polypes, these sea-anemones, 
drawing in water through their tentacles, until 
they become wonderfully distended, and their 
rays are thus rendered more clear and beautiful 
and plump by imbibing the water. Sometimes 
our sea-anemone becomes so distended as to lose 
all its symmetry, and the stomach lies like a clear 
bladder over the sides of its circular form, in large 
lobes. After a while, the water thus imbibed is 
projected in jets, or in a stream, from several of 
the tentacula ; and Dr. Johnston remarks, that if 
the contraction is sudden and strong, the water 



ZOOPHYTES. 267 

may be thrown out with so much force as to rise 
to the height of at least a foot. 

To look down upon these flowers, one would 
deem them the most helpless of living creatures. 
The water, with its myriads of tiny insects, seems 
to afford their proper nutriment, and none would 
guess, to glance at them, that they could possibly 
kill, and swallow crabs and shell-fish larger than 
themselves. But the great Creator, when he made 
them, furnished them all, helpless as they seem, 
with the means of securing their appropriate nutri- 
ment. They possess a poisonous secretion which 
soon extinguishes life in the animal which comes 
near them, and which can make us conscious of 
its power to sting. This poison is not of equal 
strength in all the species ; in some, it is sufficient 
to cause only a slight sensation of tingling in the 
fingers which have touched the anemone ; in others, 
the sensation is more of a smarting or burning 
nature. It appears, too, that different persons are 
variously affected, even by touching the same 
individual. The author had placed in a vessel of 
sea water, a fine specimen of the Fig Marigold Sea 
Anemone (Actinia mesembryanthemum)^ which she 
was accustomed to touch many times during the 
day. The tentacula closed immediately around 
the intruding finger, producing only a slight ting- 
ling. Her surprise was great at finding that the 
same anemone, on being touched by another person, 
communicated a more powerful sensation, which 
her friend assured her was felt up the whole of 
the arm. More than twenty persons touched this 
anemone, and the writer was amused by observing 
how variously they were affected; some being 
only slightly tingled, while others started back as 



268 ZOOPHYTES. 

if stung by a nettle. The poison has a great effect 
on the inferior animals. Woe to the crab or the 
lobster which strays near the innocent looking 
animal-flower : strong and active as he seems, he 
has little chance of escape. Slowly, and with 
apparent caution, the zoophyte seizes his prey, 
and crowding around all his brilliant petal-like 
arms, drags it into his stomach. He is swallowed 
whole; and so much of him as can be converted 
by the animal into nutriment, digests there ; while 
again the anemone turns out of its mouth the shell, 
or harder and indigestible portion of his victim. 
Mr. Cocks remarks of one British species (Anthea 
cereus,} " The fish which has been so unfortunate 
as to be embraced by the tentacula of this ane- 
mone for a few minutes, loses its activity, becomes 
stupid, the eyes injected, and death soon closes the 
scene. In August, 1845, I removed from the 
stomach of an individual, a partly digested fish, 
nearly four inches in length; and I have fre- 
quently taken from the stomachs of others, crabs, 
two and a quarter inches in diameter." Another 
writer once remarked one of those mistakes in in- 
stinct, which animals sometimes exhibit, in the 
case of our most sagacious little insect, the bee. 
It hovered over the anemone, which was just then 
only covered by a rim of water, and evidently mis- 
taking it for some gay marigold or other blossom, 
the luckless insect darted through the water to 
the mouth of the polype. It struggled to get free 
for some time, but was held down till being 
drowned, it was swallowed. Hungry creatures, 
too, are these anemones. A little bee would not 
serve one of them for his dinner, for delicate and 
frail as they seem, three or four mussels are only 



-ZOOPHYTES. 269 

sufficient for a single meal, and they are all dis- 
solved before the anemone casts forth the useless 
shell. 

Dicquemare, by changing the sea-water of the 
vessel in which they were held, kept sea anemones 
for some years, and tried numerous experiments 
with them. He says that they foretell changes 
of weather as surely as the barometer. Even 
when kept within doors, they are sensible of at- 
mospheric changes long before these are evident 
to our less acute sensibilities ; and that great 
naturalist thinks that they might be kept in sea 
water, daily renewed, and might serve the mariner 
as a sea barometer. 

The Actiniae are not easily injured. They pos- 
sess, in common with other creatures low in the 
scale of animal organization, a great tenacity of 
life, and a wonderful power of renewing any muti- 
lated portion. They may be immersed in hot 
water, or frozen ; their arms may be cut off, their 
very bodies cut into two or more pieces, yet, give 
them time, and again we find them forming into 
a circular body, and little arms growing out afresh 
on the portion from which they had been severed ; 
while the rays, in the course of a few weeks, 
again form themselves into a living flower. Eyes 
they have none, and yet not a cloud can pass over 
the blue sky on a summer's day a cloud which 
would hardly warn the scarlet pimpernel to close 
against coming rain but the anemone shrinks as 
if injured ; and so sensitive is it to the presence of 
fresh water, that a plunge of only a few minutes 
destroys it. Rooted as they are to the rock, yet 
they can, at will, unfasten themselves from their 
attachments, and creep about over its surface, 



270 ZOOPHYTES. 

experiencing, doubtless, a sens of enjoyment, 
when, in their rapacity, they devour their prey. 
The Actiniae all grow singly, but the allied family 
of Zoanthus, consists of a number of small animal 
flowers, seated upon one fleshy base, and connected 
together by it. 

The bodies of our British sea anemones are, in 
some, of a deep scarlet tint; in others, of green 
hue, like the young spring leaf; or of dull olive 
green, or of the pale hue of the green sea. Some 
are liver-coloured or of dark claret, or of all shades 
of red or buff; and for whiteness, some of them 
rival the snow itself. One of the commonest 
species is the Fig Marigold Sea Anemone (Actinia 
mesembryanthemum), which may be found on almost 
any of the shores of our island, where clustering 
rocks or stones can afford it a habitation. The 
older French writers called it La plus petite des 
orties de mer ; and a nettle it is in its stinging 
powers, but they are not so pungent as in some 
other species, though some writers still call it the 
small red sea-nettle. Its body is, when fully 
grown, about an inch or an inch and a half in dia- 
meter, forming a half globe in shape. It is of dull 
liver colour or olive green, sometimes marked with 
blue and greenish lines. The base which surrounds 
the hemisphere like a ruffle, has sometimes, though 
not always, a bright blue rim around its edge, 
and it is occasionally streaked with red. The 
arms are long, and usually of the same colour as 
the body, but paler and clearer in tint. Around 
the central aperture, and just within its margin, 
are twenty-five little blue tubercles, which resemble 
so' many turquoise beads. This species expands 
only when covered with water. 



ZOOPHYTES. 271 

Another frequent species, and one which adorns 
the rocks and reefs about our southern shores, and 
makes them like a blooming garden, is the lovely 
tinted Purple Sea Anemone (Actinia crassicornis}. 
Not that it always exhibits the colour which gives 
it its familiar name, for it varies much in hue. In 
one of its varieties it is of brilliant scarlet, studded 
with spots of a paler colour. Now we see it revel- 
ling in the subdued sunshine, enjoying its warmth, 
yet screening itself from its glare in the crevice of 
the rock or under the shelter of some large stone, 
and we pause to admire its delicate cream tint or 
its sulphur-coloured beauty. A little farther on, and 
our sea anemone displays itself in greenish hue, 
with orange stripes ; or marbled with red and white, 
would lead the inexperienced naturalist to believe 
that he has found some other species. The tenta- 
cula are very often, indeed almost always, marked 
with white and red rings ; but sometimes, when 
the body of this actinia is of a pale flesh or cream 
colour, there are no rings on the tentacula, but 
they are of the same hue as the body. The body 
in this species is rough, with minute glandular ex- 
crescences. 

To look at the sea anemones when they are 
closed, or to put our finger on their cold slimy coats, 
one would not be very ready to suggest the pro- 
posal of making a meal of them, yet in tropical 
countries they are much used as food, and a beau- 
tiful species, with crimson tentacles, which is 
abundant on the shores of the Mediterranean, is a 
favourite dish of Italian epicures. Our common 
Purple Sea Anemone (Actinia crassicornis) is said, 
by the Abbe Dicquemare, to be preferable to any 
other for the table. " Being boiled in sea-water," 



272 ZOOPHYTES. 

says this writer of these polypes, " they acquire a 
firm and palatable consistence, and then may be 
eaten with any kind of sauce. They are of an 
inviting appearance, of a light shivering texture, 
and of a soft white, and reddish hue. Their smell 
is not unlike that of a warm crab or lobster." After 
all, they would not, to any of us, be more unin- 
viting than a dish of snails, yet to the Hungarians 
this is agreeable, as it was to the ancient Romans ; 
and delicate ladies dine on snails, cut into small 
pieces and dressed with seasoning, while they 
would shudder at the sight of a raw oyster. 

Twenty different kinds of sea anemone are found 
on our coast, some of them much larger than the 
common species which we have described. 

Passing by many interesting zoophytes to pro- 
ceed to the other large class, the Polyzoa or 
Bryozoa, often called the moss corals, we find 
there a very different structure of the animals, 
though much resemblance in the skeletons. The 
Polyzoa, though smaller than the Anthozoa, are of 
higher organization. In the compound anthozoa, 
as in the sea fir and sickle beard, the polypes seem 
each to be a bud issuing from a common fleshy 
trunk; but, in the polyzoa, every individual is 
distinct, though they are all connected by one 
common bond of union. Dr. Johnston's compari- 
son of the former to a " chain, of which all the 
links are welded; and the latter, to a necklace 
where the beads are strung together by a common 
thread," presents us with a good idea of the dis- 
tinction. In the anthozoa, the horny plant-like 
fabric, or the stony substance of the coral, has 
little or no organic connexion with the fleshy por- 
tion ; for although it originates in the polypes, and 



ZOOPHYTES. 273 

is secreted by them, yet, when once formed, it has 
no further power of development, nor is any circu- 
lation carried through it. But in the moss corals, 
the outward skin, the polypidom, continues to be 
always a living part of the animal which dwells 
within; it adheres closely to the polype, and is 
connected with its flesh. None of the animals of 
this class are separate or naked, like the sea ane- 
mones; they all grow in compound bodies, and 
are lodged in cells, in which, during a state of 
repose, the polypes lie doubled up. The species 
of moss corals are very numerous. Hundreds 
of fossil kinds, undiscovered but by the aid of 
most powerful microscopes, have recently been de- 
tected by Ehrenberg and D'Orbigny, their shelly 
covering entering into the composition of chalk 
beds, mountain limestone, and the flints of the Jura 
limestone, sea sands, and the sands of the Libyan 
desert. Many of these are altogether invisible to 
the unassisted eye; others appear like minute 
points, smaller than the grains of the sandy shore. 
So minute are some of the species of moss corals, 
that great accumulations of them are found in the 
finest prepared whiting, uninjured in form, amid 
all the processes of its preparation. And when we 
call in the aid of the microscope we may behold 
them of exquisite symmetry, in the chalk coating 
which covers the walls of our apartments, forming- 
there a beautiful mosaic work when the chalk, 
mixed with water, is spread out before us. 

A large number of the moss corals appear to us 
merely as scaly crusts upon the surfaces of the 
rocks and sea-weeds, often covering them with a 
thick coat of dirty sand colour, and, as those un- 
acquainted with zoophytes would think, spoiling 



274 ZOOPHYTES. 

the beauty of our prettiest marine plants, and in- 
festing alike animal and vegetable productions of 
the ocean. In some cases we can at once see that 
these scaly patches are congregated cells ; but it 
needs microscopic aid to reveal to us the fact, that 
in different species these cells are of different 
forms, and that in each cell lies a living creature, 
which, when it needs to bring the prey to its 
mouth, can awake to most vigorous activity, and 
extend its arms, covered with minute cilia or hairs, 
from the opening of its dwelling. The Lepraliae, 
or sea scurfs, are thin calcareous crusts of white, 
yellow, or reddish, or purplish tints. There are 
more than thirty-five described species, and more 
probably remain yet to be discovered. The care- 
less passers by would scarcely see them, or deem 
them but deformities ; but 
our engraving, which re- 
presents the magnified 
cells of two species, will 
show that they possess 
a beautiful symmetry. 
Some of these scurfs are 
confined to particular species of sea- weed; others 
seem quite indifferent as to what surface they 
encrust, some grow only on shells, but all are 
parasitical. 

The most common zoophyte of this class is that 
represented by our figure, which is known, though 
perhaps not by name, to all who have ever roamed 
by ocean's margin, with high intent upon the 
objects scattered around them. The large, horny, 
brittle, leaf-like substance, of the colour of moist 
wood, yet reminding us of a withered leaf, and at 
some seasons almost as plentiful as if it had been 





ZOOPHYTES. 



275 



scattered by the wind from some neighbouring 
tree, is the Broad-leaved Hornwrack (Flustra 
foliacea). If held up to the light we can see 
plainly that it is composed of clusters of cells. 




These cells are formed on both sides of its sub- 
stance, and their raised margins make the surface 
so rough to our touch. When placed under the 
microscope, we can see that the upper part of the 
margin of each cell is armed with four projecting 
horny spines, which appear to be designed as a 
protection to the polypes when they extend their 
arms. It has been observed, too, by Dr. Farre, 
that the transparent horny cell which closely sur- 
rounds the body of the animal, is nearly unyield- 
ing at the lower part, but is terminated at the 
T2 



276 ZOOPHYTES. 

upper by a flexible portion, which serves to protect 
the upper part of the body when the whole is 
expanded, at which time it is as large as the rest 
of the cell; while, when the animal retracts, it is 
folded up and drawn in after it, and completely 
closes the mouth of the cell. The aperture of the 
cell is formed by a lid, which folds down when the 
polype is about to advance from it. These cells 
appear under the microscope, like so many crystal 
cups, and each one is the dwelling-place of a per- 
fect animal, united to its neighbours in the cells 
above and below him, by a common circulation. 
Wondrous, indeed, is the structure of these po- 
lypes ; their little tentacles, or arms, surrounding 
the body like small bristles, are covered with innu- 
merable minute cilia, or fringe-like hairs, all quickly 
vibrating, and acting on the water like so many 
paddles, producing all around them strong and 
rapid currents. " Constantly," says Professor 
Jones, " these streams of water pour along, some 
rushing along the aspect of each tentacle towards 
the mouth, and hurrying thither whatever food is 
brought within their influence. Escape out of the 
living whirlpool seems impossible, and every tiny 
being that approaches its dread margin perishes. 
Charybdis, with its fabled terrors, could not bear 
comparison with the fierce vortex thus produced. 
Soon as an animalcule comes within a given dis- 
tance, it is whirled along directly to the mouth of 
the gulph, where, if admissible as food, it enters 
and is swallowed ; or, if rejected, it is dashed 
away by other currents, running different ways, 
and hurried to a distance. Neither does our admi- 
ration cease after the food has passed the opening 
of the mouth, for, in the throat itself, innumerable 



ZOOPHYTES. 277 

cilia are busily in motion, turning round and round 
the swallowed victim, urging it along until it 
reaches the stomach, where its struggles end." In 
a common-sized specimen of this hornwrack, at 
least 36,000 living beings have been computed to 
exist, each actively and rapidly vibrating the cilia 
which covers the tentacles. Nor is this all : this 
Flustra is often the point of attachment to other 
corallines, minute threads which creep over its 
surface, or crowd upon it in dense little tufts, or 
cover it with a mossy-looking substance, like a 
coating of down. Every filament, there, has cells 
containing living creatures, each perfect in its 
structure, and no less highly organized than the 
polypes of the sea-mat. Many persons, to whom 
this hornwrack is familiar, have observed its 
peculiar odour, and, when the polypidom is newly 
thrown up from the waters, it is often very plea- 
sant. Pallas compares its scent to that of the 
orange ; Dr. Grant, to the perfume of violets ; and 
another writer describes it as mingling the per- 
fumes of the rose and geranium. This latter 
description seems to the author to convey the best 
idea of the odour, such at least as she has found 
it ; but it is probable that it may vary in different 
specimens, and she has sometimes picked up a 
dozen pieces, in not one of which any pleasant 
perfume was apparent, while some of them had a 
strong and disagreeable fishy odour. This horn- 
wrack has been called Duck's-foot Conferva, and 
Curious sea-weed. A writer in London's Maga- 
zine of Natural History, remarked of it, that, on 
exposure to the fire, it emits " a powerful acid 
smell, similar to that of lemons." The author has 
subjected many specimens to this experiment, and 



278 ZOOPHYTES. 

in one or two cases detected a faint 'odour of 
lemon ; but in most instances all sweet odour was 
overpowered by the strong scent of burning bones, 
or other animal substance, w^hich the hornwrack 
gave out in the flame. This and the other horn- 
wracks were formerly included under the name 
of Sea-mat; hence Linnaeus gave the genus their 
scientific name from the Saxon^wstfmm, ' to weave.'' 

The narrow-leaved Hornwrack (Flustra trun- 
cata) mucli resembles this, but it is of a thinner and 
more papery substance, and its segments are nar- 
rower at the base. Though very common in deep 
water on the Scottish coast, and on the northern 
shores of England, it is less generally distributed 
than the broad-leaved kind. Then there is a 
pretty yellowish-brown species, called Flustra 
carbasea, not uncommon on some coasts. The 
polypes in this species have about twenty-two ten- 
tacles, on which Dr. Grant remarks, " They are 
nearly a third of the length of the body, and there 
appears to be about 50 cilias on each side of a ten- 
taculum, making 2,200 cilige on each polypus. 
In this species there are more than 18 cells in a 
square line, or 1,800, in a square inch of surface; 
and the branches of an ordinary specimen present 
about 10 square inches of surface, so that a com- 
mon specimen of the Carbasea presents more than 
18,000 polypi, 396,000 tentacula, and 39,600,000 
cilias." 

Some sea-mats form patches on our common 
marine plants, some inches in length, and they 
may be seen by the naked eye to be composed of 
a mass of cells. The membranous species (Flus- 
tra membranacea], so common on the fronds of the 
Laminaria, and different species of Fucus, forming 



ZOOPHYTES. 279 

on their surfaces a gauze-like crust, is exquisitely 
beautiful under the microscope. The Rev. David 
Landsborough and Dr. Johnston have seen a spe- 
cimen of this, five feet in length by eight inches 
in breadth : and Dr. Landsborough counted the 
cells on every square inch, each of which cells had 
been inhabited by a living polype, and found that 
this " web of silvery lace " had been the work and 
the dwelling-place of above " two millions of in- 
dustrious, and doubtless happy inmates ; so that 
this single colony, on a submarine island, was 
about equal in number to the population of 
Scotland." 

Many are the wondrous zoophytes belonging to 
our own seas, and strewed about among the refuse 
of the ocean on our shores, which we must here 
leave unnoticed. Though familiarly acquainted 
with the objects named in this paper, yet the 
author is indebted for many of its details to the 
interesting facts discovered and accumulated by 
Dr. George Johnston. His valuable work on the 
British Zoophytes cannot be read by any intel- 
ligent person without wonder and delight. To 
many it has opened a new world of ideas. View- 
ing the subject with the feelings of a philosopher, 
a poet, and a Christian, his book is a source of 
gratification both to the scientific and the un- 
learned reader. 

The verses which conclude the chapter were 
written by Calder Campbell, for this little volume : 

"The sea! the sea magnificent, 

On which we love to pore, 

As if it were one huge extent 

Of sage but secret lore ; 
Which, though upon the lesson bent, 
Perplexes more and more. 



280 ZOOPHYTES. 



Look down into its depths, where life 

In such strange shapes is seen, 
That he who thinks that human strife 

On earth hath only been, 
Will turn again to landward plain, 

And own it more serene. 
Life in each fish and finny creature 

That revels in the flood ; 
Life in each tangled weed, by nature 

Porm'd for a curious brood : 
Life in each shell of varied feature, 

With many a tint imbued. 
The spars that glitter up from chasms 

Where zoophytes abound ; 
The shells, flung out from darksome pits", 

To shine on sun-struck ground ; 
The plants that grow deep down below, 

Whence comes a solemn sound : 
Those spars, shells, plants, have each and alt 

A God-given life within ; 
And solemn thoughts, in thickness fall 

Upon my spirit, when 
I think on man's superior claim 

To grace, with all his sin. 
But mysteries hide in heavenly love 

As in the dark deep wave ; 
And all we know, or need to know 

Of life, and of the grave, 
Is that God gave to man a soul 

For his own Son to save. 
Nor, without object, gifted He 

With life, those groups that grow- 
Like woodlands, in the quaint old sea, 

Whose every bud and bough 
Teems with existence ; why, or how, 

We cannot guess or know. 
Enough to know that they, like us, 

Were form'd by power divine ; 
Enough to know, that weal and woe, 

That darkness and sunshine 
Have each their time of reign below 

TO end when He makes sign." 



CHAPTER V. 

VARIOUS COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

" Now is it pleasant on a summer eve, 
When a broad shore retiring waters leave, 
Awhile to wait upon the firm fair sand, 
When all is calm at sea, and still at land, 
And there the ocean's produce to explore, 
As floating by> or rolling on the shore ; 
Those living jellies which the flesh inflame, 
Fierce as a nettle, and from that its name ; 
Some in huge masses, some that you may bring 
In the small compass of a lady's ring. 
Figured by hand divine there 's not a gem 
Wrought by man's art can be compared with them ; 
Soft, brilliant, tender, through the wave they glow, 
And make the moonbeam brighter where they flow." 

CRABBE. 

ONE of the most frequent objects' on our shores 
is a yellowish ball, composed of a number of little 
bladders, of about the size of a pea, and of a 
membranous and tough material. These balls 
skim over the stones or sands on a rough day, 
never stopping till they fall into some cavity, or 
lodge themselves against the side of a boat 
or pier, where they often lie in numbers. They 
are the egg-shells of the common whelk, and when 
first deposited, are soft and full of a cream-like 
substance. They shortly harden, and the bladders 
then become full of small roundish eggs. There 
are sometimes as many as a hundred eggs in each 
case, though not more than four or five on an 
average come to perfection. The young animals, 



282 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 

when first hatched, are covered with a minute 
shell, which they enlarge as they grow older. The 
ball is often as large as an orange, and contains 
a great number of these egg-cases. One of an 
ordinary size was found by the author to consist 
of as many as two thousand five hundred. This 
mass of eggs is called on the coast bladder-chain, 
oyster-spat, sea-rose, or soap-ball or wash-ball. 
Ellis says of it, that in his time, sailors used it as 
soap, to wash their hands. 

Our engraving will at once remind all accus- 
tomed to the sea-side, of another object on which 




they have often looked; at which, perchance, in 
childhood, they have wondered much, doubting 
whether that olive-green leathery bag were not 
some kind of sea- weed. The Mermaid' s-purse, or 
the Fairy-purse, was the name by which they 
called it in those days ; and it is the egg-case of 
some of the several kinds of Ray-fish, or skate. It 
is open at both ends to admit the sea-water, and 
if we pick up any of the specimens so numerous 
during the months of September or October, we 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 283 

find within, a substance resembling the yolk and 
white of a bird's egg. A little later, the partly 
developed fish may be seen ; and finally, the skate 
fully formed, looking exactly like the large-sized 




fish, and lying with its tail turned over its back, 
seems only waiting for a little more strength to 
emerge from the end open next to its head, into its 
new life in the waters. If taken home in this 
state, and placed in a bason of water, the young 
fish will gradually glide forth, and swim very com- 
placently about in its native element. After a 
stormy day in November, numbers may be found 
in this condition. 

But the Mermaid' s-purse belonging to the dog- 
fish, a small species of shark, is a much prettier, 
though not so frequent an egg-case as this. It is 
smaller and thinner, sometimes of a dark brown, 
but frequently of a transparent horn colour, with 
threads proceeding from the four corners, often 
many feet long, making beautiful curled tassels, 
like the tendrils of the vine. These are coiled 



284 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

around the stems of sea-weeds, or broken wood, 
or on the projections of rocks, and fastening the 
egg-shell firmly till the little inmate is ready for 
its entrance into the waters, the waves may dash, 
and the storm may roar ever so wildly, yet is it as 
safe as if the sea were unstirred by a passing 
breeze. 

Several crabs are to be seen on most parts of 
our shore, and few are commoner than that kind 
which, hermit-like, shuts itself up in a lonely cell, 
and passes the greater part of life away from its 
kind. Bernard the Hermit, or the Hermit-crab, 
or, the Soldier-crab (Pagurus Bernhardus) , has a 
peculiar structure. The hinder part of this animal 
is destitute of the usual shelly crust in which most 
of the species are enveloped, and in an early stage 
of its existence, made conscious by its instinct of 
its frail and unprotected condition, it takes pos- 
session of some empty spiral or turbinated shell> 
which it finds upon the beach, among whose coils 
it can entwine itself, and putting forth its claws, 
crawl along, like the snail, with its home upon its 
back. Various shells may be seen thus inhabited ; 
the crab, as it increases in size, setting forth in 
quest of a larger dwelling, into which it enters 
backwards, gradually winding itself in, and taking 
hold of the end of the spire by means of a hook 
attached to its tail. When the hermit-crab be- 
comes larger, there are few common shells of size 
enough to receive it, except that of the whelk j 
but as these are usually plentiful, it is easy for it 
to find a castle. So frequent on some coasts are 
the hermit-crabs in the whelk-shell, that the writer 
found thirteen specimens in the course of an hour's 
walk on the beach of Dovor. The animal well 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 285 

deserves its name of soldier-crab, for it fights with 
most determined spirit in defence of its shell ; and 
the contest between the rival crabs contending 
for one dwelling, is most vigorous and fierce ; and 




if the opening of the castle is attacked by an 
enemy, the warfare maintained by the soldier is 
most amusing to witness. This crab creeps quickly 
over the shore, cautiously peeping forth to avoid 
danger. The right claw is generally larger than 
the other, and is protruded when the animal is at 
rest ; but if any danger approaches, the crab re- 
treats far into its shell, and putting the left claw 
over its head, and clasping it down with the right 
limb, it ensconces itself so securely, that it is not 
easily injured, unless the shell be broken. This 



286 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOKE. 



crab is said, when seized, to utter a faint cry. It 
certainly takes so strong a hold of its foe, that the 
finger thus grasped would be glad to withdraw 




itself, as the hermit will suffer itself to be killed 
rather than relinquish the hold. 

We have several common crabs, as well as other 
crustacean animals, hiding in the holes among the 
rocks, some of them walking sideways over the 
sand, and if touched, making most rapid efforts to 
hide themselves behind a sheltering stone, or under 
the friendly leaf of a large sea- weed. One of the 
most frequent kinds, the common shore-crab 
(Carcinus mcenas), really well deserves the name of 
le crdbe enrage, by which it is known on the French 



COMMON OBJECTS OP THE SHORE. 287 

coast, where it is as common as on our native 
shore. If any attempt is made to touch it, it 
runs along in a most excited state, and hastens to 
bury itself in the sand. If seized before it can 
make its escape, it fights most desperately, striving 
with all its might to seize and pinch the fingers, 
and moving its claws in most defiant attitudes, 
while, when no resource is left it, it will leave its 
claws behind, and get away by means of its smaller 
limbs. Nor does the animal appear to suffer from 
its loss, for though it can move but slowly, there 
is no indication of pain. Could we again see this 
maimed crab, we should probably find, that after a 
while it had renewed its limbs ; for in common 
with other crustaceous animals, it has the power 
of reproducing them from the remaining portion 
of the old ones. We often see a lobster brought 
to table with one limb longer than the other ; a 
condition which was probably caused by its having 
in some encounter with an enemy, dropped it in 
its grasp, while the one more recently produced 
had not attained its full size at the time when the 
lobster was captured. 

This crab is a common article of food in towns 
contiguous to the sea, and is sold in the streets 
both of London and Paris ; but it is inferior in 
size and flavour to the larger species found very 
generally around our coasts, and usually abounding 
on such as are rocky, often to be seen after the 
tide has withdrawn from the rocks, hiding itself 
there among the sea-weeds. The flesh of this 
crab ( Cancer Pagurus) is esteemed a great delicacy. 
The French call it le crabe poupart, or le tourteau. 
The large kinds keep out on the rocks in deeper 
water, where they are caught by men who go out 



288 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 



in boats, with creels made of basket work, baited 
with thornback, skate, or other fish ; and, like other 
crustaceans, the crabs are not particular as to the 
nature of their food, being destined to consume the 
refuse of the sea. 

Some of the most beautiful of our British crabs 
are those termed Velvet-crabs, on account of the 
velvety down with which the shell is covered, and 




which extends even to the limbs of the animal. 
They are of reddish colour, tinged with blue. One 
of these, commonly found on our shores (Portunus 
puber], is about two inches and a half long, and 
much esteemed as food. Its colours are remark- 
ably bright. 

Then there are crabs on our coast with triangular 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 289 

bodies, and long thin hairy legs, so like the spider, 
that fishermen call them the spider-crabs; and 
there is a little crab not at all unfrequent in the 
shell of the mussel, which is the subject of many 
an ancient legend. This is the Pea-crab (Pinno- 
theres pisum), a tiny creature, belonging to a group 
of small crustaceans, which dwell between the 
mantle lobes of the mussels and pinnae, as well as 
those of some other bivalve mollusks. The ancients 
had strange poetic fancies respecting these pea- 
crabs, nor were they entirely rejected by naturalists 
or poets of modern times, though disproved by the 
investigation of recent science. Old writers told 
of a singular friendship existing between these 
little animals and the mussels, relating how, while 
the mussels lay with open shell to catch their prey, 
the crab, espying its approach, would give the 
shell-fish warning, so that it might suddenly close 
its shell upon the animal. In return for this, the 
mussel was reported to give the crab its home and 
food, for no sooner was the shell closed than the 
two friends shared the feast. Hasselquist, who 
visited Smyrna about a century since, writing 
thence, expatiates upon the valuable services of 
this little crab, though he has a different tale to 
tell of its doings. He observes, that the great 
silk mussel is found there, and that some of the 
cuttle-fish watch for it to open its shell, when, 
putting in their long arms, they would seize and 
devour the fish. But the sentinel crab, through 
the small opening of the shell, was said to keep 
so good a watch upon all enemies, that on their 
approach it moved, and gave warning to its hos- 
pitable entertainer, which immediately closed the 
doors of its dwelling. It appears, however, that 
u 



290 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

these little crabs have a soft and thin crust for 
their only covering, and that they repair to these 
shells for shelter, as the hermit-crab would to that 
of the whelk. 

The lobster (Astacus marinus), though not so 
general on all our coasts as the common species of 
crab, yet is by no means rare on rocky shores, and 
in some places very abundant. Every one is 
familiar with its general appearance, its eyes set 
upon stalks, enabling it to see all around ; its long 
ringed jointed horns, and the articulated plates 
of its tail. There is not altogether much in its 
appearance which at first sight would excite an 
interest, but to the careful observer it presents an 
object in which the skill of the great Creator is 
most beautifully manifest. Its plates are moved 
by very powerful muscles, and if the lobster sud- 
denly contracts these, it has power to dart back- 
wards with astonishing rapidity. Sometimes, when 
coming out of its hole in the rock, in search of 
food, it meets with an enemy lying in wait to 
seize it ; but no sooner does it see its danger, than 
it expands the movable plates of its tail, contracts 
the muscles, and bringing it down with much 
force, flaps it up against the lower part of the 
body, and darts backwards with inconceivable 
velocity, so that the eye can scarcely follow its 
motion, and that of the bird of the air, or the flash 
of lightning, may serve as a comparison. By these 
means the lobster will secure himself in small holes, 
in little crannies where we should deem it im- 
possible that it could enter. In the water it can 
run nimbly along, or dart forwards by means of its 
tail, with great quickness. The claws, too, pre- 
sent another instance of a beautiful contrivance 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 291 

for its use. In looking at the nippers of the larger 
claws, they may be seen to have little knobs or 
tubercles at the margin, while the edges of the 
smaller are toothed or serrated. With the knobbed 
pincers the lobster keeps a strong hold on the stalks 
of the sea-weeds, while the other serves it for cut- 
ting and mincing its food, which it is said thus 
to do very dexterously. It is well known that the 
lobster is a voracious and active hunter, eating 
all kinds of food, preferring it in a state of cor- 
ruption, thus aiding essentially in clearing away 
putrescent substances, its large strong claws fitting 
it for tearing stronger and tougher objects than 
the leaves of the marine plants. 

The immense consumption of this animal as food, 
is provided for by the great number of its eggs, 
sometimes nearly twenty thousand being produced 
by one lobster. 

The lobster, in common with other crustaceans, 
changes its coat of armour ; for it cannot, like the 
molluscous animal, add to it by secreting a fresh 
layer, as it increases in size. Its crust is of one 
piece, and formed at once, not of the same sub- 
stance as the shell of the mollusk, but consisting 
of animal matter and phosphate of lime. Nor is it 
alone the coat of mail the crust of plates which 
the crab or lobster throws off to take another: 
even the covering of its eyes, the living membrane 
of the stomach, the teeth connected with it, and 
all the expansions or tendons to which the muscles 
of the claws are fastened. Slipping out of all these, 
the soft body soon secretes a crust better fitted to 
its later stage of development. Instances have 
been known in which the ever-hungry lobster has 
been lured by the bait into the creel of the fisher- 
U 2 



292 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

man, just when about to cast its shell, and when 
the fisher has handled his prey, the animal has, to 
his surprise, slipped out, and left him holding in 
his hands the empty case. 

Equally provided with the lobster for swiftness 
of motion, is the little shrimp, whose cunning- 
looking eyes seems watching our every movement, 
as it darts about in the pool. The common shrimp 
( Grangon vulgaris) is remarkably active ; and, des- 
tined to serve as food, and to perform the no less 
important service of devouring the refuse of the 
sea, it is very abundant. Paley says of it, "Walk- 
ing by the sea-side on a calm evening, upon a sandy 
shore, and with an ebbing tide, I have frequently 
remarked the appearance of a dark cloud, or rather 
very thick mist, hanging over the edge of the 
water, to the height, perhaps, of half-a-yard, 
stretching along the coast, as far as the eye could 
reach, and always retiring with the water. When 
the cloud came to be examined, it proved to be 
nothing else than so much space filled with young 
shrimps in the act of bounding into the air, from 
the shallow margin of the water, or the wet sand." 
We have here an instance of a mass of numbers 

reminding us of the 
overwhelming flight of 
locusts in the east; and 
every one who has seen 
them on the sandy 
shores, must have ob- 
served how numerous 
they are there. The 
larger and more beau- 
tiful Prawn (Palcemon 
serratus) is less gene- 




COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 293 

rally distributed than this common species, though 
occurring, in some places, in abundance ; but the 
Opossum-shrimp (My sis Fabricii), represented by 
our figure, is almost as plentiful. Its name relates 
to the pouch or bag which holds the eggs in the 
female shrimp. 

Who has not looked upon sea and sky on such 
a scene as that described by the poet : 

" Star after star, from some unseen abyss, 
Came through the sky, like thoughts into the mind, 
We know not whence ; till all the firmament 
Was throng'd with constellations, and the sea 
Strown with their images." 

Was it the bright reflection of the glittering orbs 
of heaven, of which the poet sang when he wrote 
these lines ? Did their bright images, strown over 
the calm surface of the waters, on some still sum- 
mer evening, suggest the poetic resemblance to the 
thoughts coming we know not how, arising from 
some association of which even those who are most 
intellectually observant can take no cognisance? 
And yet his statement would have been no less 
true, had he been thinking of the literal fact of the 
multitude of star-like forms with which the sea is 
teeming forms so radiant, and some of them so 
bright with phosphorescent light, that even the 
peasant calls them star-fishes, and the philosopher, 
ever in some sort a poet too, once said of them, 
" As there are stars in the sky, so there are stars 
in the sea." Assuredly, both sea and shore are 
strewn with myriads of starry animals, though 
they are few in number compared with what they 
were in those olden ages, of which fossil remains 
tell us, when star-fishes, of extinct and beautiful 
forms, affixed to stalks, waved in multitudes in the 
seas, and having performed their appointed living 



294 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOKE, 

part in creation, went to form the crust of the 
earth on which man was to dwell, and leaving 
their petrified figures in the limestone rocks, in 
the mountain chains, traced there a history which 
should be read by the thoughtful and intelligent 
of future ages of mankind. 

Every one accustomed to examine collections of 
geological specimens, or to roam about the regions 
of limestone districts, must have seen the stony 
remains of these extinct star-fishes, in their most 
perfect state resembling the stem and flower of a 
lily, and hence called popularly lily-stones, and by 
the geologist termed Encrinites. The stalk is com- 
posed of little lozenge-like pieces, resembling small 
and nearly solid wheels, with a cinque-foil in the 
centre, and the fragments of these are very 
abundant. They are commonly called St. Cuth- 
bert's beads, and old tradition had much to tell of 
these and of some other common fossils. Some 
fossils are still in the North of England popularly 
called snake-stones, and petrified snakes, and stories 
are yet in existence of which ancient tales 

"told 

How of a thousand snakes each one 
Was changed into a coil of stone ;" 

while to the broken fragments of the star-fishes of 
the older world belong legends to which Sir 
Walter Scott alludes: 

" Nor did St. Cuthbert's daughters fail 
To vie with these in holy tale ; 

On a rock by Lindisfarn, 

St. Cuthbert sits and toils to frame 
The sea-born beads that bear his name ; 
Such tales had Whitby's fishers told, 
And said they might his shape behold, 

And hear his anvil sound ; 
A deaden'd clang a huge dim form, 
Seen but, and heard, when gathering storm 

And night were closing round." 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 295 

When we think of the immense strata of En- 
crinite marble which in some regions, as in Derby* 
shire, are composed of these innumerable lily-stars, 
showing that our seas must once have been full of 
them, it seems strange that stalked star-fishes 
should now be so rare. Once they clung by their 
long stems to the rocks down deep in the blue 
seas, and firmly fixed there, spread out their 
fringed flower-like arms to entrap the living nutri- 
ment afforded by the waters. Perhaps, like the 
modern tribe of star-fishes, they were the scaven- 
gers of the sea ; but we have no means of knowing 
whether they were at any time enabled to free 
themselves from their stalk, and glide about in the 
deep. One beautiful stalked star-fish alone re- 
mains, and this is affixed to a stalk only at an 
early period of its existence. The lovely Feather 
Star (Comatula rosacea) is found attached to the 
stems of sea-weeds and corallines, and is a bright 
rose-coloured animal, much resembling a flower, 
but not, while in this condition, more than half or 
three quarters of an inch in height. 

But this lovely object is not one of the common 
tilings of the sea-shore, though various other species 
of star-fish are among the most frequent and fa- 
miliar of all the things to be seen there. Commonest 
of all, is that star-fish known on the coast by the 
name of Five-fingered Jack, because its rays are 
usually five in number, though in some instances 
it has six. This animal (Uraster rubens) is on 
some parts of our coast termed the Common Cross- 
fish, and the people of Cornwall call it Clam, or 
Clamp. It is so abundant as to be sometimes col- 
lected for manure, and well may it be so, for one 
single star-fish will produce a thousand of its pro- 



296 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

geny in one season. Every one knows this com- 
mon animal, which is more or less of a reddish 
yellow colour in some cases of a purplish tinge, 
and varying in size from a specimen which might 
lie in the palm of the hand, to one six or eight 
inches in diameter. This star-fish, though at first 
sight not a particularly attractive one, should be 
taken home and placed in a large vessel of sea- 
water, or carried to some rocky pool, if we would 
see its wondrous and beautiful structure. If placed 
in a glass jar on its back, one of its first movements 
will probably be to turn itself round. This it does 
by folding over two or three of its rays, and then, 
with a sudden jerk, placing itself in its right 
position. If we look at its under surface, we shall 
discover, along each ray, a calcareous framework, 
composed of regular portions, commencing at the 
central mouth, and extending in a furrow to the 
tip of the ray. In this groove are many orifices, 
through which are protruded small fleshy suckers, 
which serve as legs, and each of which is termi- 
nated by a disc. More than three hundred of these 
suckers are placed on each ray, and we need no 
microscope to enable us to see them, moving 
sometimes all together, at others, only a few at a 
time. And well do these moving legs serve also 
to hold down the prey. Our star-fish has an 
appetite not easily satisfied. It has to cleanse the 
waters near the shore of that offal which else 
would pollute the atmosphere ; and the great 
Creator, who appointed to the star-fishes their 
occupation, gave them the inclination and the 
power to perform it. Nothing comes amiss to 
them. They can feed on the decomposing mass 
of dead animal matter, can swallow alike the 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 297 

gliding silvery fish, and get from within its hard 
shell the mollusk, apparently so well protected. 
Helpless as this animal would seem as it lies on the 
beach, it can conquer creatures which have greater 
strength and activity than itself. While lying in 
wait for its prey, it may chance that a crab comes 
within the grasp of its rays, which are ready bent 
in attitude for seizure. No sooner does the animal 
come in their reach, than the rays are closed down 
upon it, and vigorous as may be the struggle, 
escape is impossible, for all the suckers come out 
of their orifices, hold it down, and drag it to the 
mouth, where it is swallowed. The capture of the 
oyster might seem even a more difficult thing for 
the star-fish, yet it devours an immense number of 
these shell-fish, and is consequently in ill repute 
with the fishermen. The ancients, and many 
modern writers too, have told that it contrived to 
reach the mollusk enclosed in its shell, by in- 
sinuating one of its rays between the valves, when 
they happened to lie partly open. Thus the poet 
says : 

" The prickly star-fish creeps with fell deceit 
To force the oyster from his close retreat ; 
When gaping lids their widen'd void display, 
The watchful star thrusts in a pointed ray ; 
Of all its treasures robs the rifled case, 
And empty shells the sandy hillock grace." 

But though the star-fish does not thus " employ its 
rays as an oyster-knife," yet Professor Jones, in 
his most delightful book, " The Natural History of 
Animals," describes this process, which, as he 
says, is unique. The animal seizes upon the shelly 
valves of the oyster, and " proceeds coolly to turn 
its stomach inside out ; it then, perhaps, instils 



298 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

between the shells some torpifying fluid, which 
deprives the oyster of strength, and soon compels 
the prey to open its defences. The stomach of the 
star-fish, now distended like a bladder, is pushed 
in, and made to enwrap the oyster, which is soon 
digested, even* in its own shell, and furnishes a 
meal for its uncourteous visitor." 

Professor Forbes, too, considers it probable that 
the star-fishes have some acrid stinging fluid, which, 
like that of the sea anemone and sea nettles, serves 
to stupify the prey. It is commonly said, that 
this species possesses it in such power, as that 
it will sting those persons who touch it. But this 
is an assertion which may easily be disproved ; 
as we may pick up hundreds on the shore, and 
find them all harmless to the touch. Their great 
destruction of oysters has been long attested ; 
Bishop Sprat, in his " History of the Royal 
Society," treating of the oyster, says, " There are 
great penalties, by the Admiralty Court, laid upon 
those that fish out of those grounds which the 
Court appoints, or that destroy the Cultch, or that 
take any oysters that are not of size, or that do 
not tread under their feet, or throw upon the shore 
a fish which they call a Five-finger, resembling a 
spur rowel, because that fish gets into the oysters 
when they gape open, and sucks them out/' 

Scarcely less frequent is the common sun-star 
(Solaster papposa), which is much handsomer than 
the cross-fish. It has usually ten or twelve, though 
occasionally fifteen rays. It is commonly of a 
reddish purple colour, but sometimes the centre 
is red, and the rays are white, tipped with red and 
white or straw-coloured beneath. Like the cross- 
fish, it is found on oyster banks ; but it is fre- 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 



299 



quently thrown by the tide on the shore, or dragged 
up in nets, or on the hook of the fisherman. Some 
of the largest specimens measure nine inches 




across. It is very voracious, and generally found 
in deeper water than the last-mentioned species. 

All our British star-fishes are not so distinctly 
rayed in the star-like form. Thus we have the 
Bird's-foot Sea-star, an animal of a pentagonal 
shape, with very blunt angles, and of a white 
colour, marked with a red centre and fine red rays. 
It is thin, and when alive, flexible, like a piece of 
leather. Then we have the pretty little Gibbous 
Starlet, rarely measuring an inch across, and very 
common on some shores, though apparently con- 
fined to the south and west coasts of our island ; 
and the knotty Cushion-star, and others which 
may be described as having five angles rather than 
rays. 



300 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

These and some others, with the exception of 
the Comatula, belong to the true star-fishes, but the 
Brittle-stars and the Sand- stars are placed in the 
family termed by Professor Forbes Ophiuridce. 
These are the star -fishes which are most numerous 
in our seas. Not that the species are many in 
number, there being twelve only, but that the in- 
dividuals are very plentiful. Our engraving re- 
presents one of them, often thrown by the wave on 
the shore, and on some coasts, as at Dovor, it is 
one of the most frequent species. The common 
brittle star (Ophiocoma rosula) is a more elegant 




species than any other of the very general star- 
fishes. Brittle, indeed, it is, not only breaking up 
by a touch from its natural fragility, but evidently 
possessing the power of dismembering itself at its 
will. " Touch it,' 5 says Professor Forbes, " it flings 
away an arm : hold it, and in a moment not an 
arm remains attached to the body." Its disc is 
often of a dim rose-colour, with grey scales, some- 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 301 

times white, spotted with red often marked with 
a star of red or yellow, and occasionally nearly 
black. The rays are usually white, banded with 
pink often of a deep blue, with rose-coloured 
spines, banded with bright yellow, or speckled 
with brown and orange. It is fond of rocky shores, 
and rarer in sandy localities. The Professor re- 
marks of these brittle-stars, " I have seen a large 
dredge come up, completely filled with them ; a 
most curious sight, for when the dredge was emptied, 
these little creatures, writhing with the strangest 
contortions, crept about in all directions, often 
flinging their arms in broken pieces about them, 
and their snake-like and threatening attitudes 
were by no means relished by the boatmen, who 
anxiously asked permission to shoot them over- 
board, supers titiously remarking, that the things 
< weren't altogether right/ " These brittle-stars 
feed on small shell-fish and crabs, and are, in their 
turn, food for the larger fishes. This species is 
most brilliantly coloured, and is very general 
around our shores. 

Another very pretty, though less common 
species, is the brightly tinted Daisy Brittle-star 
(Ophiocoma bellis], with its long twisting rays. Its 
disc presents a surface of intermingled spines and 
plates, which sufficiently resemble our meadow 
flower to suggest its name. " Nor," says the 
writer before alluded to, " is the flower at all de- 
graded by the comparison, for but few daisies can 
show such beauty of form and colour, as is pre- 
sented by this sea-star." 

All the brittle-stars have long slender rays, and 
some have rays like tendrils, scarcely thicker than 
twine, and composed of many articulations. They 



302 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 

are in some species seven or eight inches long, 
and twisting about in most graceful convolutions, 
they could not fail to interest those who regarded 
them. Fragile creatures are they all, not only 
having the power of breaking up the arms into 
pieces, but these pieces again actually dividing 
themselves into others, so that when seized they 
will often leave only their disc whole. Equally 
with the true star-fishes, they can reproduce their 
rays, and may therefore safely indulge their ex- 
cited feelings. 

One of the species of the true star-fishes, is 
brittle as even the most fragile of the brittle- stars ; 
this is the Lingthorn (Luidia fragilissima) , an 
animal which is sometimes two feet in diameter, 
and has five or seven rays. It is of an orange or 
red colour. Its singular power of breaking itself 
up, in its indignation at being taken, is related in 
so amusing a manner by the Professor, that jus- 
tice can be given to his description only by quoting 
his words. This as well as several other species 
is rarely cast on sand or shingle, but must be 
fetched up from deeper water by the dredge. The 
author had succeeded in getting a Lingthorn into 
the boat, and not aware of its peculiarities, had laid 
it on a bench for examination. " On attempting,'* 
he says, "to remove it for preservation, to my 
horror and disappointment, I found only an assem- 
blage of rejected members ; my conservative en- 
deavours were all neutralized by its destructive 
exertions, and it is now badly represented in my 
cabinet by an armless disc and a discless arm, 
Next time I went to dredge on the same spot, 
determined not to be cheated out of a specimen in 
such a way a second time, I brought with me a 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 303 

bucket of cold fresh water, to which article star- 
fishes have a great antipathy. As I expected, a 
Luidia caine up in the dredge, a most gorgeous 
specimen. As it does not generally break up 
before it is raised above the surface of the sea, 
cautiously and anxiously I sank my bucket to a 
level with the dredge's mouth, and proceeded in 
the most gentle manner to introduce Luidia to the 
purer element. Whether the cold air was too much 
for him, or the sight of the bucket too terrific, I 
know not ; but in a moment he proceeded to dis- 
solve his corporation, and at every mesh of the 
dredge his fragments were seen escaping. In 
despair I grasped at the largest, and brought up 
the extremity of an arm, the spinous eyelid of 
which opened and closed with something exceed- 
ingly like a wink of derision." The red spots to 
be seen at the end of every ray of many star-fishes, 
surrounded by spines, have by some writers been 
called eyes, and it is to this part of the animal 
which the Professor alludes in the latter sentence. 
Very nearly allied in structure to the star-fishes, 
are those animals generally called sea-eggs, or sea-- 
urchins , whose rounded shells are so often thrown 
on the beach. All have seen some of the commoner 
kinds lying among the rocks, or placed on the 
chimney-pieces of houses near the sea, or deposited 
in the museums of science ; while their fossil re- 
mains, often perfect in form, are found in the flint 
and chalk in abundance. These shells are covered 
with tubercles, placed in regular rows all down 
their globular surface, and to these tubercles, 
during the life of the animal, were affixed jointed 
spines. Minute differences exist in the form of 
the spines in various species, but so regular and 



304 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

exact are they, that a good zoologist can determine 
the species by the examination of a single spine ; a 
circumstance most important when investigating 
their remains in a fossil state, as sometimes this 
may be the only portion which he can procure. 
Most wondrously suited to the wants of the living 
creature within the cell, is the structure of these 
spines. No rock is so smooth or so rugged but 
that by their help the animal can make its way. Its 
meal lies before it among the rocks ; the zoophytes, 
the shell-fish, the crabs, are all welcome prey, nor 
are they longed for in vain. To look at it, it 
would seem a mere ball, incapable one would 
imagine of attacking or seizing any living thing 
that had limbs with which to walk away, or fins 
by means of which it could glide out of its 
presence. One would deem it almost like the 
zoophyte, chained to its native rock. Not so ; it 
can climb to places where animals which seem 
better fitted for locomotion would find access im- 
possible. Cased in a coat of mail, and furnished 
with hundreds of spines which serve as legs, the 
ball moves gently onwards. If an approaching 
enemy gives notice of danger, it can either with- 
draw behind some nook, or with the spines dig a 
hole in the sand, and lie there till it is past. 
Besides the spines, countless suckers aid the pro- 
gress ; suckers, which like those on the star-fish, 
emerge from the calcareous case, and which are as 
long as the spines themselves. These suckers are 
like little feet, and adhere firmly to rocks, and 
serve too as means of offence and defence to the 
animal ; for if the crab or fish is touched by them, 
the touch proves fatal, and the victim is at once 
dragged to the mouth and devoured. Its mouth 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 305 

is most curiously constructed. It is an orifice 
surrounded by a fleshy ring, and set with little 
teeth so sharp, and jaws acted upon by muscles so 
powerful, that it can bite through very hard sub- 
stances. The whole structure of these sea-urchins 
is truly wonderful. The description given by 
Professor Kymer Jones of the shelly case, is most 
simple and striking. " The crust of the Echinus," 
observes this writer, " when denuded of its spines 
or stripped of its external covering, would seem to 
be an ordinary shell, having its outer surface 
covered over with polished tubercles, regularly 
arranged. Of these the largest are disposed in 
lines that pass from pole to pole of the round box, 
like lines of longitude on the globe of the geogra- 
pher. Intermixed among the larger tubercles, are 
seen innumerable smaller eminences of similar 
construction, but dispersed with less precise 
arrangement, upon all of which, when in a living 
state, spines were attached in correspondent num- 
ber. Moreover, placed at intervals between the 
spine-crowned tubercles, are ten broad bands 
disposed in pairs, all pierced with countless holes : 
these too extend from pole to pole of the round 
box, and through them, during life, the locomotive 
suckers passed, used for climbing rocks and for 
attachment to some foreign body. On cutting 
through the shell so far as to see its inner surface, 
we perceive, to our surprise, that far from being, 
as it appears externally, a simple shelly exudation 
moulded to the form of the Echinus, like the shells 
of lobsters or mollusca, it is a very complex fabric, 
built with most consummate art, consisting of 
some thousand pieces, varying in size but shaped 
with mathematical precision, and composed with 



306 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

so much accuracy that the eye can but with 
difficulty trace the lines of union. Tell a human 
artisan, however versed in geometrical proportions, 
to cut a thousand plates, polygonal in form, and 
fit them to each other, leaving not the slightest 
space between their margins anywhere, so that 
the whole shall form a hollow sphere of certain 
given proportions, how would he succeed? Doubt- 
less he would pronounce the problem quite im- 
practicable. But in the shell before us, this is 
just what nature has achieved most perfectly. 
First we should observe five double rows of oblong 
plates, pentagonal in form, which on their outer 
surfaces present the spine-supporting tubercles. 
On either side are found innumerable pieces, of 
smaller size, but equally exact in shape, through 
which are bored the perforations for the ambulacral 
feet; and these are again separated from another 
row of perforated plates, by other intermediate 
pieces, having spines affixed externally. These 
plates are mostly pentagons in form, with sides of 
various length ; but all combined, fit each other so 
closely that their combination serves to form one 
solid compact shell." 

The species of sea-urchin which is most frequent 
on our shores, is that called the Common Sea-egg 
(Echinus sphara}. Forbes gives as one of its 
familiar names that of Sca'ad man's head. Though 
usually of globose shape, it varies in form, and is 
sometimes so much flattened that even experienced 
zoologists have mistaken it for another species. 
These stony balls are to be found of all sizes up 
to a globe of fourteen inches in diameter. This 
sea-egg has usually a reddish or purplish tinge, 
with white spines sometimes tipped with purple. 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 307 

It lives in various depths of water, and the animal, 
like the rest of its tribe, has a number of sharp and 
hard teeth, and feeds exclusively on animal prey. 
It is in some countries much used as food, and 
resembles in flavour the species known as the 
Esculent Sea-urchin. The people of uncultivated 
regions, who live near the shores, consume many 
of the sea-eggs, and the ancients regarded them as 
delicacies, eating them either raw, or dressed in 
various ways. The sea-gulls feed on many of the 
smaller species, as the Green-pea Urchin, breaking 
the shells with their strong beaks, and sucking out 
the animal within. 

This green-pea urchin (EcJiinocyamus pusillus), 
is a frequent species on the shore, and is the 
smallest of the sea-eggs. When the animal is 




living, the shell is of a bright green colour, just of 
that brilliant powdery nature which we find on 
the shelly cases which shield the gauzy wings of 
some of our brilliant beetles. When the animal 
dies, however, this gay colour is all gone, and the 
shell is of a dingy white tint. It is very common 
among sand, and its spines are very short and 
crowded. 

x 2 



308 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

Scarcely larger than this is the Purple-tipped 
Urchin (Echinus miliaris), which is often found 
with the common egg-urchin on oyster-beds or 
scallop-banks, and is sometimes mistaken for the 
young of that animal, but may be known from it 
by its much larger purple spines. It is rose- 
coloured, with white tubercles; some of the 
spines purple, and others yellow. This, though 
very abundant in the Irish Sea, and on the south- 
western shores of Scotland, is not a frequent 
English species. 

There are a number of less known kinds of sea- 
urchins, distinguished by names significant of their 
form, or of some peculiarity in their appearance. 
Thus we have Heart urchins, and Fiddle-heart 
urchins, and Cake urchins ; names all expressive 
of the shape. And we have the Silky-spined 
urchin, well named from the bright glossy lustre 
of its spines ; and the Rosy-heart urchin, whose 
colour might vie with that of the queen of flowers. 
Of the four British species of Heart-urchin, one is 
very common and diffused through all the Euro- 
pean seas. Most persons accustomed to roam about 
in those sandy bays so delightful to the marine 
zoologist, have seen sea-eggs of this species thrown 
upon the shore, after the angry waves have spent 
their wrath upon it. The common Heart-urchin 
or MermaidVhead (Ampkidotus cordatus), is also 
otten called Child^s-head urchin, or hairy sea-egg. 
It is broadly heart-shaped, much depressed in the 
middle, and thickly set with fine hair-like spines. 
Its colour is a yellowish white, and it is usually 
about an inch and three quarters long, and very 
nearly of the same breadth. These animals, and 
some others of a similar nature, were found, on 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 309 

being opened by Professor Forbes, to have their 
intestines filled with sand or mud, which they had 
probably swallowed for the sake of the animal 
matter mingled with it. 

Many who have resided for a time on some parts 
of our coasts, have heard of those singular animals 
termed Sea-cucumbers and Sea-gherkins. They 
are brought up by the dredge from deeper waters, 
and we must not expect to find them lying about 
among the common things of the beach ; for rarely 
indeed do the storms bring them there. Slimy 
creatures they are, and usually by no means at- 
tractive ; yet they deserve notice on account of 
their singular nature and habits. Resembling in 
the different species, more or less, the cucumber in 
form, and covered with a slimy substance, which 
renders them disagreeable to the touch ; they are 
oblong animals, tapering at the ends, and covered, 
like the star-fish, with rows of suckers ; while 
beautiful feathery tentacles surround the mouth. 
Some of the species seem very apathetic, but 
others are lively and active animals. There is 
one most remarkable fact recorded of them. We 
have seen how the star-fishes, when irritated, can 
break themselves up into many pieces. The sea- 
cucumbers have the still more wondrous faculty of 
vomiting up the whole of their internal structure, 
sometimes leaving not a trace behind of their 
organs, save the empty sac. Yet the animal ap* 
parently suffers nothing from its enraged action. 
It can live on without these organs, and in the 
course of three or four months can reproduce 
them. Other species of sea-cucumber can separate 
themselves down the middle ; and can, in process 
of time, become two perfect animals. Their intes- 



310 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

tines are generally found full of coral or similar 
substances, sometimes in large pieces. Unpleasing 
as are these animals to us, yet the Malays of the 
Oriental Isles search for them, in order to sell 
them to the Chinese; and fleets of the Malay 
boats visit the isles at the north of Australia, and 
the shores of New Holland and New Zealand, 
to procure them. As Bymer Jones humorously 
remarks, " They form an important addition to 
the fried earthworms, swallows' nests, and other 
luxuries which grace a bill of fare in the Celestial 
Empire." These Holothurice are more plentiful 
in the East than in our seas, though we have 
fifteen species, and there are probably many yet 
undiscovered. They are sometimes found in num- 
bers among the tangled masses of sea-weeds near 
the shore, but are more frequently procured by 
diving ; and when split and dried over the smoke 
of a wood fire, are termed Trepang. In the Mo- 
luccas, the pine-apple HolotJiuria is nearly two 
feet long. On the Neapolitan coast, too, the 
sea-cucumbers are large and plentiful, and they 
there form a common article of diet to the 
poor. 

But passing on to the common animals of our 
coast, we must advert to the Prickly Sea-mouse 
(ApJirodita aculeata), which, during the winter 
months, is not an unfrequent visitant of various 
parts of the shore, where it may be found lurking 
on some ridge of sea-weeds which the tide has left 
to tell where it has flowed. At Dovor this little 
creature may often be picked up after a stormy 
day ; but he who searches for it must not expect 
to find any very marked resemblance to the mouse 
of the field or dwelling. Unlike thatjittle bright- 



COMMON OBJECTS OP THE SHORE. 311 

eyed creature, it is not sleek and plump, but it 
resembles it in one circumstance, rare among the 
inhabitants of the sea, in that it has silky hairs 
thinly scattered about it. Stiff bristly hairs also 
are placed on its upper surface, which make it a 
rough-looking animal. These are often half an 
inch long, and of most beautiful iridescent hues, 
reflecting the red, or orange, or green, or violet, 
which glitter on the neck of the drake, or gleaming 
forth like gold, which ever and anon betrays some 
tinge of green or purple. The sea-mouse is oblong, 
rather flat, from five to six inches in length, and 
its upper surface covered with double rows of 
plates, which overlap each other, and underneath 
these are the little fleshy tufts, which are the aerat- 
ing gills of the animal. It retains its beautiful me- 
tallic lustre if preserved in spirits. Dr. Drummond 
found, on placing a sea-mouse in fresh water, 
that it almost immediately sunk to the bottom of 
the vessel, and never again exhibited the slightest 
symptom of life or motion. 

This singular little mouse belongs to the Anne- 
tides, a class comprehending a great number of 
animals, varying in general appearance, but having 
bodies of an elongated form, composed of Brings at 
certain distances from each other. The common 
earthworm is a familiar instance of their structure ; 
and any one who has watched its bending atti- 
tudes, as it glides in and out, may have seen the 
rings which encircle its body. By far the greater 
number of the annelides live in or near the sea. 
The common Lug- worm too (Arenicolapiscatorum), 
that reddish worm, about a foot long, so frequent 
on our level sandy shores, is an annelid. It is 
very useful to the fishermen for bait; and if 



312 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

we touch it, it stains the hand with a yellow 
fluid. 

Every one, in rambling about our shores, must 
have seen weeds, shells, stones, and other objects, 
which have long been lying under water, covered 
with twisted calcareous tubes, sometimes crowded 
together in masses, and most curiously intertwined 
in each other. At other times the tube is found 
occupying a single shell. Sometimes square pieces, 
formed of dozens of tubes unattached to any object, 
lie upon the beach or are dredged up from the sea, 
but the most frequent cluster of them is on some 
old oyster-shell, which they will cover with their 
coils like so many little stony serpents ; several 
species often congregating together. The shelly 
tubes are made by the different kinds of Serpula, 
secreted, like the shell of the mollusk, by the worm 
itself; but, unlike that shell, unattached by muscles 
to the animal within, and unadorned by brilliant 
colours. But if the shell is less gay, the beautiful 
animal within may vie with the most richly-tinted 
mollusk, both in colour and in graceful form. If 
placed in a vessel of salt-water, the tiny creature 
soon emerges from its tube, presenting to our view 
a brilliant coronal of gorgeous scarlet or rich 
purple, a fan-like array of plumes which serve it 
for organs of respiration, and which, moving up 
and down in the water, awaiting such prey as they 
may find available, are beautiful as the most 
elegant feathers. 

Among the commonest of our native species 
is the Vermicular serpula (Serpula vermicularis) , 
whose white tapering rugged cylinders adhere to 
plants and stones, or curved in all forms are 
cemented to the surface of some refuse shells, 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 313 

winding all over them, or occasionally lying as a 
single tube upon them. This, like all the others, has 
beautiful fan-shaped plumes for breathing organs. 
They are, in this species, 
of deep blue, and among 
them is placed the mouth, 
surmounted by a stalked 
funnel. Our figure re- 
presents another species, 
the Contorted serpula 
(Serpula contortuplicatd) , 
sometimes found on our 
shores, and often placed 
in cabinets. In this spe- 
cies the fan-like bunches 
of plumes are exquisitely 
delicate, and gorgeously 
coloured with red, varied 
with orange and violet. 

A common annelid, the I 
Spirorbis, was slightly I 
mentioned on an earlier 
page. This little animal, 
which is represented in 
our engraving of the 
Serrated Fucus, and of which also a magnified 
figure is there given, is a small shell resembling 
in shape that of some of our land snails, seldom 
much larger than the head of a pin. The Nau- 
tilus-shaped Spirorbis (Spirorbis nautioides], found 
on our sea-weeds, is a white and wrinkled shelL 
It is more common on the Serrated Fucus and 
Podded Halidrys than any others, but is not con- 
fined to them; and is so plentiful, that we may 
walk down to the rocks where the olive sea- weeds 




314 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

grow, on any summer day, with the certainty of 
finding it. When examined with a microscope, 
the shell is seen to be shaped exactly like that of 
the nautilus, and of a beautiful white silvery 
nature; and when the little worm within puts 
forth its delicate radiated branchial organs, like 
so many exquisite feathers, we are ready to be- 
lieve that scarcely any object in nature can be 
more lovely or graceful. The shell is flat on one 
side, and when severed from the sea-weed is seen 
to have the flat side composed of a thin delicate 
substance, like gauze-paper; for the sea- weed 
forms a wall to the little dwelling, and, therefore, 
the animal needs not to secrete a thicker material 
at that part. 

Some of the marine annelides line the holes in 
the sands in which they live with a calcareous 
lining ; some make for themselves the most curious 
and interesting little dwelling-places, composed 
of broken shells firmly agglutinated together, a 
curious mosaic work of little squares, and angles, 
and circles, as the shape of their pieces may 
chance to be. One little worm, unable to con- 
struct a dwelling for itself, finds one exactly fitted 
to it in the old shell of the mollusk, commonly 
called Tooth-shell (Dentalium entalis), that little 
shell so common on our coasts, shaped like a small 
horn. This is taken possession of by the tooth* 
shell Siphunculus (Siphunculus dentalii}, which, 
having entered, seals up the entrance with a strong 
and fixed plug of grains of sand cemented together, 
leaving on one side a small circular hole, through 
which it may protrude its long proboscis in search 
of prey, yet small enough to prevent the entrance 
of any enemy into its home. This worm is about 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 315 

three quarters of an inch long, white and opaque, 
and when seen under a microscope is found to be 
wrinkled with little rings. And it is wonderful 
to think of that instinct with which it has been 
endowed by the Creator, to find a safe dwelling 
place, constructed for it by an animal altogether 
so different from itself. 

Not less curious are the little mosaic- work tubes 
of the Terebellae. Many species of these worms 
frequent our own shores. Their bodies are very 
similar to that of the Serpula, and they construct 
their dwellings by spreading out their tentacula 
on the sand, till such pieces as they there select 
are attached to them, and then brought down to 
the neck. Here the tube commences, " being ar- 
ranged," as Professor Jones has observed, "with 
as much regularity as rows of bricks, and cemented 
together by the tenacious exudation, until a tube 
is formed encasing the upper part of the creature's 
body." This tube is sometimes several inches 
long, and the whole process may be observed by 
placing the Terebella in a vessel, and putting 
within its reach the different materials needed for 
its singular dwelling-place. 

The Terebellaa inhabit the sandy shore between 
high and low-water-mark, usually quite buried in 
it to their upper opening, but as the action of the 
water sometimes raises or depresses the spots in 
which they are found, they are occasionally seen 
covered with sand rising some inches above them, 
and at other times are left quite uncovered. 

The animal while forming its dwelling moves its 
head continually, from side to side, and it expands 
its feelers to the length of two inches, when it uses 
them for digging particles of sand. In summer, if 



316 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

deprived of its sand tube, and placed in water with 
a bed of sand and fragments of shells at the bottom, 
it will in the course of four hours build a new 
habitation ; but in winter, when the animal is 
not in full vigour, it will require an hour or two 
longer for its process. 

Many of the naked annelides are very beautiful, 
and curling about in the waters of the rocky pool, 
seem like glittering snakes. Some look like little 
harmless creatures, but others seem to glance defi- 
ance at us as they dart to the other side of the 
pool, and hide themselves among the sea plants or 
beneath some silvery shell. 

There is one advantage which the sea possesses 
above any other of the scenes of Nature in this 
portion of our globe, which is, that its aspect is 
always beautiful under any change of season. 
Winter strips our fields and hedgerows of their 
leaves and flowers ; our streams lose their crystal 
clearness, our meadows their robe of green; and 
if we linger among the woodlands, admiring the 
various forms of the leafless boughs, the strange 
wild attitudes of some, the graceful disposition of 
others, yet are they so much less lovely than in 
the time when summer clothed them in their 
green, or autumn in their gold, that were it not 
for the music of the winter woods, the strange 
wild harmonies made by the winds among them, 
their beauties would not often long detain us in 
our country walk. But the sea is always beautiful, 
always musical, in sunniest or darkest day. Now, as 
it ripples softly on the summer shore, the little surges 
just falling on the pebbles, and maldng a sound as 
gentle as that of an April rain on the forest leaves, 
it is soothing and calming to the mind. Its con- 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 317 

tinuous sound lulls us into that state of quietness 
favourable to meditation and uninterrupted trains 
of thought. And when the storm-wind sweeps 
over the sea, and we listen breathlessly to the 
wild harpings of the waves, the spirit seems 
awakened too, the thoughts are borne away, and 
blending themselves with the sublimities of nature, 
the listener seems awhile to forget in the elevation 
of the spirit, that there is yet a portion of him 
which is of the earth and mortal. It is in moments 
like these, amid the deep yearnings of the soul for 
something beyond all that the material world can 
offer, that the poet and the philosopher are first 
awakened to a new existence. It is at moments 
like these, and amid the longings for the infinite, 
that the Christian turns with renewed gratitude 
to that Holy Eecord which tells of Life and 
Immortality. 

Never, perhaps, is the sea more lovely than 
when on some summer evening, after a succession 
of stormy days, it has become calmed and is lighted 
up with a glow of phosphorescent brightness ; when 
as the boat glides onwards 

" Every track 
Is a flash of golden fire." 

Every one who has resided for any length of 
time on the shore, can remember some calm nights 
of this kind, when the moon shone in silvery lines 
across the water, and spread its bright gleam over 
its whole surface, making it look like burnished 
steel. A wake of light has seemed to follow every 
boat ; and if the hand was dipped into the sea, it 
brought up glittering sparks which dropped from 
it. If we ask some mariner how this may be, and 



318 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE; 

how in the brilliant night scenes of the tropical 
seas this light shines brighter still, we may per- 
chance be told that the light is caused by the 
sheathing of the hulk striking fire in consequence 
of her rapid motion. But the naturalist has a 
different tale to tell, and he can show how the 
phosphorescent light is caused by the masses of 
the dead inhabitants of the deep, by the gleams 
given out by several crustaceous animals, by 
zoophytes, by various fishes and animalcules. But 
most of all is this phosphorescence attributable to 
the innumerable swarms of jelly-fishes, which in 
the day time delight us with tints of various hues, 
and compose 

"The luminous life 

That makes the dark nocturnal ocean bright 
With constellated clusters of rare things, 
Group'd or apart ; seeming in lustrous grace 
Fantastic wreaths of many-colour'd gems 
Instinct with living fire : or here and there, 
Glittering in golden glory : flashing forth 
Metallic white or tremulous silver, cinqued 
By ambient tints of sapphire, pink and blue. 
As if some opulent spirit of the sea 
Had, from his treasury of precious stones, 
Flung up his choicest treasures on the waves, 
To bathe their beauties in the meek moonshine." 

In our seas these glowworms of the deep belong 
chiefly to the Medusae, which, of microscopic 
minuteness and in inconceivable profusion, swarm 
in every drop of ocean, while the larger kinds 
may often be seen gliding near its surface, and 
lying in multitudes on our shores. In some regions 
the waters are crowded with myriads of minute 
jelly-fishes ; and in the Red Sea, according to Mr. 
Salt, they teem in such abundance as to bear a 
proportion of one third or even one half to a given 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 319 

volume of the water. The animals of this genus 
have a disc more or less convex above, similar 
to that of a mushroom or umbrella, sometimes 
deepening into the shape of a bell. The greater 
number cannot be seen in the day time, for they 
are clear as crystal, and both by their small size 
and translucent nature often escape the observa- 
tion, even when aided by a microscope, till night 
brings out their sparkling beauties. And why 
were these and the other tribes of beautiful 
jelly-fishes created? Were they made merely to 
gratify our sense of beauty and to give us delight 
as we gazed upon them ? The beauty of nature, 
its fitness of pleasing the intellectual taste of man, 
was evidently deemed by the great Creator of the 
universe no mean object of his care: but these 
animals have other purposes, too, to fulfil. When 
God said, " Let there be light " over all the earth, 
yet he sent no light from the orbs of heaven, into 
the depths of the sea. Light rapidly diminishes 
in its progress through the water, and far away 
down in the deeps all would be darkness but for 
this provision of rendering it luminous. Yet there 
is an inconceivable multitude in that world of life 
beneath the waters. The fishes, which, like the 
lion of the forest, seek their prey there, and choose 
for their hunting time the period when man is 
sleeping, need these lamps to guide their way. 
Fishes will follow any luminous object, and the 
angler knows that the glitter even of a newly 
tinned hook will be an attraction to the herring 
amid the waves ; and thus the smaller animals are 
caught by means of the glitter arising from the 
newly dead inhabitant of the deep, which ere it 
has time to become putrescent glitters with light, 



320 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

and is carried off for food ; while the lamps which 
shine from countless Medusae help the fish to 
chase his living prey. Nor have the tribes of 
jelly-fish performed all their part in creation when 
they have lighted up the darkness, and in their 
turn served as food to other tribes of animals. 
" Possibly," says Professor Jones, " the sea itself 
is fitted by their agency to be the residence of 
beings that otherwise would perish. Not the 
least striking circumstance in the history of the 
Khizostoma (a genus of large jelly-fishes), is its 
prodigious power of producing, from the surface 
of its body, quantities of mucus or thick slime, 
which is of course mixed up with the surrounding 
water. When this material is furnished, is even 
yet a question ; but so copious is the supply, that 
if a specimen be placed alive in a large vessel 
filled with water, in a little time the whole is 
rendered thick and viscid, so that the Rhizostoma 
would perish speedily from the accumulation of its 
own secretions. You change the water, but in 
vain, still the abundant mucus is poured forth, nor 
does it cease as long as life remains. But if a 
single specimen afford such quantities of viscid 
matter, we shall conceive when we reflect upon 
the countless multitude of Acalephse, spread 
through every sea, that their united agency must 
cause important changes in the water around them, 
filling it with animal substance, upon which in- 
numerable races may be fed, a kind of nutriment 
adapted to the feeble mouths of new-hatched 
spawn, or ocean's tenderest progeny." 

The whole tribe of jelly-fishes are included 
under the name of Acalephse, the Greek word for 
a nettle, and they are commonly called Sea-nettles, 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 321 

and by the French Orties de Mer. This is a very 
old name for them, for Aristotle called them so, 
and it was given on account of the stinging pro- 
perty possessed by some of them. They have not 
all, however, the power of stinging, though all are 
phosphorescent. Indeed, by far the greater num- 
ber of the British jelly-fishes may be touched with 
safety, and Professor Forbes, in his work on the 
" Naked-eyed Medusae," mentions four species only 
as being, in his opinion, gifted with this nettle-like 
property. Beautiful as are many of the creatures 
of the sea, none are more lovely than theAcalephs. 
Now they may be seen in the darkness of night, 
moving with most graceful ease, like so many 
resplendent orbs, shining singly, yet gliding from 
place to place ; and now combined in vast multi- 
tudes, forming a broad sheet of light. The vessel 
glides in amongst them, or the oar throws up the 
white foam, and a shower of stars rises but to fall 
in a stream of living brightness. Down below the 
surface these jellies seem like balls of silver or gold; 
sometimes, as in the Girdle of Venus, of the blue 
Mediterranean, appearing like a riband of flame, 
of several feet long ; or, as in the yet more lumi- 
nous Pyrosoma, enabling the voyager to read by 
their light, as he stands by the cabin window of 
the ship. Some of the larger species are described 
as having the resemblance to white-hot shot, visi- 
ble at some depth beneath the surface. Our own 
rocky shores are sometimes studded with them as 
with diamonds, and many who have trodden on the 
tuft of sea-weed, have seen it shoot out, in all 
directions, rays of phosphoric light, which re- 
minded them of a star of artificial firework. So 
beautiful are they, that the man of science, in 

Y 



322 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

describing them, writes like a poet, and Professor 
Forbes, speaking of one of these globular umbrella- 
shaped animals (the Modeera formosa), whose 
tints are white and richest crimson, says of it, 
" There is not a Medusa in all the ocean which 
can match for beauty with the minute creature 
now before us, though its smallness is such, that a 
split pea would overtop it. Yet small though it 
be, it has shape, colour, and substance so disposed, 
that as yet no explorer of the sea has met with 
another like it. It is gorgeous enough to be the 
diadem of sea-fairies, and sufficiently graceful to 
be the night-cap of the tiniest and prettiest of 
mermaidens." Another very lovely Medusa, not 
uncommon in the ocean around the Isle of Wight, 
is as clear as the water itself, and by day time can 
only be seen by the rich crimson nucleus beneath 
the crystal mushroom-like figure. This richly 
tinted portion is very apparent, so that the beauti- 
ful Scarlet Cyanea resembles in the water a bead 
of coral, swimming beneath the calm surface of 
the sea. Hugh Miller, in his " Summer Rambles/' 
gives an interesting description of some of the 
common kinds, which he saw while aboard the 
Betsey, off the island of Eigg. At this time the 
Medusae had risen from the bottom of the waters 
as the wind fell, and " were mottling the green 
depths of the water below and around, as far as 
the eye could reach. Among the commoner kinds," 
says this writer, " the kind with the four purple 
rings on the area of its flat bell, which ever 
vibrates without sound, and the kind with the 
fringe of dingy brown and the long stinging tails, 
of which I have sometimes borne from my swim- 
ming excursions the nettle-like smart for hours ; 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 323 

there were at least two species of more unusual 
occurrence." One of them the writer describes as 
scarcely larger than a shilling, inscribed with a 
pretty orange-coloured wheel; the other like a 
small brown hazel-nut. " As the evening closed," 
continues this author, " and the depths beneath 
presented a dingier and yet dingier green, until at 
length all had become black, the distinctive colours 
of the Acalephse, the purple, the orange, and the 
brown, faded and disappeared, and the creatures 
hung out, instead, their pale phosphoruc lights, like 
the lanterns of a fleet, hoisted high to prevent col- 
lision in the darkness. Now they gleamed dim 
and indistinct, as they drifted undisturbed through 
the upper depths, and now they flamed out bright 
and green like beacon torches, as the tide dashed 
them against the vessel's sides." 

All may not have seen our beautiful Medusae to 
such advantage, though most persons who have 
sailed on the sea have met with masses of the 
larger kind, which seemed moving along in myriads; 
and all who have rambled on the shore have seen 
the large gelatinous transparent discs of some, 
surrounded with a fringe-like margin, dilating and 
contracting as they swam just below the surface 
of the water. Not a walk of any extent can be 
taken along the shore, in summer time, at low tide, 
but we meet with that species which is the com- 
monest of all the British jelly-fishes, the common 
Aurelia (Aurelia aurita), with a clear bluish gela- 
tinous disc, fringed with thread-like tentacula, 
often measuring nearly a foot across, and easily de- 
scribed. It has four long arms with fringed edges, 
coming from the centre of its umbrella-like expan- 
sion. Between each pair of arms is a raised 

Y2 



324 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

tubercle. These are four in number, and shaped 
like horse-shoes or half-moons. They are of bright 
purple colour, and are very conspicuous when we 
see the jelly-fish swimming in the water. These 
Medusae are extremely abundant ; sometimes, by 
their numbers, impeding the course of vessels, and 
occurring all round our coast. We need not fear 
to touch them, for they are stingless. 

Far different in this respect is the jelly-fish 
termed the Hairy Cyanea (Cyanea capittata), a 
common animal of our seas, and one which has 
sent many a bather away with smarting sensations 
not easily forgotten. It has a dingy brown disc, 
about a foot across, festooned at the edges, while 
as it flaps along in the water it drags after it an 
immense number of filaments, like tails, which 
constitute the " hair," from which it derives its 
name. Woe to the bather who, regardless of the 
approach of this beautiful but terrific creature, 
becomes entangled in this trailing " hair." To get 
out of the tangling mass seems impossible, and 
wound among its meshes, he experiences a prickly 
torture, until the jelly-fish finding its own course 
hindered by the contact, uncoils its arms and leaves 
the bather free to swim from its embrace. Even 
when the filaments are cut away, they retain their 
power of stinging as fiercely as when around the 
beautiful crystal monster which they once adorned. 
The Lamarckian Cyanea (Cyanea Lamarckii), a 
less common species, possesses a like power of 
stinging; and another species is mentioned by 
Professor Forbes as stinging faintly ; but these are 
all the Medusas which that scientific naturalist 
has ascertained as the true nettles of our British 
seas. 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 325 

The largest kind of jelly-fish frequent in our 
seas is the Great Sea-nettle (EMzostoma Cuvierii}, 
the name of root-mouthed having been given to 
the genus, because the animals composing it were, 
until recently, believed to have no true mouth, but 
to receive their nourishment from pores on the eight 
large peduncles which hang from its centre. Like 
the other Medusse, however, it is now thought to 
have a true mouth. It is sometimes two feet in 
diameter, and is several pounds in weight. Yet if 
this large jelly-fish is left on the shore but a few 
hours only, nothing remains of the mass but 
a number of small films. The jelly of the living 
animal is composed entirely of large cells of fra- 
gile texture, arranged with exquisite regularity, 
differing in form in the various species, and filled 
with a fluid which seems to resemble sea-water. 
In some species when this evaporates, nothing is 
left but a stain on the stone where the jelly-fish 
lay. This, as well as other species, has a great 
sensibility to light, several of the smaller Medusae 
being known to sink into deep water to avoid 
a bright light. Though it seems doubtful if they 
are gifted with eyes, they, like some other crea- 
tures low in the scale of animal life, appear to be 
endowed with senses, which give them perception 
in a manner of which we can form no idea. A 
writer on this subject records that he once saw 
a shoal of the Great Sea-nettle of our coasts, 
swimming high with the tide off Seaton, during 
calm weather. As these animals approached the 
boat, over whose side the writer was looking, they 
gradually sank in the clear glassy sea, and it re- 
quired some dexterity to catch, with the boat- 
hook, only one or two of the great numbers which 



326 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 



passed. The slightest motion immediately alarmed 
them. Every one who, when bathing, has tried 
to catch a jelly-fish, knows how difficult is the 
capture, as they glide away from the approaching 
hand, and were it not that the wave dashes them 
against us, we should probably rarely succeed in 
obtaining one. Our common species are termed 
Sea-blubbers, Sea-dangers, Falling-stars, or Sea- 
crosses. At Dovor they are very generally called 
Starch-fishes. 

A very beautiful jelly-fish, which in some parts 
of our coasts is not rare, is the Globular Beroe 
(Gydippe pileus], and it is a more lovely object 




under the microscope than can possibly be ima- 
gined by those who have not witnessed it. It is 
of an oval shape, often nearly an inch long, and 
having eight belts of little plates on its surface, 
which serve as paddle-wheels. These plates con- 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 327 

sist of a number of fine hairs (cilia), which are 
placed side by side, like the barbs of a feather. 
By means of rapid successions of vibratory action 
caused by these ciliary rows, the animal is pro- 
pelled through the water with great velocity, the 
mouth in advance, perpetually contracting and 
dilating, arid communicating with a two-lobed 
stomach provided with a valve. A complete whirl- 
pool is made around the beroe by the action of the 
cilia, and the valve in the centre of the animal is 
left open. This communicates, by another tube, 
with the opposite pole of the globular animal. No 
sooner does a small shrimp or other like creature 
of the waters approach, than it is forced by the cur- 
rent into the mouth. Its hooked claws and fringed 
arms avail it nothing. The valve is closed upon 
it, the nutritious part of the victim is dissolved, 
and in due time the indigestible shell and the 
eyes are thrown up again in the water. The un- 
digested eyes of the shrimp, seen in the stomach, 
have been sometimes mistaken for the organs of 
the beroe. It is generally stated that the long 
filaments at the side of the beroe, covered with 
the tendrils,, are a means of securing prey. An 
intelligent naturalist, a friend of the writer's, who 
has made microscopic observations on this animal 
taken from the shore of Dovor, is of opinion, that 
these tentacles serve only as anchors to hold the 
animal fast to any object to which it may choose to 
attach itself. Some small shrimps were placed by 
this gentleman in a vessel of water, with the 
beroe ; one of these became accidentally entangled, 
and was dragged, apparently without design on 
the part of the beroe, into the receptacle of the 



328 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 

tentacles. This part has no connexion with the 
digestive tube, and is evidently designed solely 
for the reception of these long arms, when the 
animal chooses to withdraw them and to remain 
a simple globe. After some time the tentacles 
were again protruded, and the shrimp escaped, 
evidently uninjured. Its mode of catching its prey 
was by this gentleman, after much observation, 
deemed to be wholly irrespective of these long 
filaments, which the beroe appeared to use as 
cables for keeping itself firm in its position, and 
by which it held fast even to the smooth surface 
of a glass vessel. 

Like all other jelly-fishes, the substance of the 
beroe seems but a few filmy cells, filled up with 
a material like sea-water, which soon dissolves, 
leaving scarcely any trace of the animal behind. 
The naturalist just alluded to, having confined one 
of these animals in a cylindrical glass vessel, 
observed, that after the lapse of about twelve 
hours, it appeared to undergo a gradual dissolu- 
tion of its substance, commencing at the upper 
pole, around the tube extending from the mouth 
to the stomach. In a few hours the whole of the 
upper half of the body had dissolved, leaving the 
digestive tube standing like an isolated pillar at 
the centre. Notwithstanding this mutilation, the 
animal appeared to be as lively as ever, gliding up 
and down the glass with the same easy and rapid 
motion. At length the stomach and mouth fell 
off, and it underwent a gradual reduction of its 
dimensions, retaining its activity to the last. 
Finally, the tentacula fell away, and the last 
trace of the crystal ball of the beroe, which was 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 329 

to be seen, comprised not more than a fortieth 
part of its entire substance. To this was attached 
a portion of one of the ciliary bands, by means of 
which this fragment of the animal moved rapidly, 
so long as any remains of it were visible in the 
water. 

The enthusiasm with which observations like 
these are made and described, is easily partaken by 
such as have an eye for the beauties and wonders 
of nature. The utilitarian smiles at such pursuits, 
and valuing science but as it may contribute to 
the promotion of wealth or of physical comfort, 
would deem an hour idly spent in watching the 
structure of an animal under a microscope. Yet 
these minute wonders were made by the God who 
formed the sun and stars, and who inspired the 
records of Sacred Writ ; and if they fix on our 
minds one fresh idea of his power and goodness, 
we have not looked on them idly. There are many, 
too, who receive exquisite enjoyment in such 
pursuits, and some now pining in sadness, and con- 
sumed by the one painful idea of the past or the 
present, might be cheered, could they but be once 
awakened to an interest in natural history. The 
poet could appreciate and describe the feelings 
belonging to the lover of nature : 

" One made acquaintanceship with plants and flowers, 
And happy grew by telling all their names ; 
One class'd the quadrupeds, a third the fowls, 
Another found in minerals his joy ; 
And I have seen a man, a worthy man, 
In happy mood conversing with a fly ; 
And as he through his glass, made by himself, 
Beheld its wondrous eye and plumage fine, 
From leaping scarce be kept for perfect joy." 



330 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

The globular beroe is common on many parts 
of our sea-coast. It has been found at Sheerness, 
and is by no means unfrequent at Dovor. The 
fishermen say of it, that it is the spawn of the sea- 
egg. Some of the species are to be found in most 
seas, swimming along with great rapidity, by 
means of their myriads of minute cilia. Like the 
other acalephs, it is not possible to preserve them 
for any length of time. 

The colour of the Greenland sea, varying from 
ultra-marine to olive-green, was found by Mr. 
Scoresby to be caused by the innumerable jelly- 
fish of the tribe of medusae which swarm there. 
These animals are found in the bluish-green water 
in great profusion, but in the olive-green they are 
innumerable. Mr. Scoresby calculated that a cubic 
fathom of this water would contain 23,000,872 indi- 
viduals; andacubicalmile, 23,888,000,000,000,000. 
He adds, that allowing even that the depth to 
which these animals extend be but two hundred 
and fifty fathoms, the above immense number of 
one species may occur in the space of two miles 
square. And in order to give a better idea of the 
amount of medusas than the mind can gather by 
reading statements made in a large number of 
arithmetical figures, he says : " Allowing that one 
person could count a million in seven days, which 
is barely possible, it would have required that 
eighty thousand persons should have started at the 
creation of the world, to complete the enumeration 
at the present time." Twenty or thirty thousand 
square miles of this sea are thus coloured by the 
medusae; how then shall the mind of finite man 
conceive of the numbers of these living creatures, 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 



331 



formed by the great Creator, and preserved by 
his constant care ! 

Lowest in the scale of animal life, yet won- 
drously constructed as are animals of highest organ- 
ization, are those singular productions, the Sponges, 
springing from the marine rocks or sea caverns, 
or growing down in the waters of ocean, or occa- 
sionally clustering in the clear rivulet. As they 
branch forth from the rocky fissure, resembling 
plants in their form, ramifying, like them, accord- 




ing to local circumstances, having nothing which, 
at first appearance, would indicate an animal 
nature, it is not surprising that zoologists deemed 
them of vegetable origin, or at least regarded them 



332 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

as forming a link between the animal and vegetable 
kingdoms. Since the day when that close observer, 
John Ellis, a merchant of London, made accurate 
observations on these productions, writers have 
still varied in their opinions as to their nature, till 
Dr. Grant satisfactorily proved that the marine 
sponges, at least, are certainly animals. Dr. John- 
ston enumerates fifty- six species of British sponge; 
but these cannot be described merely by their ex- 
ternal appearance, as the same species will often 
assume a great variety of forms. In order to study 
the sponges, we must look at them under a micro- 
scope, and direct our attention to the nature of the 
framework. Taking a small portion from the 
common Mediterranean sponge of our toilet tables, 
and placing it under a microscope, we see that it 
is composed of a number of elastic horny fibres, 
crossing each other in all directions, and forming 
a complete network of meshes, through which the 
water is absorbed, and passes 
through every portion of the 
sponge. Countless pores 
cover the surface of this 
network, and hence a cur- 
rent of water goes towards 
the centre whenever the 
sponge is dipped in liquid. 
But besides these minute 
pores, there are large and 
distant canals, having large 
orifices on prominent portions of the body of the 
sponge, and during the life of the animal the water 
is, by means of some vital force, gradually collected 
into these channels, and forcibly expelled through 




COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 333 

the openings, thus making two counter cur- 
rents. 

The living animal of the sponge can, of course, 
only be seen in the newly-gathered specimen. It 
consists of a gelatinous, filmy substance, similar to 
the white of an egg, and varying in quantity in 
the different species. If a small portion of this 
be placed under a microscope, it exhibits minute 
transparent grains ; and yet this gelatinous sub- 
stance, spread out upon the network, the skeleton 
which itself has made, separates from the sea such 
substances as shall nourish it, and serve for the 
fabrication of its own peculiar structure. 

The opposing currents of water, during the 
entire life of the animal, are described by Dr. 
Grant as most rapid and remarkable. Having 
brought one of the larger apertures of the Spongia 
coalita under the microscope, this writer describes 
it as " a living fountain, vomiting forth from a cir- 
cular cavity an impetuous torrent of liquid matter, 
and hurling along, in rapid succession, opaque 
masses, which it strewed everywhere around;" and 
after having watched this orifice at short intervals 
for five hours, sometimes looking at it for a quarter 
of an hour at a time, the stream was seen still to roll 
on with a constant and equal velocity. Dr. Grant's 
description of these fountains in the Spongia pani- 
cea is no less striking. " Two entire specimens of 
this sponge were placed together in a glass of sea- 
water, with their orifices opposite to each other, 
at the distance of two inches ; they appeared to 
the naked eye like two living batteries, and soon 
covered each other with the material they ejected. 
I placed one of them in a shallow vessel, and just 
covered its surface and highest orifice with water. 



334 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

On strewing some powdered chalk on the surface 
of the water, the currents were visible to a great 
distance ; and on placing some pieces of cork or of 
dry paper over the apertures, I could perceive 
them moving by the force of the currents, at the 
distance of ten feet from the table on which the 
specimens rested." And thus the wondrous ope- 
rations of nature, till lately unsuspected, have been 
continually going on since man first awoke to light 
and life ; the knowledge of which reminds us how 
much there may be still in the world around us of 
which as yet we know nothing. Surely the philo- 
sopher may well be the humblest of men, since he 
best knows the degree of man's ignorance and the 
finite nature of his understanding. 

The young eggs or gemmules of the sponge are 
attached to the inner sides of the canals, and are, 
when fully formed, clothed with the minute hairs 
which serve so important a part in the economy of 
many small marine animals. Here again they 
are useful in forming currents in the water around 
them, by means of their rapid and incessant mo- 
tion, and these currents carry away the young egg 
of the sponge into the sea, till it fixes itself in some 
rocky crevice, or on some sea-weed or other object, 
and springs up like a little tree, or forms itself into 
a ball or cup, or takes any other form, according 
to its species and the circumstances under which 
it grows. 

Additional strength is given to the framework 
of some kinds of sponges by calcareous or flinty 
minute crystalline spicula, which, small as they 
are, are capable of scratching glass. The existence 
of these in our British sponges, as well as the 
smaller growth of these productions, render them 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 335 

unfit for domestic purposes. The sponges with 
thorny framework belong mostly to the seas of 
warmer zones, though even our common Turkey 
sponge may be seen, on reducing it to ashes, to 
contain a small portion of flint. The forms of the 
spicula are invariable, and therefore constitute a 
good characteristic of species. 

Our native sponges have not the grotesque 
shape of the larger kinds belonging to tropical 
seas, where balls, inverted cups, fans, and mosses 
seem represented by them as they hang among 
the fissures of the rock. Yet with us they fringe 
the rock or sea cave, branching out like trees, or 
grouping in rugged and irregular crusts, or clasp- 
ing around the various olive-green sea-plants, or 
forming a soft carpet on some rocky ledge. Their 
brown or sandy-coloured branches lie about on the 
beach, or sometimes we find them, as in the case 
of the smallest of our native sponges (Sponyia 
confervicola) , growing among the hair-like green 
Arctic conferva on the rock, and contrasting its 
brilliant white colour with the dark green tint of 
that sea-weed. In some cases, as in a common 
sponge (Spongiafluviatilis)) the colour varies from 
bright green to pale brown, according to the action 
of light, inducing many naturalists to think, that 
though marine sponges are undoubtedly of an 
animal nature, yet the fresh-water sponges may 
belong to the vegetable kingdom. Many of our 
native sponges grow within reach of the tide, 
others down below in the deeper waters, where 
they become of more compact structure, and are 
less easily rent by wind or wave. 

Our figure will enable the reader to identify 
one frequent object of our shores, the common 



336 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 



branched sponge (Halichondria oculata]. It is 
usually of a pale sand-colour, though sometimes of 
a darker brown. It varies much in the disposition 




of its branches, for sponges differ more than many 
other marine productions in the form of the indi- 
viduals of a species. It is frequently to be seen 
hanging from the under surfaces of the rocks, at 
about the low-water mark of spring-tides. 

Aristotle told of the sponges, that they shrank 



COMMON OBJECTS OP THE SHORE. 337 

when touched. That the Greeks used them as 
we do for domestic purposes, is evident from 
their name, which is derived from the Greek word 
to squeeze. Homer, too, relates how Vulcan 
obeyed the command of Thetis : 

" First from the forge dislodged, he thrust apart 
His bellows, and his tools collecting all, 
Bestow'd them careful in a silver chest ; 
Then all around with a wet sponge he wiped 
His 



To those who love to stray among the wild 
solitudes of nature, 

" To sit on rocks, to muse o'er flood and fell," 

there is something very delightful in the nooks 
among the crags at the base of the cliffs. Some 
little plants that love the saline air, some green 
patch of grass or bright flower, has found a place 
on which to spring, and may form a cushion for us 
on the jutting crag. And there, far away from 
the haunts of men, the tall white cliff overhanging 
him and contrasting with the deep blue sky, the 
wild murmuring of the sea, the strange shrill 
screams of the sea birds, seem to awaken the echoes 
of the heart 

" The universe's inward voices cry 
Amen to either song of joy or woe," 

and the human heart responds alike to the wail 
or mirth note of nature. The sea-gulls come 
crowding or singly, 

" Each on its separate track of life, 
And each a mystery." 

We have many species of these birds, and the 
common gull (Larus canus) may be seen cresting 
z 



338 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

the billow, fearless of storm, or covering, with 
others of its tribe, the crags of the rocks in count- 
less numbers. The prettiest species is the laughing 
gull (Larus ridibundus], which is common on our 
coast during winter, but leaves the sea when spring 
returns, and wings its way inland to build its nest. 
It is of a beautiful pearly grey colour, changing in 
the winter season to a white, and its head is of a 
blackish brown hue. It skims lightly over the 
water, for like the other gulls it cannot dive, but 
it feeds on the fishes and other marine animals 
which come near the surface, or on the insects of 
the most inland spot where it builds its nest; 
and when seen at a distance, looks so like a dove, 
that we might fancy it a messenger from some ark 
upon the waters. Tempestuous weather is looked 
for when the gull flies inland, and Scottish records 
relate how when flocks of sea-gulls come in from 
the shore, a storm from the south-east is sure to 
follow, which being over, they will return to the 
sea again. The gulls are restless, screaming crea- 
tures, their song is doubtless one of joy, and 
though we might in the woodland deem it harsh 
and dissonant, yet its wild shrillness seems so 
adapted to the lonely and rugged places where it 
is heard, that it has its own music too. 

The sea-swallows are graceful creatures, too, 
and much like our land-swallows. The common 
Tern (Sterna Hirundo) skims in great numbers 
over the waves which wash our southern shores, 
and its grey wings and black-topped head are a 
iamiliar sight. And when storms have been ra- 
ging, and the "signs and wonders of the elements" 
have been exhibited, and we can reach the lonely 
cliff, to see how the ocean, whose fury has been 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 339 

so great, seems even yet to be foaming with rage, 
perchance some stormy petrel ( Thalassidroma pda- 
gica) may be seen darting about over the waters 
close to the shore, or coming to seek refuge on the 
cliff. It is common at such times around the coast 
of England and Scotland, and is a bird something 
like a swift, with a short compressed bill, and the 
smallest of all web-footed birds. Large flocks of 
these petrels often appear far from land, and the 
mariner, with the superstitious feeling common to 
those who live in mountainous places, or far away 
out at sea, or in other lonely regions, looks on them 
as messengers of the storm, and associates them 
with all the wild terrors of the tempest, the broken 
mast, and the shipwrecked vessel, and the drowning 
sailor. The name of storm-finch has its synonyme 
in the French Petrel Tempete, and the Accello 
delle Tempeste of the Italians ; and the sailors give 
the bird the name of Mother Carey's chicken, from 
one who was supposed, in darker times, to be a 
witch, and, able to raise a storm by her machina- 
tions, sent out our little birds as forerunners of 
evil. That their appearance forbodes a tempest, 
is often true, but their instinct leads them, in the 
time of coming danger, to hover in the wake of the 
vessel, as if, like some other of the lower animals, 
they relied on the presence of man for safety. Yet 
even when skies are blue, and the waters are calm 
as the silvery lake, the petrel follows the ship, 
sometimes for days, gathering up for its food such 
refuse as may be thrown from it. Sleepless and 
untiring, skimming lightly over the water with 
unfailing wing, and only gently touching its sur- 
face, they seem almost to walk upon the sea; and 
Mr. Yarrell says that its name of petrel was 



340 COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 

given to this bird from the apostle Peter, because 
of this circumstance. 

On our northern and western shores vast flocks 
of those antiquated looking birds, the Puffins, con- 
gregate in the spring, and stay till the autumnal 
winds warn them to depart for the warmer shores 
of Southern Europe. Venerable birds are they, 
looking down from the ledges of the lofty cliffs on 
which they have perched themselves, as if they 
were moralizing on the follies of mortals below; 
or keeping their sharp keen eyes fixed on the 
waters, till some fish appears near the surface, 
when they dart down and capture their prey. 
Their allies the Auks, and the Guillemots, called 
Wild Willies on some of our coasts, also cover some 
of the cliffs in unnumbered flocks, making such 
a confused noise, as if quarrelling and screaming, 
that their shrill cries seem almost to bewilder the 
wanderer below. 

The dark dusky-looking Cormorants may be seen 
on our southern shores, spreading out their wings 
to dry their plumage, which, unlike that of many 
diving birds, gets thoroughly wetted by their 
plunging under water. Sometimes as we watch 
this bird, we may see its head emerge from the 
sea, but it pursues its prey down beneath the sur- 
face, and devours it with such voracity, that the 
proverb, " as greedy as a cormorant," is a familiar 
one. It is provided by Almighty skill, for the 
purpose of feeding on larger fishes than can be 
swallowed by most birds, with a very large gullet 
or tube, between the mouth and stomach, and it 
is said even to be able to swallow a flat fish. Its 
digestion is so rapid, that a tame bird has been 
inown to eat three or four pounds of fish twice in 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHOEE. 



341 



a day. The cormorants can dive down on their prey 
from the greatest height with almost unerring cer- 
tainty, and having seized a fish, will emerge from 




the water with the fish across the bill, with sudden 
twirl throw it up in the air. catch it head foremost, 
and swallow it. 

The black cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo) is a 
common bird of the shores. It is to be seen in 
great numbers on the cliffs of the Isle of Wight, 



342 COMMON OBJECTS OP THE SHORE. 

making its seed-weed nests. The Rev. C. A. 
Johns, in his "Week at the Lizard," describes 
the cormorant as an unfailing visitor on the rocks 
in that district. " One low rock in particular, 
near Pen Olver," says the writer, " has generally 
on it a conclave of twelve or more birds, solemnly 
digesting their last meal, or expanding their wings 
to the sun, while in the water a solitary head at 
intervals shoots up, jerks itself from side to side, 
and immediately disappears." 

The Gannet or Channel Goose (Sula alba) re- 
sides constantly on our coast, and has great strength 
of wing, soaring over the sea, and darting into it 
with inconceivable rapidity. It is a white bird, 
with black-tipped wings, the young ones resem- 
bling downy balls like powder-puffs. It is of great 
value to the people of St. Kilda, both for its num- 
ber of eggs and soft down. 

Vast crowds of ducks and geese come to us in 
the winter months from colder regions, and some 
make their dwellings on the coast, while others 
build their nest inland. The loud noise made by 
a flock of these as they pass in some winter's day 
over our heads, has a singular sound, and accus- 
tomed as we are, from childhood, to deem that the 
rustling of their wings tells of coming rough and 
cold weather, they scarcely receive a welcome. 
Many, however, can remember when, in their early 
days, they had the fancies which Clare describes 
as in the mind of the shepherd boy : 

" He hears the wild geese gabbling o'er his head, 
Then, pleased with fancies in his musings bred, 
He marks the figured forms in which they fly, 
And, pausing, follows with a wondering eye, 
Likening their curious march, in curves or rows, 
To every letter which his memory knows." 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 343 

The goosander, the smew, and other birds fre- 
quent the shore, while grebes and divers dash 
down into the waters after the fish, and the pied 
oyster-catcher seats himself on the rocky crag, 
not so much delighting in the oyster from which 
it has its name, as in the resistless limpet and the 
mussel, which have little chance against the attacks 
of its strong bill. This bird is also called Sea 
Woodcock and Olive. It is very common on the 
low flat coasts of our 
island, its beautiful 
glossy black wings and 
back contrasting with 
the white plumage of its 
breast and the under 
portion of its expanded 
wing. It lays its eggs 
on the low ground or 
shingle. They are four in number, of pale olive- 
green, blotched with white. 

The loud solitary whistle of some lone curlew 
(Numenius arquatus) has an almost thrilling sound, 
as we listen to it at some distance, while the clear 
shrill tones uttered by the large flocks of curlews, 
or the notes of " courlie, courlie," which they utter 
as they sweep around the head of one who ap- 
proaches their nest, heard when alone on the shore, 
far from human habitations, are among the wildest 
of the tones of nature. These birds, as well as 
the oyster-catcher, belong to the tribe of waders, 
and are adapted for wading in search of food, by 
having the greater part of their legs free from 
feathers. In this tribe, too, we find those joyous 
little birds the sandpipers, sometimes called Sea 
Snipes. These birds frequent all parts of our 




344 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE. 



coast. Troops of the Dunlin (Tringa variabilis), 
which Buffon called the Sea LarK, appear sometimes 
like a dark cloud, while we see their backs only, 
but immediately after, all in a moment, as if under 
the command of some one which all the other 
birds obey, every individual will turn up at once, 
and almost dazzle us by a sudden display of the 
white and silvery under plumage. It is most 
amusing to watch them as they run along. They 
seem very types of mirth and sprightliness, moving 
their tails up and down, and uttering a low gentle 
note, as they seek their food among the shingle or 
on the salt marshes near the sea. The dunlin 
makes a neat little nest, and its eggs, of greenish 




grey, tapering at one end and spotted with brown, 
are always four in number, and are disposed in the 



COMMON OBJECTS OF THE SHORE, 345 

nest in such a form as to take so little room, that 
the bird may cover them while sitting. 

The limits of this little work have allowed but 
a passing mention of a few of the many birds of 
our coast, but all have seen them skimming over 
the sea, or diving into it, and have heard their 
wild cries. Like all birds, they seem happy crea- 
tures, till the fowler comes, with the just right 
which God has given him over the lower animals, 
and takes some of them for food, and others for 
their downy plumage ; or, till some cruel marksman, 
who needs them not, and who has no regard for 
their grace or beauty, aims at them as they are 
rejoicing in God's sunshine, and leaves their dead 
bodies to float on the waves, or sends them, with 
crippled wing, to endure the short remains of life 
in pain and misery. It would be well could all 
feel with Cowper's gentle pleadings for kindness 
to the lower animals, and come to the same result 
as did the poet in his arguings, 

" The sum is this : 

If man's convenience, health, or safety interfere, 
His rights and claims are paramount, and must extinguish theirs : 
Else they are all, the meanest thing that lives, 
As free to live, and to enjoy that life, 
As God was free to form them at the first, 
Who in his sovereign wisdom made them all" 



THE END. 



TKtET HILL. 






S3 
fi 



*' H 



8 o V d 

| ** 5 a 

^ 55 , ^2 



^ 2 

p W 
st d ^ 



5ig ^ S| 

a \ 1 M S g 



.8-.' 






| 2 r 
? . o 9 



