J HE DEVELOPMENT 



ANIMAL KINGDOM: 



A PAPER 



UKAP AT THE FOX Kl'H MEETlN<i OK IHK 



ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF WOMAN 



By (JRACEAXXA LEWIS. 




Irinted by the Committee on Science 




NANTUl'KET : 

HT SSEY ,v H()BINS(JN. PRINTEKS— INQUIKEK AND MIRROR OFFICE. 

1877. • 



THE DEVELOPMENT 



ANIMAL KINGDOM 



A PAPER 



IJKAU AT THE FOTHTH MEETTNG OF THE 



ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF WOMAN 



By GRACEANNA LEWIS. 



Printed by the Committee on Science. 



NANTUCKET : 

HUSSEY & ROBINSON, PRINTERS— INQUIRER AND MIRROR OFFICE. 
1877. 






The Devclopmeiii of the Aiiiuial Kinodom. 



Naturtalists, whatever may be their opmions on the 
question of P]vohition. unite in beheving in the exist- 
ence of ;in Order of Relationship in the animal 
world. To trace this order and to seek its cause is one 
of the most interesting occupations which can engage 
the human mind, and is one well worthy of honest 
study through life, even if but little a])parent progress 
should ))e made therein. 

It is not possible to study Animal Life effectively 
without a general knowledge of its co-related branch, 
Vegetable Life ; nor tlie System of Life as a whole 
without some attention to the Mineral Kingdom ; nor 
can either Kingdom be fairly understood without due 
consideration of the Laws which control matter. The 
Physicist must aid the Biologist; and on their con- 
clusions both the Botanist and Zoologist are largely 
dependent. Each' science enriches the other, and we 
who can devote ourselves to but one gladly acknowl- 
edge our indebtedness to all who ])estow their help. 



That Power which called us into being has endowed 
us with the desire to grasp thread after thread of 
knowledge, that we may hold them as clues to guide 
us through the labyrinths of unrevealed mysteries. We 
are obeying the dictates of the Soul when we follow 
their leading. The faculties which distinguish between 
thinors which are like and those which are unlike 
make of us classifiers, and we think of the class, rather 
than of the individuals which compose it. Thus we 
are enabled to take a general survey of Nature. 

When we speak of the mineral kingdom, the vege- 
table kingdom, or the animal kingdom, we remember 
that, in fact, vegetable and animal organisms are not 
distinctly separable, and that no man knows the con- 
ditions necessary for the production of either from 
their chemical components. We are also reminded 
that the distinctions ])etween animate and inanimate 
matter cannot ]:>e too strongly insisted upon. 

Protoplasm, formed by the combination of so many 
atoms of Carbon, Hydrogen, Oxygen, and Nitrogen, — 
inanimate gases, — exists in all animate forms, whether 
these be of the vegetable or of the animal kingdom. 
Mineral compounds may lie formed with exactly the 
same chemical constitution. Where does life arise, and 
whence comes its activity ? The mind goes beyond 
these compounds to find that activity in the Motions 
belonQ-inu' to atoms of matter. 

The Atom is understood to be the material represen- 
tative of Divine Energy, — the Germ of Being, — and 
to contain, in combination with other atoms, all the 
possibilities of the whole Life-System. If we adopt the 
idea that ntoms partake of the eternal energy of the 



Supreme Ruler of the Universe, who both called them 
into being and planned for them an infinity of combi- 
nations, we are prepared to consider the multiplicity 
of forms which are in existence, and to find in them 
all some binding principle of relationship. 

Atoms, like magnets, are supposed to possess attrac- 
tive and repellant poles, and to retain in combination 
both vibratory and rotary motions. Atoms which are 
held together b}' their a.vrs of rotation are believed to 
give lines of Magnetic Force. Molecides, formed of 
atoms, possess similar polarities ; as do particles and 
masses of matter. 

Magnetism acts end to end, and, since it holds mat- 
ter to a central axis, it is a Cextripetal Force. Oth- 
er forces distribute from a centre, and are Centrifit- 
OAL Forces. 

Light is electro-magnetic, and may combine in itself 
both the centripetal and centrifugal forces, moving in 
accordance with these dual forces, all mjitter on which 
it acts. 

The Crystallizing Forces, which arrange mineral 
substances in definite order, according to the attractive 
and repellant ])olarities ot their molecules, act so simi- 
larly to Light as to suggest the operation of either 
identical or analogous laws. 

The Vital Forces, which control the system of 
life, operate in harmony with Light, and also with the 
Crystallizing Forces. 

Therefore it may be understood that tlie centripetal 
and centrifugal forces in nature, similarly, act upon 
mineral, vegetable, and animal forms. It may indeed 
be assumed that all forms are modifications of the 



6 

sphere resulting from the action of these two classes 
of forces. 

The primary structural Forms which are built up 
under their action are the crystal in the mineral, and 
the cell in the vegetable and animal kingdoms. Min- 
eral masses are Iniilt of crystals ; and cells form every 
higher structure in the vegetaljle and animal king- 
doms. 

Crystals are united in masses under laws which gov- 
ern the primary forms : animate beings cannot escape 
from the action of the polarizing forces, although 
these may be modified by the action of the Vital 
Forces. 

In the water-crystal the main axis is perpendicular 
to the plane of crystallization, or, in other words, it is 
at right angles to the hrdnches. In their plane of 
crystallization snow-crystals may present a series of 
triang:les. A snow-crystal of six ravs may be a dou- 
ble triangle. There may be twelve or more points, 
the beauty usually depending on the complexity of 
design. Each point has its own axis, which governs 
the symmetrical disposition of the parts, but the de- 
sign is similar in circles of six rays each. In the 
crystal the centripetal and centrifugal forces are mod- 
ified by molecular action. 

In the flower, the essential parts, the stamen, pistil, 
and ovary, are in the axis of growth. The less im- 
portant corolla diverges from the centre, as do the 
rays of the snow-crystal. In the fruit, the line con- 
necting the stem and blossom ends, corresponds to the 
perpendicular axis of the snow-flake, the seeds being 
disposed by various methods around that axis. 



In the tree, the main trnnk is the axis of growth ; 
the l)ranches diverge from this axis under the same 
hiw which sends the molecules of water on their di- 
vergent paths of crystallization. Each Ijranch of the 
tree has its special axis, from which the minor hranches 
diverge ; and leaves ray from the branch as the branch 
rays frou) the stem, the ribs of the leaf following the 
same general law of divergence. In the plant we see 
the action of centripetal and centrifugal forces, con- 
trolled l)v (Jrowth Force. 

A large proportion of the Protozoans and Radiates 
resemble crystals in form. Some of them, especially 
among Rhizopods, are strikingly similar to crystals. 
The limbs of animals correspond to the branches of 
plants. They bud at right angles to the axis of growth, 
but may be modified so as to ))ecome parallel with it, 
as in the lower extremities of man. 

In the Groups of animals, as well as in the individ- 
ual forms, we lind evidence of the operation of the 
same laws. There is a well-defined axis, and there is 
a circle of radiation in every great group. The branches 
of such groups are related to each other by characters 
which make it impossible to confound them with mem- 
bers of a higher circle. 

These circles — or, more accuratelv, coils of ascendino; 
spirals — represent the disposition of the rays of a 
color disk, the plane of crystallization of a water-crys- 
tal, the Ijranches of trees, the disk of a flower, the 
seeds of a fruit, the symmetrical parts of a radiate 
animal, — all alike due to the great law of Phyllotaxis, 
resulting from the dual action of the centripetal and 
centrifnu'al forces in nature. 



8 

The Order of Dea^elopment in the animal king- 
dom, is from the lower to the higher. The coils of 
ascent around a central stem are formed by a system, 
of dicliotomoiis branches at right angles to each other. 
The alternating pairs of ))ranches compose one circle 
of four rays of related animals, with a central stem 
of hiirher forms. The hiodier stem is analogous to the 
perpendicular axis of the snow-flake ; to the trunk of 
a tree ; to the earth's axis of rotation ; to the centre 
of rotation of the planetary system ; and to ever}' 
axis of rotation in nature. 

Beyrinninu- with the lowest organisms, the Plastides 
of Haeckel may be considered as the root of the ani- 
mal kingdom. These organisms are scarcely, if at all, 
separable from Plant-Life, and barely removed from 
the mineral kingdom. From this root diverge four 
great groups of Protozoans. The first pair of 
branches are the Polycystines and Sponges, together 
comprising the Actinozoolds. The Polycystines, among 
annuals, represent the Diatoms of the vegetable king- 
dom ; and the Sponges are also analogous to plants. 
The Diatoms, Polycystines, and some of the Sponges 
are siliceous, when there are hard parts. Prof. Agassiz 
went to his grave (loul)ting whether the Sponges 
should be classed among Plants or Anhnals. These 
doubts are not generally shared by naturalists, and 
some consider the Sponges among the more highly 
organized of Protozoans. 

The next pair of branches are the Rhizopods or 
Root-footed animalculaj, and the Infusoria. The 
Rhizopods, in certain external characters, foreshadow 
the Mollusca, especially the cephalopods. They are 



9 

sometimes called Mn/dcazooids because, like the mol- 
luscs, their hard part-< are of car})onate of lime. In 
like manner the Infusorian-; sugg-est the Articulates, 
and are known as EutoDiozouids. 

The Polycystines connect with their neighbors the 
Rhizopods ; and in the same way the Sponges connect 
with the Infusorians, thus completing the coil of ascent, 
as the Infusorians are, clearly, the most highly organ- 
ized of Protozoans. 

The Protozoans appeared enrliest in Time, the old- 
est of known fossils beiui^- Eozoon. belono'inu" to the 
rocks of the Pre-Cambrian Period. 

From the Protozoans arise a central stem of Meta- 
zoAXs, of which the branches lowest in structure are 
the C(ELEXTKHATA ( Conds aud Allies), iind the Eciii- 
NODERMATA ( Star-Fislies, c^c. ) This pair of branches 
constitute the '• Radiata," although the Echinoderms 
and even the higher (Juelenterates manifest a degree 
of bi-laterality. 

The succeeding pair of branches in this inverte))rate 
circle, are the Molli:s("a and Artki^lata. Of these 
Agassiz remarks,"' We cannot i)redicate absolute superi- 
ority or inferiority of organization of either group as 
compared with the other ; they stand on one structu- 
ral level, though with different tendencies." This is 
entirely consistent with the idea that they are oppo- 
site and complementary members of one pair, in a 
system of dichotomous Ijranching. 

The Coelente rates (through the Polyps) connect so 
closely with the Sponges below them that the best 
palieontologists hesitate to say of certain ancient forms 
whether they are sponges or (*(^i-al. 



JO 

The Mollusca, on one side connect with the Coelen- 
terates, throngh the branches known as Molhiseoidea, 
and especially by the Polyzoa ; and on the other side 
the Cephalopods rest npon an Echinodennatons base. 

The Worms by their lowest branch, the Rot if era ^ 
tonch npon the Infusoria ; they also through other 
forms connect with ancient Echinoderms, while by 
their complete circulation the highest l)ranch, the 
Anit€H(Ja, approaches the vertebrates. 

Molluscan and Articulate forms sometimes resemble 
each other so closely that it has required the most 
profound research to distinguish lietween the two. 

All four of these invertebrate branches diverge from 
a connnon stem : hence these resemblances to each 
other, and to their Prott)zoan stock. 

The Articulates appeared in the Lower Cambrian ; — 
in America, with the genus Par ado. mules. The lower 
Molluscs and Radiates foUowed during the deposition 
of rocks of the Camljrian and Lower Silurian Periods, 
bnt it was not nntil later, at the base of the Upper 
Silurian, that the Cephalopods entered upon existence. 

With the Upper Silurian, the Vertebratp: Stem 
budded from the invertebrate base. 

Some of the earliest vertebrates of the family Ceph- 
alaspklxe remind us cnriously of l)Oth the Trilobites 
and the Orfhoceratidce, — that is, of both Articidate and 
Molluscan forms. 

The vertebrate which is lowest in structure, but 
which belongs to a later period, appears to have taken 
its rise from the opposite side and to be derived from 
the Coelenterates and lower MoUuscans. 

All molluscs, articulates, and vertel)rates are bilateral 



II 

in stnu'tiuv ; that is, their parts are synniiotrieally ar- 
ranged on either side of a longitudinal axis. Two end- 
edves^ has gained the mastery over the sphere. There 
are here an (interior and a j/ostcrior pole, and these 
usnally correspond to the head and tail of the animal, 
although the lower mollusoa are headless. 

The great stem of the Veijtebijata divides, primari- 
ly, into four lateral hranehes, with a fifth central stem, 
destined to produce the most important vertebrate 
forms. The primary whorl, composed of these lateral 
))ranches, includes fish-like animals which are entirely 
distinct from the true fishes. The lowest in u'rade of 
these generalized vertel)rates is the Lancelet, or Ani- 
jiltio.riis. forming the division Piiaryxgobranchii, or 
Leptocakdia. This is the animal which durino- its em- 
Itrvological develo))ment recalls the ( 'Oelenterata and 
lower Mollusca, and reaches maturity with no resem- 
blance to any but an embryonic vertebrate. It is with- 
ont vertebra, possessing only the noto-chord which is 
transitory in other vertebrates. Xo fossil Leptocardia 
are known. It is reasonable, but not necessary, to 
conclude that it must have come into existence early 
in time. In many other instances, forms low in struc- 
ture have ap])eared at ('()m|)aratively late geologic 
eras. 

The Marsipobkanciiii, or the Lamprey P]els, are the 
next in order. Although no fossil forms are known, 
they, in some respects, jipproximate the earliest of the 
Silurian vertebrates. 

The Elasmobranchii (Sharks. Rays, and Chimoeras), 
unlike the Leptocardia and Marsipobranchii, came ear- 
ly into existence, occurring in the Upper Silurian 



12 

rocks, and continuing l)y successive forms to the pres- 
ent time. 

These are followed in structural order by the Dip- 
noi, or Mud-Fishes, animals which Ijreathe by true 
lungs, as do the Reptiles. The spmal column and the 
Ihnbs of the Dipn<jans a})proxhnate to those of the 
most ancient of the (Jrossopterygian Ganoids, and the 
annuals approach the x\mphibians even more closely 
than they do the true Fishes. 

These four branches of generalized vertebrates form 
a coil around a central stem of Ganoids, which, as Icii- 
THYOPSIDA, lead up to the more highly specialized ver- 
tebrate classes. 

From this main stem of the Ganoids, in the Carbon- 
iferous Period, animals with amphibian tendencies be- 
ti-an to branch, but it was n(jt until a vast interval of 
time — in the Cretaceous, that the true bony fishes came 
upon the scene. The whole group of Ichthvopsida, 
including the Fishes and Amphibians, appears to arise 
intermediately between the Elasmo))ranchii and the 
Dipnoans. The Amphibians, although on a higher 
plane than the Fishes, seem to express the possiljilities 
of structure residing in a group whose root is between 
the Leptocardia and the Dipnoans, whilst the fishes 
lean to the side of the Elasmobranchii. 

Below the Permian, no Sauropslda are known. 
Branching from the (ranoid stem, they developed in 
force during the Triassic and Jurassic Periods, and 
gave rise to modern reptiles and birds. 

The Mammalian stem ])egan to })ud in the Triassic, 
with Vromatherhiw ^ and at least eleven genera of 
mammals were in existence before the appearance of 



ArchiEopteryx, the earliest of the true birds, belonging 
to the Upper Oolite. 

All of the early Ichtliyopsidans and Sauropsidans 
were more or less mammalian in character. The dif- 
ference between the hand-footed Cheirotherium, which 
left its tracks in the mud of the Lower Trias ; the 
Labyrinthodonts and other Amphibians ; the Proto- 
rosaurs of the Permian, and other Triassic Saurop- 
sida, and the Mammals, was not so great as might be 
anticipated by comparing modern representatives of 
these ancient forms. At tlie time when the mammals 
appeared with characters borrowed from both the 
great groups which preceded them, the four lateral 
branches of fishes, amphibians, reptiles, and birds had 
not attained their distinctive characters. These were 
the result of later development. 

The class of Mammajja branches into three main 
divisions, known as Orxithodelphia, Didelphia, and 

MONODELPHIA. 

The Ornithodelphia, or Monotremata, are the lowest 
and most bird-like of Mammals. They combine both 
Sauropsidan and Ichthyojj-^idan characters with those 
which distinguish the gi'oup to which they belong. 
They consist of two families only, each represented by 
a single genus, and belong to Australia. They are 
Echi<h)(i^ or the Porcupine Ant-eater, of the family 
Tachif gloss idee ; and Orniflio/ hipichus. Platypus, or the 
Duck Mole, of the family ()rnitIiorlu/nc}iid(2. No fossil 
OrmOwdelph'ia are known. 

The DiDELPHiANS, or Marsupials are also a low grade 
of Mammals, with imperfect young. If divided ac- 
cordinu" to the nature of their food, they constitute 



14 

three groups, Hekbivora, Carnivora, and Insectiv- 
ORA, which are again divisible into tribes and fami- 
lies. Thus among Herbivora there are Root-eaters, 
Grass-eaters, etc., with extinct forms which com- 
bined the characters of several groups. The Marsu- 
pals seem Kke a first essay of the higher mammals 
which appeared later. The Didelphians and the Mon- 
otremes constitute the Implacentals. 

The families Dromatheriidce and J'/n^idu/dcidcB, 
which are Mesozoic mammals, are usually classed with 
the Didelphians. They may possibly be neither 
Ornithodelphians nor Didelphians, but, like these, dis- 
tinct groups of generalized mammalian forms. 

As we are wholly unacquainted with their internal 
organization, it is impossible to do more than conjec- 
ture whether or not they were implacentals. Like 
those comprehensive vertebrates, the viviparous sharks, 
they may have included species with a rudimentary 
placenta. It seems strongly probable that extinct 
forms carried up the line unbroken from the earliest 
vertebrates to the placental mammals. 

The MoNODELPHiANS, which are the placental mam- 
mals, arise as a main stem from the implacental base 
with a structure superior to these, carrying up, doubt- 
less, characters derived from the earliest of vertebrates. 
They appeared in force during the Tertiary period, 
branching, in the Eocene, into their main divisions, 
although the Edentates, which are the lowest in struc- 
ture, did not appear until later. The extinct Eden- 
tates belong to the later Tertiary and to the Quater- 
nary Periods, and include the gigantic Megathniiuii , 
the huge OUiptodon, and other fossil animals. The 



10 

living Edentates are the Armadillos, Ant-eaters, and 
Sloths, species of which are found in South America, 
Southern Asia, and Africa. 

Among Monodelphians, the Edentates recall not 
only implacental mammals, but Sauropsidans, at the 
same time that they manifest relationships to the Non- 
Deciduates, Zonarians, and Discoidans. Lying at the 
root of the Discoida, they sum up many preceding 
forms, but are apparently reversions rather than gen- 
eralized Monodelphians. 

The Cetacea, or Whales, may be regarded as the 
opposite members of the lower pair of branches of 
Monodelphians. In external form they represent the 
Fishes, as the (rli/pfodou among p]dentates reminds us 
of the Tortoises. 

The next pair of branches are the Non-Deciduates 
and Zonarians. The former includes Siren ia, Ungu- 
Inta, and Toxodontia. 

Sirenia (Manatees and Dugongs) descends to ap- 
proximate the whales. The Toxodonts are an extinct 
Quaternary group approaching both the Sloths and 
the Bears, and also bearing relations to members of 
the Discoida. They mu-^t I)e regarded as an ascending 
group, in the same manner a>< Sirenia is a descending 
one. 

The Ungulates, or hoofed animals, form the main 
central stem of the Non-Decidua, and include some of 
the most important of our domestic animals, as the 
hog, the cow, and the horse, with a large number of 
extremely interesting familie-^, both living and extinct. 
The ungulates appeared in the Eocene Tertiary with 
members closely related to the Zonarians as well as to 



16 

the Discoidans, the whole, circle of Monorlelphians be- 
ing, at first, closely related to each other. 

The ZoNARiA]srs, so called because in this group the 
placenta is in the form of a zone, include the Probos- 
cidians, the Carnivores, and Hyracoidea. 

The elephant is the only living remnant of the ex- 
tensive order Proboscidia, which nourished in the 
Eocene, and which produced the U'lntotiierimns, Dino- 
fherinms and Mastodons of the Past. This group is 
closely connected with the ungulates, rising on a higher 
plane from the whole stem of the Non-Decidua. The 
Proboscidians are closely connected with Sirenia as 
well as with the ungulates. 

Hyracoidea is represented at the present day only 
by the conies of the East. It would not be wonderful 
if some of the Eocene Mammals should be found to 
belong here, as for instance, Hyracotherium and its 
allies. 

Intermediately between the Proboscidia and Hyra- 
coidea, proceeds the main stem of the Zonarians, the 
Carnivora, with a full development of living species. 
Its ascending plantigrade branch rises to meet mem- 
bers of the Discoida, more especially those of the 
Quadrumanous divisions, at the same time that it re- 
calls the Edentate Vermilingitia^ and the Sloths. The 
opposite branch of the Pinni pedes descends to recall 
the old Zeiiglodonts of the Cetacea. The typical car- 
nivores are undoubtedly to be found in the Cynoidea, of 
which the Dogs are the central forms. These show 
more tendency to vary under domestication than do 
any other carnivores. A similar tendency is seen 
amonij uno-ulates. 



The central and terminal stem of Monodelphia is 
DiscoiDA. It derives its name from the form of the 
placenta, which is here discoidal. To this group be- 
long the Rodents, the Insect Ivor a (including Cheirop- 
tera)^ the ProsimiiB, the Siniiir, and the central and 
terminal stem of Hon^inind or Man. 

The two lower branches, Rodentin and Insectivora, 
include animals which, whilst possessing the essential 
characters of the group, are inferior in brain develop- 
ment. They compensate for the extraordinary cer- 
ebral perfection which characterizes man. 

The Prosimians and Simians together are termed 
Quadrumana. These, with the Rodents and Insectiv- 
ora, form a whorl of four lateral branches around the 
main stem or axis of the group. 

The connection between the Prosimians and the In- 
sectivora is made by (Taleop'Uhecus^ or the Flying 
Lemur, an animal held to be an insectivore. On the 
side towards the Rodents, the Cheiromyini, or the 
Aj^e-Aye, forms the link of connection. The Mar- 
mosets, considered as the lowest of the Simians, would 
seem to be equally well placed if held to be the high- 
est group of the Prosimians. They are without an 
opposable thumb, as in one of the Lemurs, — the Aye- 
Aye. When the face looks forward, as it does in the 
squirrel-like posture natural to these animals, the base 
of the brain is almost horizontal to the spinal column, 
as in the erect human being. The brain case is also 
relatively very large, although, like the Lemurs, the 
Marmosets are smootli-brained animals. In the brain 
there is an excess in quantity combined with inferior 
quality. The teeth in the Marmosets are thirty-two 



18 

in number, as in the highest of the Apes and in Man. 
Like the Lemurs, these animals are thickly furred, 
their whole aspect being that of the ti/pes of their 
group. For these reasons it see^s justifiable to regard 
them as more Lemurine than Simian. Considered as 
the central and highest branch of the Lemurs, and 
in certain respects on a level with the Simians, the 
peculiarities of their structure become instructive, 
and their relation to the lower OebidiB intelligible. 

Without the Marmosets, there are three families of 
Simiae. The CeMdce or Platyrhine monkeys, are found 
only in South America. In this family of vSimiiie the 
rodent analogies are most clearly shown. The rela- 
tionship does not appear to be one of close affinity. 

The Catarrhine Apes, belonging to the old world, 
include two families. The typical Carnivores are re- 
called in the Ci/no})it]iecidcE or dog-like apes. The 
central and highest family of the Simile is the Simiida?, 
otherwise known as Anthn>po}nori)ha or Man-like Apes. 
To this family belong the Gibbons, the Oran^s, tlie 
Chimpanze , and the Gorilla. These Apes do not con- 
stitute an ascending series towards man, but the simi- 
larities are found in the family as a whole, some gen 
era presenting likenesses not found in others, while 
the latter show different resem))lances. The meaning 
of this appears to Ije that the whole branch of the 
apes diverged from its root with man-like characters, 
and that in time these came to be represented l)y dif- 
ferent species, which diverged more and more widely 
from the main central stem Hominina. This view is 
strongly confirmed by the more anthropomorphous 
appearance of the young Simiidce, which indicates the 



19 

siiperioritv of the root stock from which this family is 
derived. The extinct forms are P/iojntliecus and Dry- 
oinlhecu!^. These ar<^ considered, by very good natu- 
ralists, to be more man-like than any of the existing 
Apes, as they should be if the above theory is the 
correct one. 

The group known as the Primates is composed of 
both branches of the Quadrumana, and Hominina. 
There can be no doiil)t. although connecting forms 
are as yet wanting, that the extinct pachydermatous 
Quadrumana of the Eocene were the generalized 
forms from which arose these three lines of develop- 
ment. These pachyderms were neither true lemurs, 
monkeys, apes, nor men. but were closely related to 
extinct ungulates, carnivores, pro})oscidians, rodents, 
and insectivores. They had the dental arches un- 
broken by a diastema as in man, which was the case 
with a large number of the Eocene Monodelphians. 

It has been no part of my purpose to give the char- 
acters of the different groups in the anhnal kingdom. 
My object has been to sliow how, by the simple method 
of bichotomous branching, whorls of four great groups 
are formed in succession around a main trunk of com- 
prehensive forms, from the Protozoa up to the Dis- 
coida, and that man arises in the axis of development 
for the whole animal kingdom ; that he existed as the 
flower exists in the seed, and that in the line of his 
coming he lifted all below him and held them at a 
higher level. As yet there is no proof that this cen- 
tral stem Homimna budded from its base earlier than 
the Quaternary period. If the great law of Progress 
continued without interruption, Man arose at first on 



20 

a far higher round than his lateral congeners. The 
central stem has been shown to be the highest from 
the Metazoans which arose from a Protozoan base ; the 
vertebrate from the invertebrate ; the mammal from 
the lower classes ; the monodelphian from the impla- 
centals, and the discoidans from the lower monodel- 
phians. There is no reason to suppose that a general 
law failed here, but every reason to believe that with 
successive changes the rise in development became 
infinitely important. If bone for bone, muscle for 
muscle, and every other physical character could be 
shown to be more similar in man and the apes than 
naturalists admit, the distinction between them would 
still remain one of the broadest in nature. In man. 
Thought Force gained its true terrestrial exponent, 
and the Soul beamed from its tenement to work all 
the wonders it has wrought. Nothing paramount to 
this occurred earlier : not even the change from inan- 
imate to animate matter was a rise so grand, so fruit- 
ful in results as this. 

But as the forces and tendencies of intellectual life 
lie sleeping in the ovule from which is evolved the in- 
dividual man, so in the germ of Being residing in 
atoms of ether, may sleep the forces and tendencies 
of immeasurable spiritual power. The erect, large- 
brained thinker was ordained, when atoms ranged 
themselves by their axes of rotation. This intelligent 
being is a necessity of the eternal activities of nature, 
which, working under the guidance of the Divine 
Ordainer, must produce good, better, best. Atomic 
Force, Molecular Force, Growth Force, Nerve Force, 
Thought Force, Spiritual Power, these succeed each 



21 

other because the universe is Uving and not dead ; be- 
cause the Supreme Soul vivifies eternally with light 
and life and love, — witli all the attributes of Mind. 

Considering Life as one of the cosmical forces re- 
sulting from the interaction of Spirit and Matter, 
coeval with God and eternal in duration, its sphere of 
activity must be Ijoundless as infinitude ; and, wherever 
all the forces of nature act together in due harmony, 
there must Life be exhibited in one phase or another 
of its development. To what height of development 
it may arise above anything known on earth, it is im- 
possible for the human mind to conjecture. Our indi- 
vidual duty is to rise as near the Source as is possible 
to each, and thus aid in elevating our own race. 

That one single sphere should be selected as a 
theater for the display of the vital forces is incompat- 
ible mth the play of the whole class of motions whose 
proper field of action is the universe. The improba- 
bility of the partial action of general laws is so strong 
as to bear the stamp of impossibility, and we are war- 
ranted in believing that we are connected by ties of 
relationship not onl}' with every terrestrial being, but 
also with those existing on ever^' life center in theex- 
pause beyond ; and that the Purpose of Creation is to 
multiply beings attuned to the Divine Nature, destined 
to an immortal existence in the midst of His everlast- 
ing harmonies. » 

KimhertoN, Pa. 





3 9088 01348 8226 



X 



