

HEIR HAVNTS 



-NRLF 




B M 313 Otfi 







- V 




MABEL- OSGOOD WRIGHT 



The Gift of Beatrix Farrand 

to the General Library 
University of California, Berkeley 



Ex 

Libris 

BEATRIX 
JONES 

LANDSCAPE 

ARCHITECTURE 




REEF POINT GARDENS 
LIBRARY 



FLOWERS AND FERNS 
IN THEIR HAUNTS 







STAND &Y THAT GfeAT 

PLACE SN TRUTW A H A UN T OF TH E ^ 



FLOWERS AND FERNS 
IN THEIR HAUNTS 




BY 
MABEL OSGOOD BRIGHT 

Author of "BlRDCRAFT," "CITIZEN BIRD," "THE FRIENDSHIP 

OF NATURE," Etc., Ete. 



Illustration* from BHjotoerap|>0 

BY THE AUTHOR 
AND J. HORACE McFARLAND 



fforft 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

LONDON : MACMILLAN & CO., LTD. 
I9OI 

All rights reserved 



COPYRIGHT, 1901 
BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 



$@ount {pleasant printer? 

J. HORACE MCFARLAND COMPANY 
HARRISBURG PENNSYLVANIA 



LANDSCAPE 

ARCHITECTURE 



US 
W6 

LANDSCAPE 

ARCH. 
LIBRARY 




Booft 10 >rUicatfl> to 

dStogtm > $V Ponp 

(bp to|)o0e name t&ere i)anc0 a tale) 
in recognition of our frien&0|>ip of 
fifteen pearu, anU of |)er intelligence in 
ftnotoing tol^rn to stanti still 




INVITATION 

ILL you stroll with me awhile across 
the fields and round the wood edge 
in search of flowers and ferns ? 

I offer no apology, and no new 
thing as lure, save perhaps the point 
of view the flower in the landscape. 
Wild flowers taken from their surround- 
ings and considered as aggregations of 
calyx, corolla, stamen and pistil are wholly dif- 
ferent from the same flowers seen in their native 
haunts. Wild Roses clustered in a crystal bowl, 
like their more robust garden sisters, are beautiful, 
but they lose the shy loveliness that they wore 
before you gathered them from beside the mossy 
bars of the old pasture. 

The Cardinal Flower, that shows its red 
hood along the waterways or stands sentinel to 
guard the Closed Gentian where it drowses in 
moist shade, looks dull and lifeless when massed 



Vlll INVITATION 

in your stateliest jar. Anemones hang their heads 
and the Blue Gentian closes its "fringed eye- 
lids " on leaving home. 

The flower in its haunt is a part of the 
landscape, a tint on nature's palette not to be 
heedlessly removed. The great patches of red 
and gold Samphire are the glory of the autumn 
marshes; plucked, they are but leafless plants of 
curious structure, chiefly valued in their green 
state by the natives for pickling. 

Perchance you are a botanist, knowing all plants 
by name and attribute, apt in Latin and techni- 
calities; have you ever in a purely friendly sense 
visited the flowers and ferns in their haunts ? I 
do not mean, have you gone in search of a 
particular plant that you wished to study, trans- 
ferred it triumphantly to your vasculum; toiled 
over it patiently and finally stowed it away with 
its life pressed out, though very neatly labeled. 
This sort of acquaintance is that of the reporter 
with the person he must of necessity interview to 
gain special information, the other the after friend- 
ship of those between whom the door is never 
closed. 



INVITATION IX 

The wild flower and fern is only to be truly 
known where it creeps, clings or sways untroubled 
in its home. If you may not follow the trail 
either afoot, awheel or on horseback, spare an 
idle hour to look with the eye of the mind and 
the camera at a few of the flowers and ferns in 
their haunts. 

M. O. W. 

WALDSTEIN, March 30, 1901 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

I. THE COMING OF SPRING i 

II. ALONG THE WATERWAYS . .... 33 

III. ESCAPED FROM GARDENS ..... 63 

IV. IN SILENT WOODS 93 

V. SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS . . . . . 123 

VI. POISONOUS PLANTS . 157 

VII. THE FANTASIES OF FERNS. . / . . 185 
VIII. FLOWERS OF THE SUN ., ... . . 219 

IX. A COMPOSITE FAMILY 243 

X. WAYFARERS . . .... . . . 273 

XL THE DRAPERY OF VINES . , . -, r . 295 

XII. AFTERMATH , . ... 321 

INDEX AND GLOSSARY ..*... 343 



ILLUSTRATORS' NOTE 

THE thanks of the illustrators for valuable 
assistance are due to Miss Mira Lloyd 
Dock, Miss Martha Buehler, Professor 
F. A. Waugh, Captain Charles Mcllvaine, and 
particularly to Mr. O. P. Beckley. 

The full -page plates are engraved directly from 
the photographs. The text cuts, with but two 
exceptions, have been drawn over the original 
photographs, showing that mechanical accuracy 
and artistic effect are not incompatible. The 
initials of the illustrators indicate the part taken 
by each in the work. 

LIST OF FULL -PAGE PLATES Pac|ng 

page 

A Fern Haunt (frontispiece) M. O. W. . 

The Coming of Spring False Hellebore, 

Skunk Cabbage, etc J. H. McF. . 4 

Jack-in-the-Pulpit, Wild Ginger, etc. . . 

Spring Beauty 

Wild Mandrake 

Dutchman's Breeches 

Shadbush 



Large Blue Flag 



12 
19 

22 

27 
30 

37 



(xiii) 



XIV ILLUSTRATIONS 

Facing 

Pickerel Weed and White Water Lilies . M. O. W. . ''44 

The Lower Pond Lizard's Tail " .48 

Purple Closed Gentian J. H. McF. . 53 

Rose Mallow " . 60 

"The Kenilworth Ivy that Clings" ... " .64 

Bouncing Betsy M. O. W. . 69 

Elecampane J. H. McF. . 76 

Jerusalem Artichoke, or Earth Apple ... " -83 

The Flag of Truce Flowering Dogwood . " -94 

"The White Wood Trilliums" " .96 

Mountain Laurel " . 101 

Indian Pipe M. O. W. . 108 

Oak-leaved Gerardia " . 113 

Tree-bridge " . 128 

Showy Orchis J. H. McF. . 134 

Yellow Moccasin Flower " .139 

Calopogon . 145 

Fly Amanita M. O. W. . 160 

Stramonium, or Jimson Weed J. H. McF. . 176 

The Unfolding of Osmunda .185 

A Glade of Cinnamon Ferns " . 192 

Rock Polypody M. O. W. . 197 

Christmas Ferns . 204 

The Silvery Glint of Spleenwort J. H. McF. . 209 

Beech Ferns in the Open . 215 

Maidenhair M. O. W. . 218 

Prickly Pear J. H. McF. . 228 

Butterfly Weed and Toad Flax " .236 

Common Silkweed . 240 

Sunflower Lane M. O. W. . 246 

Black-eyed Susan J. H. McF. . 251 

Cat-tails and Swamp Goldenrod . 256 

Brook Sunflower . 260 

New England Aster " . 264 



ILLUSTRATIONS XV 

Facing 
page 

Ragged Goldenrod J. H. McF. . 269 

Thorns by the River . 274 

A Wild Hedge Red-berried Elder ... . 279 

Elder Flowers .282 

Wild Bergamot . 287 

Wild Lettuce .291 

Staghorn Sumac . 294 

Clematis Virgin's Bower . 299 

Virginia Creeper "Throwing its lovely 

draperies" . 302 

The Frost Grape M. O. W. . 305 

Balsam Apple J. H. M"cF. . 308 

Great Bindweed, or Wild Convolvulus . . M. O. W. . 316 

Cat-tails Gone to Seed J. H. McF. . 321 

Silkweed . M. O. W. . 325 

"The Frost Traceries Upon the Window 

Panes" " .332 



LIST OF TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 

Nell (dedication) M. O. W. . T 

Hepatica (initial) J. H. McF. . vii 

Pussy Willow (initial) . . I 

Skunk Cabbage M. O. W. . -* 

Marsh Marigold J. H. McF. . n 

Trailing Arbutus . 14 

Red Wake Robin .15 

False Solomon's Seal . . . " . 17 

Violets M. O. W. . 23 

Wild Columbine . 25 

Spring Beauty, Bloodroot and Dutchman's 

Breeches " . 28 

Wild Geranium J. H. McF. . 32 



XVI ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 

Turtlehead (initial) J. H. McF. . 33 

Button-bush M. O. W. . 40 

Pitcher-plant J. H. McF. . -^ 

Arrowhead M. O. W. . 4 

Swamp Loosestrife, growing -49 

Swamp Loosestrife, detail -5 

Marsh Samphire . 51 

Sweet Pepper-bush 52 

Seaside Gerardia . 59 

The Lilac House " . 63 

Orange Hawkweed . 68 

Live-forever and Cypress Spurge M. O. W. . 71 

Catnip and Thyme -75 

Blackberry Lily J. H. McF. . 78 

Coronilla M. O. W. . 81 

Red Day Lily " . 82 

The Ruined Chimney " . 85 

Shinleaf (initial) J. H. McF. . 93 

Shooting Star " . 95 

Wild Sarsaparilla " .103 

Four-leaved Milkweed " .109 

Wild Blue Phlox " . m 

False Beech Drops M. O. W. . 112 

Pipsissewa II 5 

Black Cohosh J. H. McF. . 116 

Ragged Orchis (initial) M. O. W. . 123 

Pink Moccasin Flower J. H. McF. . 132 

Yellow Moccasin Flower . " .187 

Twayblade M. O. W. . 138 

Calopogon J. H. McF. . 142 

Yellow Fringed Orchis " .150 

Ladies' Tresses, Fringed Gentian and Marsh 

Shield Fern M. O. W. . 153 

Rattlesnake Plantain " . 154 



ILLUSTRATIONS XVli 

Page 

Showy Lady's Slipper J. H. McF. . 156 

Poison Hemlock (initial) M. O. W. . 157 

Poison Ivy . .162 

Poison Ivy and Virginia Creeper .163 

Poison Sumac .168 

Jimson Weed (seed pod) J. H. McF. . 175 

Climbing Nightshade M. O. W. . 177 

Black Nightshade J. H. McF. . 178 

Pokeberry . 179 

Staggerbush . 181 

Wild Cherry .183 

Climbing Fern M. O. W. . 185 

Walking Fern .188 

Brake and Colic-root . . J. H. McF. . 191 

Royal Fern " -194 

Evergreen Wood Fern M. O. W. . 196 

Christmas Fern .198 

Lady Fern . 199 

New York Fern " .200 

Sensitive Fern . 201 

Grape Fern . 203 

Spinulose Shield Fern . 204 

Silver Spleenwort . 205 

Hay-scented Fern . 207 

Maidenhair Spleenwort . ' .211 

Ebony Spleenwort . 216 

Slender Iris (initial) . 219 

Sundrops . 226 

Yellow Star Grass . . . . J. H. McF. . 227 

Canada Lily, Late Meadow Rue and 

Meadow Sweet Spirea J. H. McF. 229 

Red Wood Lily M. O. W. . 231 

Turk's Cap Lily .232 

Meadow Lilies . 233 



XV11I ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 

Purple Gerardia M. O. W. . 241 

Blue Fringed Gentian . 242 

Brook Sunflower (initial) " . 243 

Boneset and Joe Pye . 245 

Blue-stemmed Wood Goldenrod . 249 

Silver Rod and Fragrant Goldenrod ... .251 

Early Purple Aster J. H. McF. . 256 

White Heath Aster M. O. W. . 257 

White Wood Aster J. H. McF. . 266 

Seaside Goldenrod M. O. W. . 269 

White Wreath Aster " .270 

Blazing Star J. H. McF. . 271 

Wild Crab Apple " .273 

Tansy M. O. W. . 275 

Choke Cherry " .278 

Meadow Sweet Spirea . 280 

Rabbit's Foot Clover " .285 

Steeplebush and Wild Carrot " .286 

Bayberry and Sweet Fern . 289 

Purple- flowering Raspberry . 290 

Pink Knotweed . 292 

Wild Convolvulus J. H. McF. . 295 

Climbing Hemp weed M.O.W. . 297 

Hyacinth Bean 300 

Trailing Wild Bean " -303 

Trumpet Honeysuckle . 306 

Mountain Fringe J. H. McF. . 309 

Wild Yam M. O. W. . 310 

Carrion Flower 3 I 3 

Climbing False Buckwheat " .314 

Jack-in-the-PuIpit Berry and Winterberry 

(initial) .321 

Dogwood Berries J. H. McF. . 324 

Virginia Creeper M. O. W. . 327 



ILLUSTRATIONS XIX 

Page 

Bittersweet J. H. McF. . 329 

Partridge Vine M. O. W. . 331 

Spicebush Berries 333 

Witch Hazel J. H. McF. . 334 

Cedar Berries M. O. W. . 336 

Catbrier - 339 

The Fire Logs Finis .341 



I 



THE COMING OF 
SPRING 

'HEN Time o' Year padlocked his 
cabin door and with his trout pole 
under his arm wafted across the 
meadow path until he vanished like a 
shadow between the willows, the hillside 
people knew that, whatever other signs might 
fail, Spring was surely at hand. 

Time o' Year made no pretentions to weather 
prophecy in fact, he was altogether an unpre- 
tentious mortal, coming, going, and biding his 
own time silently, like the spirit of some straight 
white frost -shaft. Yet his smile was never frosty. 
It came far back from his deep -set eyes and quiv- 
ered among his wrinkles whenever he was ques- 
tioned about the state of the woods, the height of 
the river at the remoter bridges or the prospect of 
trout catching, until the questioner always felt that 
the old man was possessed of secrets told him by 
no one but the Magician himself, and which he 
was pledged not to reveal. 




2 THE COMING OF SPRING 

It was his favorite saying, his apology for any 
halt in the progress of things, that had given him 
the name of "Time o' Year," by which alone I 
first knew him a name also in full accord with 
his cheerful temper and his loyalty to outdoor life. 

"The river 's a leetle overcrowded beyond the 
glen, but none too full for the time o' year. Trout 's 
few as yet, and what 's come down 's too skart and 
dazed with the flood to see a fly, but that 's what 
I allus reckon on, this time o'year!" 

If, however, you spoke of the nesting place of a 
shy bird or the haunt of some elusive flower, his 
attitude would instantly change and he would subtly 
begin to sift your motives. No rustic gossip he, 
to tattle of woodland doings to the merely curious. 
If he deemed his questioner a collector, seeking to 
despoil the woods of flower and feather either for 
gain or private hoarding, that person's fate was 
sealed. Should a botanist appear, provided with 
microscope and vasculum, his contempt was hardly 
less deep, and he would reveal the location of noth- 
ing rarer than a field of Buttercups, perhaps, feign- 
ing ignorance of plant lore, yet muttering to him- 
self: "Schoolma'ams! I know 'em! poking their 
fingers into posies' mouths to feel their teeth, and 
splittin' 'em open to count their ribs! Then like 



THE COMING OF SPRING 3 

as not yanking the rest up by the roots to dry 'em 
into hay. Yes, I 've caught 'em at it and seen it 
done ! 

"Sometimes they say they want my flowers to 
paint 'em into pictures. 'Paint away,' sez I, 
'they 're here ready to sit for ye from frost -leaving 
to frost -coming, but look out ye don't spoil the 
pictures God 's filled the earth with, in so doin'.' 

"The names they give 'em, too! Long enough 
to make a man think the woods is full of diseases 
like what the town doctor fetches over to the hill- 
top folks when they have colic!" 

By "hilltop folks" he meant the summer people 
a half day's ride away, who were the bane of his 
usually placid life. It was they who, eager for 
"local color," insisted in intruding upon his cabin, 
snapping their impertinent little cockney cameras at 
everything within range. Asking questions as to 
where he obtained his delicate fishing rod, how he 
learned the art of tying flies of original design; also 
probing his past and present hermit way of life 
ruthlessly. Why had he let his farm on the hilltop 
go into other hands? Was it still his, or had he 
given it up for taxes? 

Alack ! Why is it that money and good breed- 
ing are accumulated in an inverse ratio? The peo- 



4 THE COMING OF SPRING 

pie who come out to conquer the land by purchase 
so often have only the one, the people born on the 
soil the other. The native New Englander certainly 
has a highly developed bump of curiosity, which 
properly cultivated is neighborliness, but before it is 
placed the right of the individual to privacy. 

Doubtless there were many things that the 
hilltop folk desired to know concerning the old 
man, whose forbears for two centuries had tilled 
the soil that now lay a fallow waste of wild grass 
and field flowers. The middle-aged remembered 
his young wife, the daughter of the glen miller, 
and their only child, a restless, questioning boy 
who had disappeared short of forty years before, 
some said with a peddler, others to go to the civil 
war. Was he alive or dead? No one knew. Par- 
cels were left at the cabin at rare intervals by the 
carrier, and the old man had many little things 
not of local origin, like his fishing rod and gun. 
But his neighbors asked him no questions, and 
he had remained a myth of the fifteen -mile circle 
that swings around Tree -bridge, Lonetown, the 
Glen and the Hollow. 

One day in middle April, after a winter so long 
and cold that it had almost numbed even the 
memory of growing things, Nell and I went out to 




THE COMING OF SPRING 
False Hellebore Adder' s-Tongue Skunk Cabbage 



THE COMING OF SPRING 5 

look for Spring. That is to say, I did the looking 
and Nell, being a pony, the walking, a comfortably 
cooperative arrangement, for like many prospectors 
we went far afield for what we might have found 
close at hand. But when the Spring thirst for 
outdoors comes upon one, the hunting cools the 
fever of longing nearly as much as the finding. 

Up and out of the house! Away from houses! 
Away from the pleasantness of the planted and 
sheltered garden things that do not indicate the 
pulsings of wild nature! Nell snorted and pranced 
with joy, experiencing a sort of horse second - 
childhood as the keen breeze scattered tiny tufts 
of her loosened winter coat to feather wayside 
briars and offer early birds rare bargains in all- 
wool nest lining. Myrtle warblers flitted along 
the waysides mingling the remains of winter worn 
Bay and Poison Ivy berries with fresh ants in a 
sort of Spring salad. Fox sparrows and white- 
throats sent up an occasional retrospective melody 
from pastures where the snow had held the seeded 
grasses against the wind's caprices, and quail ran 
noiselessly by through the undergrowth or told 
their names boldly from a fence rail. It was still 
two hours before noon when we found ourselves 
over the hills and well within Time o' Year's 



6 THE COMING OF SPRING 

country, on a sunny cross-road that led through 
Lonetown. 

Ah! the silence! Yet after all the deepest 
quiet is made by the perfect harmony of subdued 
sounds. Dry leaves scurried along the fences; 
then the rush of the distant mill stream separated 
itself from the stillness; next the trickle of a 
near-by brook that in its spring madness had lost 
its reckoning for a space and, after turning a low 
meadow into a pond, gropingly found its rocky 
pathway through the woods again. Two gray 
rabbits crossed the road with long leaps, and a 
light footstep overtook us. It was Time o' Year 
with his trout pole, emerging from a furry -clawed 
clump of Pussy Willows, that skirt the meadow, to 
follow the brook again. 

I ventured to ask him, "Does Arbutus still grow 
in the woods by the Hollow road?" Dropping 
his rod so that he rested on it like a staff, he 
looked at me critically, the shrewd expression that 
came over his face as he spied my camera and 
appurtenances changing to one of undoubted satis- 
faction as he discovered neither spade, trowel, basket 
or tin box; yet he would not commit himself, and 
merely said, "Did it use to grow there?" moving 
on as he spoke. 



THE COMING OF SPRING ^ 

There was no time to be lost, so I quickly 
told him that I had not come to pull to pieces or 
transplant, that the flowers of those woods and 
hillsides were old friends of mine whose names 
were written long ago in both brain and heart. 
That now I only came to see them in their 
haunts; my quest being of the bird in the tree, 
the flower in the landscape, the spirit, not the 
letter of the law ; the meaning, not the anatomy. 
For a moment I feared that Time o' Year did not 
understand my explanation, born of the first real 
touch of Spring and my desire to propitiate him. 
He did, however, but his ideas came to him more 
by thought than through words. "Arbutus does grow 
yet in the Holler woods, only folks don't think it 
does or there would n't be any. Come and see!" 
Refusing the proffered ride he strode up a wood 
path, taking a short cut while we followed slowly, 
Nell halting now and then to snatch at a tuft 
of young grass. 

The change of flower growth from Spring to 
Fall is made no less wonderful by its regularity, 
and the bareness of Spring is as different from the 
nakedness of Winter as slimness is from thinness. 
The greater number of the early blooms are pale, 
and hide in the grass or under dead leaves ; they 



8 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



have less landscape value therefore than the flowers 
of Summer and Autumn that crowd the fields and 
march up to the roadsides to demand attention. 

The first three to appear, sometimes in rapid 
succession and sometimes together, precede even 
their own leaves, the Skunk Cabbage 
having its rank flowers enclosed in a 
pointed wrapping like the 
bouquets of the Madeleine 
flower market, while the flesh 
tints of the Trailing Arbutus 
and the lavender or white 
Hepaticas are enhanced by 
the dark -toned resistant leaves 
of the past season. 

Wise Magician, so to set 
your scenery, while the peep- 
-- ing marsh frogs twang away 
on a single fiddle -string, as 
befits the first arrivals in an 
orchestra! Vivid color and wild music would be 
a too abrupt transition from the season of etched 
outlines, and silence that is only broken by the 
calling of crow, owl and jay, the snapping of icicles 
and the winds whistling. The Magician, though 
he keeps flower and leaf -bud ready so that he may 




THE COMING OF SPRING 9 

unfold rapidly, is the very prince of modulators, and 
does nothing jarringly. 

Time o' Year rejoined us in the lane with its 
grass -divided wheel tracks. On the right the bank 
sloped to the trout stream; on the left it was part 
of a rocky, wooded hillside. The bushes were 
almost leafless and the usually narrow stream was 
again trespassing on the lowlands. 

"It might be November," I said, leaving Nell 
and going down to the water's edge. 

"No, it might not: look!" said Time o' Year, 
jerking his head backward over his shoulder. 

There, almost at my feet, unharmed by the 
drift of the stream, was a Skunk Cabbage, its 
thick, green leaves so far developed as to show 
that it had been long in bloom. Beside it grew 
a stalk of False Hellebore, with its crumpled leaves 
fast unfolding, while underneath the spotted twin- 
leaves of a few plants of Adder's-Tongue bore the 
stalks that held each its single yellow flower. 

"While we were watching for Spring on the 
hill-tops, she has crept in by the waterways and 
entrenched her forces like a good commander, and 
yet as often as she does it, we are always surprised," 
I said; but my companion had again disappeared. 
Yes, and before one can half realize the coming of 



IO THE COMING OF SPRING 

Spring, the flower procession is upon us and march- 
ing by, music and all. Of course the memory of 
it remains, and often gives us back what we did 
not visualize at the time. It is then that the 
camera comes to our aid, that silent companion 
whose eye translates the doings of nature truth- 
fully, without gossip, yet always in an indulgent 
spirit being in itself a lesser magician, bringing 
the frolicking squirrel, the brooding bird and the 
delicate traceries of flower and fern within the very 
glow of the study fireside, yet leaving them unmo- 
lested in their haunts. 

One day I had found a plant of Blue Fringed 
Gentian in a place where before it was unknown. 
I thought, "If I pick the flowers they will close, 
and, being an annual, the place will know the 
wanderer no more. I will take its portrait for 
my photo -herbarium." Then when I had left the 
place and it was too late, I fell to wondering 
what other stray plants might have been its com- 
panions in the sodden meadow where the bog 
moss was ankle deep, for I had seen only the 
Gentian. 

The answer to my thoughts flashed back next 
day from the developed plate, where I found 
Forget-me-nots, Grass of Parnassus, three kinds 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



II 



of Violet leaves, with Ladies' Tresses, Moonwort, 
and Crested Shield Ferns, all grouped around the 
Gentian ! 

Time o' Year whistled from far up the lane, 
and as I pulled myself back to the road a small 
branch struck me lightly across the face. It was 
a spray of Spice Bush thick with its yellow - 
stamened flowers, that, 
coming upon bare twigs, 
remind one strongly of 
stunted Witch Hazel 
bloom. I stooped to free 
my skirt from Catbrier 
thorns, and glanced back- 
ward to where the sun 
shone full upon the 
sunken strip of cleared 
land that caught the brook's overflow. There 
glistened golden tufts of Marsh Marigold, the first 
true pledge of the sun to the marshes even as the 
Dandelion is to the fields. 

Again Time o' Year whistled, and Nell left 
browsing to fall into a reluctant trot as we went 
on to join him. He was sitting on a chestnut 
stump, half a mile further up the lane. Motioning 
me to tie Nell to some bars at the entrance to the 




12 THE COMING OF SPRING 

pasture on the opposite side, he began to scramble 
through the underbrush toward the woods. Cat- 
brier again, coils and ropes of it, surely the 
Magician was the inventor of barbed wire and 
protected much of his property with it before man 
wore tearable clothes! Catbrier helps to keep the 
balance even now in woodland economy. The 
rabbit may run under where the fox meets a 
barrier, the ruffed grouse can slip safely to shelter, 
while the hawk, that dropped too boldly, is 
arguing with the hooked thorns that pluck tufts 
of his feathers to rags, or sometimes hold him 
altogether a prisoner, until his lifeless wings flap 
to and fro in the wind like a scarecrow. 

Once free of wayside underbrush we entered 
a region of Hemlocks, Oaks mingled with other 
forest trees, and rich leaf -mould, ankle deep, and 
crusted by the unchanged leaves of last year's 
shedding, made an elastic footing. Straightway 
we were greeted by a single cluster of white 
Hepaticas. 

"Snow Flowers, I call these," said Time o' 
Year, gaining more precise speech. "I 've often 
found them, when the sun 's come out hot the 
end of March, in little thawed places in front of 
rocks when the snow was lying thick on the 



THE COMING OF SPRING 13 

north side. It 's best to allers look on the south 
side of things, specially this time o' year." 

Much of the older growth had been cut away 
several seasons before, and a maze of dead branches, 
left where the trunks had been trimmed, made 
progress very slow. Ledge rocks as well as mossy 
boulders protruded everywhere, and now and then 
a hidden spring trickled down drop by drop, its 
course being revealed by the greenness of the moss. 
In one such spot were a few bunches of the pure 
white fragile -petaled Bloodroot, the palmate leaves 
having hardly loosed their hold upon the flower - 
stalks that pushed up between. Wood Anemones 
nodded close by, and in the shallow earth on a 
rock ledge perched the resetted leaves of early Saxi- 
frage, with some scattering flower-stalks. Nothing 
as yet in abundance, but promise everywhere. 

On went Time o' Year without speaking un- 
til, leading straight through the sharp breastworks 
of a great fallen hemlock, from whose branches 
hung the old nest of a parula warbler, like a shred 
of southern moss blown to northern woods, he 
halted. Kneeling, he brushed away the leaves and 
twigs from the ground before him. Beneath them 
was a thick mat of leathery leaves ; some dark 
green and bronze, others delicately veined. Vine- 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



like branches trailed from the mass, and here and 
there nestled the clustering Arbutus flowers that 
breathe the first wood incense of the year. This 
truly is a blossom that must be visited in its haunts 
to be known save by name. Torn up and bunched 

in nosegays, it loses the 
most delicate quality of its 
perfume and all the char- 
acteristics of its growth. 

I also knelt and buried 
my face in the woodland 
bouquet, and when I 
looked up Time o' Year 
was watching me and wore 
his smile from afar off ; then 
we each perched on a stump 
and continued to gaze until an 
ovenbird broke the reverie with 
his call. 

"Does it always bloom as early 
as this ? " I asked, after I had looked and sniffed 
to my heart's content. 

"You can never say just when, about posies," 
answered Time o' Year, deliberately. "Some years 
one kind is first and then another. I us' ter allow 
that Skunk Cabbages led off, but one time we had 




THE COMING OF SPRING 



a warm Feb'ury and that started 'em up rash- 
like ; then along in early March it froze so hard 
it nearly killed the 'coons in their holes, and be- 
fore those cabbages got their courage and their 




RED WAKE ROBIN 

blood up again, Arbutus was out, and Wake 
Robins and Shadbush, and a different sort o' 
Violet for every finger on your hand! You see, 
it depends on the kind o' season we get and the 
way things lie to the sun, beside the bent of their 
own natures. 

"Take birds, now, and they come up to time 



1 6 THE COMING OF SPRING 

likelier. The swallows have n't missed their week, 
the last in April, for coming to my old barn on the 
hill, not since I can remember. But then they 
can move themselves and reckon things out a bit 
while the posies have to sit still until the sun calls 
them above ground. They jest do as they 're told 
and don't hustle and worry. That 's why I think 
they 're so restin' to brood on ; but bless yer, it 
stands to reason that they must come variable and 
uncertain, specially at this time o' year." 

"Now, here 's red Wake Robin," he continued, 
leading me a few yards back to where a low spot 
made a division between two hills. "On the west 
and north side of the woods you need n't look for 
it till May, when we get the big white kind over 
on the hill - slope above the bridge. Then the 
Jacks - in - the - Pulpit and the Wild Ginger are 
hustlin', along with Solomon's Seals, Bellwort, and 
Blue -flags in the wet places, and the Red -bells 
have most driven the Saxifrage off the rocky places. 
Now only the south medder 's showin' life and the 
north 's as bare as yer hand." 

There was the handsome but evil -scented Wake 
Robin, surely enough, and more Bloodroot, while 
the lily -leaved stalks and feathery flowers of the 
False Solomon's Seal were foreshadowed only by 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



thick green wands that everywhere pierced the earth 
of the moist copse. I ventured to ask Time o' Year 
where he had learned the accepted popular names 
of so many of the flowers. For almost all rural 
nomenclature is indefinite to the verge of confu- 
sion, and Red-bell, a local name for Red Columbine 
or Aquilegta Canadensis, was his only 
slip. 

Hesitating at first, his usual 
habit, he said: "A piece back, it 
might be ten years, a schoolma'am 
came to stop over 
our way for her 
health. Our doc- 
tor, the old one 
that 's dead now 
and has that 
stone arch up in 
the hill buryin' 
ground, told her to 
quit medicine and get 
outdoors, which she 
did ; and likin' flow- 
ers and lookin' like 
that is, favorin' some one I 
onct knew, I showed her what 

_ 




1 8 THE COMING OF SPRING 

I could. She told me some names that I could n't 
recollect and did n't want to, and when I told her 
so she laughed, and learned me others that had 
sense in 'em. 

"When she went away she left me her study - 
book with 'em all marked out plain in red ink, so I 
should n't forget. I 've always hoped maybe she 'd 
come again ! " Here was a revelation ! Most people 
thought Time o' Year half-witted, from his silence. 
Who had ever heard him speak so much before ? 
But as I turned to ask another question, he rose, 
and quickly disappeared in the direction opposite to 
which we had come to the wood. The warmth of 
the sun suggested returning to the highway by the 
old logging road skirting the southern slope of the 
woods, and through the south meadows that Time 
o' Year had said were showing signs of life, rather 
than by the barren lane. 

As I worked my way back to the bars where 
Nell was tied and scanned the ground closely, 
there were signs of growth on every side, but held 
in abeyance as if waiting a signal. I touched the 
earth where the fists of sturdy Cinnamon Fern 
were striving to push through ; it was dry and 
hard. "Rain, rain, rain!" peeped the marsh frogs 
from below, as a cloud crossed the sun. 



THE COMING OF SPRING IQ 

True, I thought, Spring will not shake her 
garments to the breeze and dance and sing in full 
abandonment without her baptism. Earth and sun 
are ready, but water must complete the creative trio. 
But where was Nell ? There were the bars, with 
only the neck strap tethered to them. 

"Goose," I said to myself as I looked, "you 
were so excited by the prospects of finding 
Arbutus that you simply noosed Nell instead of 
pulling the strap through the bit. If you have 
to walk home and find your very best camera 
sprinkled in sections along the way you will have 
no one but yourself to blame!" 

But Nell had merely freed herself, in resentment 
at being tied instead of wholly trusted, and was 
grazing along a little beyond the turn, looking over 
her shoulder every few minutes in the direction 
where I had disappeared. The chaise and its con- 
tents were right side up, and upon the seat lay a 
single sprig of Arbutus, a wand of blossoming 
Shadbush, and two exquisitely spotted brook trout 
resting on a few dry beech leaves. How had the 
old man placed them there? 

"Well done," I said to Nell, rubbing her nose 
with my cheek. "Time o' Year approves of us 
and believes that we are honest folk, so he has 



20 THE COMING OF SPRING 

left a sign and given us the freedom of his coun- 
try. Do you know what that means for us, Nell, 
this coming to find the flowers in their homes? 

"It means days in wood and meadow, by river 
and wayside, from the sea gardens up through Lone- 
town to the glen. It means sunburn and thunder 
showers, freckles, brier scratches, nettle stings and 
mosquito bites, but oh, such deep sleep in the 
nights that follow those days! And, Nell, we must 
come often now; we must visit these unspoiled 
places week by week while yet we may, for only 
here can we find the natural haunts of things. Be- 
fore axe, plow and quarry drill drive us out we 
will, instead of plucking and uprooting, make pic- 
tures of all this loveliness wind and weather aid- 
ing," I added humbly, for the image of a swallow 
on the wing is not more impossible to capture than 
that of a pendulous flower when the wind is abroad. 

Nell only whinnied and sniffed the breeze, yet 
surely the most intelligent sympathy is that which 
does not divert one's thoughts or jar a happy mood; 
so we turned in our tracks and began our zigzag 
return through the south meadows to the high- 
way. 

Presently the brush grew thinner and the sun 
filtered steadily through it. A startled whippoor- 



THE COMING OF SPRING 21 

will, who had been sleeping almost as close to a 
branch as the bark itself, suddenly divided himself 
from his perch, and, unmindful of the early hour, 
gave his weird cry many times. Nell stopped short, 
in astonishment. 

Surely this was the time of first things; a day of 
beginnings! The whippoorwilPs cry was startling, 
and as my eyes followed the bat -like downward 
swoop with which he disappeared in the shadows, 
they rested on the first flower landscape of the year. 

Stretching backward from the open toward the 
young growth of saplings was a glade starred by the 
delicate Spring Beauty, whose rose -penciled white 
petals open freely to the sun, but furl on being 
picked almost as quickly as the leaves of the Sensi- 
tive Plant. Here was a flower of itself inconspicu- 
ous, yet when massed in its haunts the very eye of 
the landscape. 

What a region for Violets! Dry woods, moist 
woods, hillside and meadow, furnish food and lodg- 
ing for a dozen members of that shy family which 
never trusts its secrets to anything but the earth, 
many species burrowing unopened and independent 
flower-buds into the ground itself to ripen seed 
and plant it in strict seclusion. 

The first-born of all, the little Blue Palmate 



22 THE COMING OF SPRING 

Violet, was already wide awake and smiling, and 
the three Whites were sending out a few stray flow- 
ers to try if the air was warm enough to stir the 
blue blood in their veins. The smallest of these, 
Blanda, is our only native Violet that has a sugges- 
tion of perfume other than the pungent birch odor 
shared alike by Violets and Pansies. The Canada 
Violet is the tallest of the trio, but its blossoms are 
less distinctly white and sometimes might be mis- 
taken for common Blue Violets gone pale, while 
the Lance-leaved has stiffness for a characteristic; 
stiff, narrow leaves and a way of holding its bearded 
purple -veined petals primly erect. 

A little later and the Bird's-Foot Violet, of rich 
color and finely cut leaves, will be on the hillside, 
creeping toward the drier side of the woods, where 
lives its downy yellow cousin, with straggling, leafy 
stalks and flowers the color of Celandine. In the 
lower springy woods, between old logs and mossy 
stones, the paler Smooth Yellow Violet will greet 
May -day under the shade of giant Jack -in -the - 
Pulpits and have for company the strange Wild 
Ginger blossoms that spend their brief existence 
ear to earth, as if listening for a footstep. 

In short, one might talk a day away about the 
tribe of Violet and not be done with it. No 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



other familiar plant of the near-by woods and fields 
wears such diversity of leaf -shapes, the leaf -type so 
often overshading that of the flower as to give the 
name and identify the 
plant after the bloom- 
ing has passed. 

The old road, 
being of decay- 
ing slabs ides , 
made it necessary 
for me to lead 
Nell, as it was 
too full of pit- 
falls for even 
that clever four- 
foot. What was 
that yonder, in a second lightly shaded place, 
sloping southward like the haunt of the Spring 
Beauty? Maidenhair Ferns breaking the ground ? 
No; a more sturdy shaft, growing upward, but not 
yet expanded. Ah, one leaf reveals it all! In a 
few weeks, two or three at most, the soft green 
umbrellas of the Mandrake or May Apple will be 
sheltering each its white -capped flower from sun 
and rain, as it takes its place in the great spring 
flower -market of outdoors. 




24 THE COMING OF SPRING 

Ah, for the chance to sit wide-eyed in that mar- 
ket place and watch the procession enter! To-day 
come the heralds and outriders and the heart beats 
high with expectancy, yet, plan as one may, one's 
dealings with the god Outdoors are always uncer- 
tain. In this itself lies no small fascination. 

To-day we have met Spring as she timidly enters 
by the valleys. If a few weeks pass before Nell 
and I can return to Time o' Year's woods, Spring 
will have shown herself bravely on the hilltops and 
be waving her green banners from every nook that 
holds a thimbleful of soil from which she can raise 
her standard of fertility; for every ambitious rock- 
cleft manages to hold a leaf or two in middle May. 

That is the time when the early and the late 
flowers meet each other and salute, one advancing, 
the other retreating, through the company of con- 
servative intermediates. Then while we must 
search carefully in moist woods for Dwarf Ginseng, 
Trientalis, Baneberry, Sarsaparilla, Wintergreen, Me- 
deola and Mitrewort, other flowers are warming the 
soft green of the open landscape with splashes of 
color. 

Then it is that the Columbine begins its reign 
of fire among the granite rocks of old hillside pas- 
tures, and the gorgeous Painted Cup carries the 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



same color scheme across wet meadows under the 
very eye of the sun. 

This last is a misnamed flower that must be 
known in its haunts, where its darting tongues of 
flame outblaze even the autumn Cardinal Flower. 
It is not a cup -shaped flower, and the color is not 
in the bloom itself, which is pale yellow and akin 
to Wood Betony, but in the red stem -leaves that 
mingle with the blossoms. This flower is a thing 
of the landscape. A single stalk is merely curious ; 
a meadow aflame with it 
is like fire creeping among 
autumn grasses. 

So is it also with the 
delicate, pale purple, five- 
petaled flower of the Wild 
Geranium. A single stalk 
is often ragged, showing 
buds and overblown blos- 
soms at once ; but its color 
is most striking when seen 
in masses in open fields 
or along the lighter wood 
edges, where it remains 
in perfection well into 
June. In fact, these three 




26 THE COMING OF SPRING 

flowers identify themselves so thoroughly with the 
season's landscape that if some random questioner 
asks, "What was that bank of scarlet that I saw 
to-day among the rocks as I came on in the train? " 
it is perfectly safe to answer "Columbines." 

"And the great patch of the same color in a 
low pasture ? " 

"Painted Cup." 

"There were also masses of flowers of a pecu- 
liar lilac shade that grew in broad waves along the 
field edges and in the gullies beside the track. I 
could see the color but not the shape. They were 
not Violets, nor Iris, but something slender that 
swayed in the grass." 

"Wild Geraniums." 

The Pink Azalea, or Pinxter- flower, as it is 
known locally, is a shrub of May that carries a rosy 
warmth of color among gray rocks and up bare hill- 
sides until it is an inseparable part of the Spring 
landscape. Akin to the Mountain Laurel and 
Great Rose Bay or Rhododendron, and forerunner of 
them, it is found in equal beauty growing along 
shady wood roads and in clearings where first the 
logger and then the charcoal-burner have not left 
even a sapling. 

Blush -white or pink in the shade, in the open 



THE COMING OF SPRING 27 

it deepens in the bud through carmine almost to 
crimson, and is called red by the undiscriminating, 
though it never takes the orange, yellow and scar- 
let tints of the Flame Azalea of the Pennsylvania 
and Carolina mountains. 

While among flowers the first comers are pale, 
the Magician soon blends brilliant colors for his 
work, though he paints less broadly with them 
than in summer and autumn. As regards the yel- 
low and white flowers of the landscape, it is well 
to answer questions with greater caution; there 
are so many of the Magician's treasures in sight 
at this season, and mere color is not always rightly 
caught in a swift glance. 

Was it a bed among rocks of much -cleft silver - 
green foliage, set with flower-sprays of two -pointed 
white and yellow bloom that might be pairs of elfin 
trousers hung out to bleach? Then you may say 
they were Dutchman's Breeches. 

Wood and Rue Anemones both make patches of 
light in shady places, but the Rue is less brilliantly 
white, owing to the mixture of the foliage with the 
blooms, while the Wood variety holds its head well 
above its leaves, even though it hangs it down in 
a discouraged fashion at the approach of night or 
during cloudy weather; and Bluets also look white, 



28 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



in spite of their name, when seen in the grass-like 
abundance common to them. 

The tiny two-leaved feather -flowered Maianthe- 
mum, a sufferer for a suitable name, and a half 
cousin of False Solomon's Seal, also makes a frost - 
like fretwork of white, in the deepest shade as well 
as in comparatively open places. 

If the white -flowering landscape herbs of Spring 
are confusing, the yellow ones are doubly so. 

Marsh Marigold tells its own name very well, 
almost as plainly as the chickadee, for both are in 
evidence at a time when they have swamp and 




THE COMING OF SPRING 2Q 

tree largely to themselves. Yellow Adder's-tongue 
also has a distinctive leaf and growth; but when 
one tries to separate at a distance the golden mazes 
of Buttercups, Dandelions, Squaw and Rattlesnake 
weeds, and the low-growing Star Grass from Yel- 
low Oxalis, intuition must piece out knowledge. 

It is a far easier task for the novice to name 
the flower in the hand than the flower in the land- 
scape. The first requires attention to detail alone, 
the second the comprehensiveness, the impression- 
ability of art. 

Patient Nell at last became restless, the treach- 
erous ribbed roadbed that had forced me to lead the 
way disappeared altogether, and the track became 
an endless puddle. I did not complain, however, 
because at this juncture I found the first hyla; or 
rather the little peeping frog, surnamed Pickering, 
discovered me by landing on my knee in the course 
of a miscalculated leap. I held him in my hand for 
a moment, looking with something akin to awe at 
the throbbings of the almost transparent body, 
whose penetrating voice is the first assurance of 
the coming of Spring. 

Once again upon the windswept highway, the 
signs of growth lessened. In a few moist spots the 



3O THE COMING OF SPRING 

vigorous Cinnamon Fern and others of its family 
were emerging from their woolly winter wraps. 
Light clouds continually veiled the sun and prom- 
ised a shower, the password that alone could fling 
wide the door for Spring's entrance. 

Soon again the landscape barrenness was broken. 
From across a narrow railway curve waved white 
plumes of Shadbush, preceding the downy leaves 
on the leaden -hued stalks. 

Obeying an impulse, I gathered an armful of 
this April snow that fell over my shoulders in soft 
.flakes even as I brought it back to fasten some 
twigs on Nell's collar and use the rest for a lap- 
robe. 

The clouds were now gathering fast, and loneli- 
ness seemed to come with them. It takes either 
health and wildly good spirits, or else philosophy, 
to make a solitary trip in the woods endurable. 
The former are preferable as companions, because 
outdoor philosophy is possible only in a rather argu- 
mentative mood, which is at variance with the 
physical exhilaration and mental calm that we seek 
in fresh air. But out in the open it is different, 
for when the sun shines there is not a shadow to 
hide even the ghost of loneliness. 

A drop of rain fell on my nose; another, and 



THE COMING OF SPRING 31 

the shower was upon us. The chaise top and 
boot have saved me many a wetting. In fact, a 
wise horse and that democratic vehicle that usually 
suffers the indignity of the name of "buggy," 
corrupted from the East Indian word for gig, are 
indispensable companions for a woman who visits 
the flowers in their haunts, or goes hunting with 
a camera. 

The wonder of the change since early morning! 
A keen ear might have heard the leaves unfurl and 
the wrappings drop from the various catkins, while 
the unalloyed aroma of the earth arose with the 
vapor of the steaming pastures. 

At home, with Nell safely stabled and fed, I 
stood on the porch watching the water course down 
the triple trunk of a slender Black Birch. Sud- 
denly the rain ceased and the sun rent the clouds 
in hot haste. As if at this signal the Magician 
raised his staff, the adhesive winter wrappings 
melted, and the Birch tree was enveloped in a 
golden glory of yellow -stamened tassels! 

The season offered many golden days, and wood 
and field overflowed with ferns and flowers, but the 
first is the longest remembered; the day that began 
and ended in sunlight, with the wetting of an 
April shower between, the day when Nell and I, 



32 THE COMING OF SPRING 

going out to see the coming of Spring, met Time 
o' Year in the lane, and the master on his return 
from his day among paved ways gratefully ate the 
trout for his supper, with a sprig of Arbutus in 
his buttonhole. 

Then at twilight we stood under the Birch's 
golden shower rejoicing; more precious, this treas- 
ure, than Hesperus' apples, for no one would dis- 
pute its possession with us save the bees ! 




II 




ALONG THE WATER- 
WAYS 

[ME O' YEAR spends half his days 
among the waterways, that begin afar 
off in quickening veins of moisture 
among the rocky hill-woods, thread 
their way unknown, save for the tell- 
tale flowers that follow, across many 
meadows, and join forces to rush into 
the mill-pond above the forge; after this they sepa- 
rate again, and go their several ways as full-fledged 
streams. 

Time o' Year has chosen the most capricious 
among these for his following a waterway that 
changes its course every hundred yards or so. Now 
fairly broad and smooth, though inhospitable to 
traffic, like so many New England streams, it sud- 
denly drops rushing into a ravine cut by centuries 
of its passing, where fissured rocks and pot-holes 
tell of its work. Then, hesitating in pond-like 
complacency every little while, it quiets to a usual 
mill-stream for the eight -miles' course before, the 

c 33 



34 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

salt entering its blood, it disappears among the 
marshes, being drawn seaward with tide -water. 

If you ask Time o' Year what he is doing when 
you meet him wandering along the birches on river 
banks, or sitting watching the sway of the white 
Water Lily pads and the reflection of purple Pick- 
erel Weed in some quiet nook well out of the cur- 
rent, he will answer, "Fishing," at the same time 
taking a seasonable bait, worm, grasshopper, or 
suchlike, from his basket, perfectly unconscious that 
your eyes are riveted, perhaps, on the flower of a 
rare Pitcher-plant, that dangles from his frayed 
buttonhole, telling of a long tramp through marshy, 
fishless places, where the ground is sphagnum -cov- 
ered, the haunt of the strange insect -killing Sun- 
dews, Arums, Water Plantains, Cranberries, Fringed 
Orchids, and other bog plants. 

Fishing ? Why should he be doubted, when rod 
and line and water all are there ? Even if trout 
should be out of season, he knows the run of every 
eel, bass, perch, or pike. But Time o' Year is no 
pot-hunter, either with rod or gun; a morsel for 
his own need is all he ever takes of fin, fur, or 
feather. No: he is listening to the river-voice that 
has been calling, calling, ever since it first moved 
on the face of seething waters, to those that have 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 35 

the ears to* hear. He is watching day by day, week 
by week, year by year, the procession that follows 
the waterways flower, fern, beast and bird, and 
sometimes man, from the greening of the first grass - 
blade that tells of the dawn of Spring, until the 
footprints of mink and skunk in the snow alone 
point to where the stream lies ice -covered. To 
these humble followers the voice speaks through 
their necessity, and guides them to the warm, 
thinly -crusted spring-hole where they may drink. 

Time o' Year uses his fishing-rod as a natural 
shield to ward off questioning, a commonly under- 
stood excuse for days spent with nature, in what 
otherwise would be called idleness. Have not many 
men, naturalists and moralists both, in all time, 
tried, like this childlike man, to hide their nature - 
ward and spiritual longings, held too sacred for 
casual handling, behind a slender fishing-rod ? 

Was it the love of fish -catching, or the voice, 
that led Walton from the linen-draper's, or, some 
say, the ironmonger's shop, to follow the water- 
ways ? Sportsmen still argue that he did not rank 
as a fisherman pure and simple, for to him a reel 
was a confusing implement, and he lacked the skill 
to fish up-stream. 

Did he absorb from the daintily cooked trout 



36 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

that he has given such careful directions for pre- 
paring, the cheerful, spiritual philosophy that fitted 
him for the friendship of Donne, and enabled him 
to interpret the life of Herbert ? 

No, it was the voice that taught him. 

Each year when Spring has made her entry, the 
errant streams, retreating to the established water- 
ways, resume the discourse that frost ended by 
a finger -touch. These waterways are the most 
potent social influences of wild nature, and not to 
know them is but half to learn the Magician's 
alphabet. 

A riverless land is a treeless, birdless country 
where homesickness flourishes; a motiveless waste, 
where the wind whirls the sand until there are no 
paths and no boundaries. Do you realize that, 
while boundless liberty is the great desire of the 
mind, the feet unconsciously seek for trodden 
paths? The waterways were the first paths cut by 
the Magician through primeval rock, and he still 
loves to linger about them. Be it April or arid 
August, go out into the near-by waterways; watch, 
listen, and follow. 

From the waterways, seen or invisible, are the 
colors irradiated that paint the landscape, and it 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 37 

does not take a lake or mighty river to exert a 
quickening influence over miles of lowlands, either 
by spring overflow, or by the penetration of slug- 
gish outlets and minute tributaries. 

The waterways work with a bold brush in flower- 
painting, and from earliest spring until late autumn 
the primary colors, yellow, blue, and red, flow from 
it. The first strongly yellow flower is the Marsh 
Marigold, which gilds the swamps before the Dan- 
delion holds its field of the cloth of gold in pastures. 
At this season of overflows, the near approach to 
stream and river is difficult; but the Marsh Mari- 
gold can be seen afar, and consequently is the first 
bright color of the landscape. 

Blue, tinting to purple, a royal color, comes next. 
New England may have rejected kings and heraldry 
long ago, but she still wears freely every May Fleur- 
de-Lys azure in or, on a green field; for the large 
Blue Flag, or Iris versicolor, flocks in crowds at 
every muddy river -edge, and spreads its regal mantle 
over the marshy fields. It is a peerless flower seen 
in its haunt when the sun shines clear. To look 
down among these violet -blue flowers, touched with 
white and gold, and veined with deep -cut purple, 
to watch the shadows of the deep green sword - 
shaped leaves quiver across them, while a trans- 



38 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

parent haze of color envelops the whole, is to 
confess the effect unpaintable. To pick the rigid 
stalks, topped by the crown -shaped petals, that 
droop and melt away after the fashion of all flowers 
of a day, is to acknowledge that this Iris must surely 
be seen in its home to be known in anything but 
outline. If many flowers of wood and field lose 
quality away from their surroundings, the herba- 
ceous flowers of moist lands and waterways do so 
in far greater degree. 

The Water Lilies, however, of which three va- 
rieties can be found within a day's drive of Lone- 
town, may be safely gathered, and floated in a deep 
bowl ; they will open and close for several successive 
days. But the deep green and carmine -lined leaves 
that enhance their beauty curl up as soon as their 
under surface dries. 

One day in late July I was searching the margin 
of the forge mill-pond for Lily-pads to photograph, 
having as yet found that morning only the half 
erect leaves of the yellow variety, whose bumptious 
flowers look more like large, leathery Buttercups 
than Lilies. Seeing on the opposite side of the 
pond a mass of the floating leaves I wanted, I 
worked my way around to them, only to find that 
they were ragged and torn, that all the flowers and 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 39 

buds had been wrenched off, evidently by a rake, 
and that many plants were entirely uprooted and 
drifting, ready to be washed away by the next 
shower. A shout from a hickory grove just above 
gave clue to the destroyers. A picnic was in prog- 
ress, of the sort that always brings disaster upon the 
flora and fauna of the region where it locates. 

Water Lilies were being fastened around the 
men's straw hats and at the girls' belts impartially, 
while the buds, with their long, rubber-like stems, 
were freely used as return balls to throw into the 
faces of the unwary. Trowels and jack-knives in the 
hands of women were uprooting clumps of Maiden- 
hair and other equally fragile Ferns, to be stowed 
away under the seats of wagons that stood out in 
the sun, while the men were engaged in trimming 
these same vehicles with whole bushes of the Large- 
leaved Laurel and yards of Ground Pine. A little 
apart from the others two lads were ripping a foot- 
wide girdle from the trunk of a magnificent old 
Silver Birch, the only one of its size for miles 
around and a well-known landmark. 

As I was about to call out in protest, I felt, 
rather than saw, a shadow cross the path. Before 
I could even turn, Time o' Year's voice said: 

"'Sh! Ye can't do nothing. They 're on town- 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 



ship land, and township don't care. Ye 're wanting 
to take Pond Lilies? I know some they won't find. 
Come and see!" 

Whenever Time o' Year said, "Come and see!" 
an ecstatic expression of blended revelation and sat- 
isfaction beamed in his 
smile, and he seemed to 
quiver all over with pro- 
phetic eagerness. At 
the first step, we dis- 
appeared safely and 
wholly from view into 
a group of Button Bushes 
that margined the pond on 
the upper side. As we 
pushed our way, a delicious 
fragrance came from over- 
head, and I pulled down a 
branch to smell the feathery 
balls of bloom at nearer range. From the time of 
Wild Grape flowers, until the last purple cluster 
shrivels, the richest fragrance centers about the 
waterways. 

"What does it smell like?" I queried, half 
aloud. 

"Pa'tridge Vine, I reckon," answered Time o' 




ALONG THE WATERWAYS 41 

Year, rubbing the flowers between his fingers, and 
then smelling of them as if to inhale the grade 
rather than the volume of the perfume. 

"Surely it is like Partridge Vine," I replied; 
"only as pervading as if bushels of the little cross - 
shaped white blooms were gathered in a mass. 
Good reason why the two are members of the 
same family." 

"I want to know!" said Time o' Year, delight- 
edly. "It beats me, how blood will tell! Now, 
Fanton's brown mare has a way of favorin' her 
near front foot by lappin' it over t' other when 
she stands. I never saw another do so, and she 's 
sound as a dollar, too. Last fall a neighbor o' 
his'n bought a colt up York state, and pretty soon 
he noticed she overlapped in standin', same as 
Fanton's mare. Huh! he thought it must be a 
catchin' habit, from pasturin' alongside; but sure 
enough, come to find out, the colt's mother and 
Fanton's mare were whole sisters!" 

Next a space of mud and Tussock Grass, where 
picking the way was an absorbing task, ended my 
guide's comparison between the passive and active 
development of heredity. Near here, where the 
stream sometimes sluggishly meanders away from its 
channel, I have, at rare intervals, found the curious 



42 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

Golden Club in May, and the Water Arum in early 
June. 

Next we crossed a wet meadow inhabited by 
Monkey Flowers, with delicate light purple blos- 
soms, together with the striking but unsatisfactory 
spikes of Steeple Bush, that promise in the bud to 
be graceful sprays of bright pink Spirea, but end 
in faded fuzziness, owing to the trick that so many 
spiked flowers have of slowly blossoming in sec- 
tions. Here also the fleshy stalks and dangling 
flowers of two Jewel Weeds grow thick, rank and 
top-heavy. 

A bit of bog hidden from the country-side by 
Bush Willows must be crossed by means of fallen 
trees, which have lost their branches and are mol- 
dering to peat. Time o' Year paused, and pointed 
to a sturdy tuft of red -veined green leaves. It was 
a splendid Pitcher-plant, or rather a group of them, 
every pitcher-like leaf perfect, water-filled and laden 
with drowned insects held for its nourishment. 

I stood amazed, and signed to my companion to 
know the reason of its presence so far from any 
haunt where I had ever found it. 

"Thirty years ago it was full of 'em here," he 
answered. "Folks took 'em onct in a while for 
curiosities, or to try to grow 'em in fish -globes and 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 



43 



jars. Still, they held their own until one time, four 
or five years since, a florist fellow from back of 
Bridgeport came out here for a load of bog moss, 
and spied 'em. Next thing I knew they were all 
rooted out, 'cept a couple of young ones, and they 're 
beginning to spread again, you see." 




Another plant that, taken from its haunt, is a 
curiosity destined to come to an untimely end in a 
fish -globe, but at home an example of the mechan- 
ism which the Magician can lend to plant -life, and 
a fine study in green and bronze tints, backed, as 
it was, by Bur Reeds and Cat -tail Flags. 

Woods again, still more completely hiding a chain 



44 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

of smaller ponds from the highway. Truly, Time 
o' Year's own waterway is infinitely varied. On 
the sunny edge of these woods grew bushes of 
white Swamp Azalea, the flowers, almost past their 
prime, giving a perfume more heavily sweet than 
that of the Button-bush. 

This Azalea being, like its sister, the Pinxter 
Flower, a shrub, its blossoms may be kept in water 
several days if they are picked before they fully ex- 
pand, which is the case with most of our native 
shrubs, of dry or moist lands, provided their stems 
are wrapped in wet cotton as soon as cut, and an 
additional bit taken from the stalk when it is finally 
placed in water. 

The first two ponds were close together, only 
divided by an old dam, which had long since fallen 
inward, stone by stone, and, catching the spring 
drift of soil, had turned to a flower-covered dyke. 
The near-by margin of the lower pond was fur- 
rowed, and the ground felt oozy to the tread for 
several yards above the water's edge. The oppo- 
site bank was abrupt and rocky, while under it the 
water held reflections of trees and the lazy clouds 
of the summer sky. 

Time o' Year halted, spread out his hands as if 
giving a blessing, and said briefly: 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 45 

"There 's Water Lilies." 

Yes, and a landscape fit to drive a flower pho- 
tographer mad with the impossibility of keeping 
the merest fragment of it, though an impressionist 
painter would have been filled with joy. Lilies 
gathered in circles where there was no current, 
and sturdy purple Pickerel Weed came out as far 
from shore as it could wade to meet these floating 
islands. But that which held the eye longest was 
a broad band of clear green foliage, thickly feath- 
ered with soft white, which margined the entire 
pond, a metallic glint, as of strands of copper wire, 
showing here and there as if it bound the mass 
together. 

The flower was the familiar Lizard's Tail, with 
its delicately spiked white flowers and heart-shaped 
leaves, both of which droop on being gathered. 
The copper wire was Dodder, a leafless parasite, 
with small white flowers and berries, which lives 
upon the plants of waterways. In the hand, nei- 
ther plant was of conspicuous appearance, but 
growing in rank luxuriance in such a haunt, the 
effect was almost tropical. I know of no other 
like bit of picturesqueness hereabout, except where, 
at the end of a long drive across country, I once 
came upon the pale yellow native Lotus growing 



46 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

in such rich profusion in Lake Wacabuc that a 
boat could barely push its way among the tangled 
pads of leaves, buds, flowers and seed -pods, oddly 
shaped like the nozzle of a watering pot. It was a 
sight to make one for the time forget New Eng- 
land's rocky hills and cobble -strewn pastures. But 
even among these much beauty goes a-begging, 
and is passed by unheeded, because it is too near 
home to be thought worth seeking out and cherish- 
ing. People make coaching tours the country over 
for love of scenery who do not know of the near-by 
flower landscapes, or of the waterways that sur- 
round their very homes, except as drinking places 
for the cattle in the pastures. 

"Come up to the other pond," said Time o' 
Year, breaking my reverie at the right moment; 
for the picknickers, whom we had left behind, were 
jangling a dinner-bell to collect their scattered com- 
pany, and the howls and cat -calls that sounded by 
way of response were jarring. 

"If they 'd seen your trick-box nothing would 
have saved yer. You J d have had to take 'em all, 
sure, 'nless you went and sat in the middle o' the 
pond," chuckled Time o' Year, wickedly laughing 
as he saw me huddle my camera up tight in its 
waterproof cover at the bare thought. 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 47 

"The other pond's different deeper, steeper 
banks, more bushed up. I always thought this one 
was just a low meadow not so long ago. The 
bottom 's soft, and there is n't a hole in it deep 
'nough to hold a two -pound pickerel. King- 
fishers don't like to dive in it neither, and that 's 
a sure sign of shallow water and soft bottom. But 
green herons like it here, and quawks and great 
blue cranes, but they 're more in the frogging line 
o' business." 

A foot-path coming from the woods followed the 
margin of the second pond at the distance of a 
yard or so, winding and curving around the minia- 
ture bays and inlets until ten feet of headway meant 
thirty of meanderings. This is one of the illusions 
by which the waterways beguile us into thinking, 
as we follow the voice that travels on before, that 
we are covering vast areas; whereas, after wander- 
ing about a whole morning, discovering each mo- 
ment new treasures of the eye and ear, we find that 
we have progressed only a mile or so, measuring by 
the direction of the straight highroad. 

Between the path and the pond -edge shot up 
stiff plants of the Arrowhead, with their arum -like 
leaves and spikes of fragile, white, tripetaled flow- 
ers, quite as pleasing to the eye as many of the 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 



smaller Orchids. These also are flowers to rejoice 
over when seen in their perfection with clear 
water for a background, and 
splendid dragon - flies darting 
over them; but when gathered 
soon are but sad little wrecks, 
with curled, blackened leaves 
and drooping blossoms, like so 
many of the frailer flowers of 
the waterways, literally melting 
to tears on leaving home. 

All about this upper pond 
crowded a half woody growth, which 
arched its long, slender branches over 
the water until they trailed in it, after 
the fashion of vines. Upon the wand- 
like stems of the near-by shrubs I 
could see, set in the axils of the leaves, 
the groups of small, pink -purple flow- 
ers, whose thin, narrow petals and long stamens 
gave the stalks a rosy, fringed appearance. Where 
a vigorous stalk bent low enough to reach the 
mud beneath the water a mass of roots could be 
seen spreading from it, and grasping a firm hold, 
while the stem of a new plant started upward from 
these roots. 




ALONG THE WATERWAYS 



49 



This slender-stemmed shrub was the Swamp 
Loosestrife, or Willow Herb, though Walking 
Loosestrife would, I think, be rather a better 
name for it, as it strides about our Connecticut 
ponds and river banks with such rapidity that it 
surely wears the seven-league boots of plant land! 
A common plant? Yes, for our own home mill- 
pond is hedged with it, though never had I found 
a pond so completely possessed by it as this. But 
how few there are who seem to know it 
by name, or to remember ever 
having seen it in 
its haunts! Of 
the many 
guides to 
flowers 




ALONG THE WATERWAYS 



which, during the past few years, have held out 
their hands to aid and instruct the novice, which 
one has mentioned it ? 

Yet, for all this, it is not a land- 
scape flower that may be overlooked, 
even though the value is more in the 
leaf than in the bloom. From Spring 
to Midsummer its foliage wears succes- 
sively three shades of green, ranging 
from sap through clear emerald to verd 
antique. Its blossoming time runs all 
through July and August, and even 
before its flowers drop away a mel- 
low tint overspreads the foli- 
age, yellow, pink and deep 
maroon all flicker and come and 
go among the bending withes, 
until, as summer passes, the 
pond -edges are wreathed in the 
same colors of flame that Sam- 
phire spreads over the salt 
marshes, Low Bush Blackberries 
bring to the rocky pastures, Sumacs to the hill- 
sides, and Virginia Creeper, festooning over old 
walls, trails by the wayside. 

The sun was very bright upon the water, and 




ALONG THE WATERWAYS 51 

as Time o' Year turned toward the wood again to 
rest his dazzled eyes, the third perfume of the day 
played with my nostrils, a sort of blending of the 
odors of Button -bush and Swamp Azalea, yet 
more clearly defined and spicy than either, and 
bearing the suggestion of damp leaves with it. 
Another whiff, and my nose 
decided that the perfume was 
Clethra or White Alder, as it 
is often called, though nowhere 
could my eyes discover it. 

"A lot o' Sweet 
Pepper - bushes on 
ahead," said Time 
o' Year, who was 
in front of me. 
"Fine ones, too, 
well flowered and in a 
likely spot, not too much 
sun nor too much damp, 
and screened from the 
northwest wind, which 
does a lot of harm, driv- 
ing along the ponds and 
rivers some Springs, after 
things have started. I 




ALONG THE WATERWAYS 



guess you '11 find Pepper -bush just right this time 
'o year." 

Clethra, White Alder, or Sweet Pepper-bush 
(so-called from seed -pods that resemble pepper- 
corns), the flower is one and the same; no name, 
however invented, could half describe the sugges- 
tive fragrance, and no chemist could ever counter- 
feit it. Clethra is too often a bush defaced by 
much dead wood and shabby seed -pods, but this 
group was of even, young, fresh growth, coming 
from old stumps, while the flower sprays rose 
erect above the leaves, in shape like long 
candle flames. 

A horse neighed at the pic- 
nic ground, and Nell, tethered 
down the highway, 
answered and added 
an impatient whinny 
on her own account. 
So once again I 
parted company with 
Time o' Year, who stood 
a moment smiling at me as 
I packed away my plate - 
holders safe from light. 
Then, picking up his eter- 




ALONG THE WATERWAYS 53 

nal fishing-rod from some mysterious hiding-place, 
he trudged off up the pond path, whistling softly 
to himself in a startled sort of way, like a bird 
that, after the silent time, tries his voice in Au- 
tumn, and seems surprised at its sound. 

Nell whinnied again when she caught sight of 
me, this time contentedly tossing her head to 
signify that it was time to change bit and bridle 
for her lunch -bag. At the same instant my day's 
companion, who, owing to a dainty gown and 
flowery hat, had preferred not to risk damage by 
thorn and briar, and had decided to stay in the 
shade reading "The Kentucky Cardinal" (I would 
not allow her a less admirable book for the day's 
outing) , turned the last leaf, leaned back against 
the bank of Hay- Scented Ferns, and stretching lux- 
uriously, said: 

"It has been a simply perfect morning. But, 
oh! how hungry I am!" 

Telling Nellie to be patient a little longer, we 
drove down the road a mile or so, until we joined 
the river again, almost opposite Time o' Year's 
cabin. Here the way was narrow, well shaded, and 
cut like a step in the edge of a wall of rocky 
woodland, which rose eastward of the river valley. 
Rocks also separated the road from the river, which 



54 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

at this point rushed along, its rock -bed full of pot- 
holes, twenty feet below. Between road and river 
were some old buildings, which in their day had 
been grist-, saw-, and cider-mills. Two were so 
crumbled that vines grew through the floors, and 
the phcebe's nests of many generations strewed the 
beams. The third, the cider -mill, still bore traces 
of use. Moldy straw and dried apple -skins hung 
from the clumsy press, while the rude platform, 
under the vines and trees in full view of the river 
where Tree -bridge spanned it, offered an ideal 
resting place. So there we halted. 

A flowering Clematis vine climbed up from the 
bank by way of some tall Alders, and leaning over, 
I saw at the same glance a gorgeous company of 
Cardinal Flowers, doubled by their reflection in 
the water. A rock had protected their roots from 
freshets, and they stood there like a company of 
silent torch -bearers, their lights but newly lit, and 
likely to burn a month or more before extinguish- 
ment, save only this difference, that a pine-knot, 
torch, or a candle, burns from the top downward, 
while the flower- flame creeps upward and shows 
its last gleam from the stalk's top. 

When the Cardinal Flower grows among the 
tangles of low meadows or by muddy ponds where 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 55 

it is meshed by Tear-Thumb, Goose -Grass, Dodder, 
or the persistent Hog Peanut, we see its wonderful 
color, but lose its identity of form. Here, back- 
grounded by clear-cut rock, it stood out in perfect 
and untroubled stateliness. Two of its companions 
along the waterways, which form with it a sort of 
floral tricolor, are also seen in greater beauty when 
they grow massed along the course of running 
streams, than where a profusion of rank marsh 
growth overpowers them. These are the flesh - 
white Turtle -Head and the purple Closed Gentian, 
flower of mystery, that keeps its lips tight closed 
upon whatever secrets it possesses. 

The Turtle -Head was already in bloom, for it 
usually keeps pace with the Cardinal Flower. The 
Closed Gentian not showing its intensely opaque 
purple flowers until middle August, loses them 
before its companions are out of bloom. 

Farther down the road, where a lane turns off 
over a low -set bridge into a wood lot, there flowers 
each year a patch of Closed Gentian, such as one 
seldom sees now within reach of travelled roads. 
Exactly where it is I will not tell, though I may 
lead you there some day. I guard its haunt as 
Time o' Year guards his Arbutus. 

Within a space of a scant dozen feet, deep- 



56 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

rooted in wet soil, and screened from the lane by 
the end of the bridge, the straight stalks of the 
Closed Gentian, so overgrown by good nourish- 
ment as to be almost vine -like, can be counted 
by the dozens. This flower is of perennial habit 
of growth, and therefore, once established, is more 
true to its haunts than the sun -loving blue Fringed 
Gentian, which is an annual, dependent upon seed 
alone for its continuance in the place where we 
find it, and sought with eagerness from this very 
elusiveness. 

The locusts droned away, Nell nodded into her 
feed-bag, and we sat silently watching the bees, 
that were helping themselves to a peach that was 
beyond our capacity, and the ants who came on 
sweet errands, and who had, by their passing year 
by year to and fro from the press, worn a little 
track in the soft boards. 

" Do cover up that ant - walk with a branch 
or something," said Flower Hat. "I don't think 
I like to watch ants; they are so industrious and 
virtuous that, on a day like this, they seem a sort 
of moral reproach to one. Oh, look!" 

At that moment a yellow swallow-tail butterfly 
drove the bee from the peach, while a cloud of 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 57 

the brick -red milkweed monarchs hovered over a 
jungle of their favorite flowers just beyond the 
mill. 

The sun lay many hours to the west of noon 
before we left our shelter. I sat leaning back 
against the one-time straw rack, and dreamily wove 
together thoughts of all the other lovely outdoor 
days that were brought back by the picture now 
before me. The river -voice murmured clearly as 
it passed between the rocks, and I idly wondered 
how long it would take the current now flowing 
by in cool shade to reach and spread among the 
open marshes near the sea, tropical gardens which, 
at that season and hour, would give off visible and 
blinding rays of heat. 

My companions were both sleeping. How 
strangely sleep relaxes characteristics that will- 
power gives to the faces both of man and of 
beast. Flower Hat was but no! I'll not say it. 
She may read this, which Nell will hardly do. Nell, 
who, on the road, would pass for ten instead of 
twenty, had shaken off her feed -bag and now stood 
with closed eyes. Her somewhat whiskery chin 
dropped in a foolish way, partly showing her lower 
teeth, while her ears, usually so pert and mobile, 
had lost nerve and direction , so that she appeared 



58 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

to be in the last of the seven ages of a horse, sans 
everything but sleep, 

I laughed aloud. 

A flowery hat was straightened, and a far-away 
voice said, "Oh, I 'm wide awake. I 've heard 
every word you said, but I 'm too comfortable to 
answer." Which statement, as I had not spoken, 
was perfectly true. 

Then once more my thoughts joined with the 
river, and followed it down to its sea -gardens. 

The day before I had looked for flowers in the 
marshes threaded by hybrid watercourses, half creek, 
half river, where the salt relish stimulates other con- 
ditions of growth and different colorings. It had 
been a good morning for going to the marsh lands. 
The sky was overcast, the wind, fresh and east- 
erly, had driven the mosquitoes from the wet -bot- 
tomed salt meadows back to the bracken thickets. 
The 'tide was low, so that the feathery edging of 
lilac Sea Lavender that bounded the salt haying 
grounds was reachable. 

Where the coarse grass was short, and the sunken 
tide -water had left a sort of metallic luster on the 
mud, grew the dwarfed Seaside Gerardia, its flowers 
purple -pink, its shape a minute counterpart of its 
sisters of wood and upland meadows. There, too, 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 



59 



growing in rosettes, the leaves coming from a central 
root, blushed the rose-pink, wheel-shaped flowers 
of the American Centaury or Sabbatia, so bright 
in hue that the near-by Salt Marsh Fleabane 
looked dingy and overblown by contrast, while, 
acting as a foil to 
both of these, the 
stiff, inflated leaf- 
less stems of Glass - 
wort covered the 
ground with the 
translucent green 
such as we find in 
seaweeds. 

The course of 
every tide -ditch was 
outlined by Cat -tail 
Flags, rich with 
their brown batons, which seem to give them juris- 
diction in the world of reeds. But the Rose Mallow 
is in Summer the landscape flower of the marshes, 
inseparable from the scene from late July until early 
Autumn days give precedence to yellows and pur- 
ples, preparing the eye for Autumn leaf colors. 

All along the eastern coast, wherever water 
courses, this Mallow, often higher than the height 




60 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

of the tallest man, rears its hollow stems, from a 
perennial rootstock, and opens its flowers wide as a 
hand's breadth. They range in color, like the pink 
Azalea, from blush -white through deep rose to 
almost crimson in the unopened bud. Far up 
rivers and by inland lakes, wherever a salty flavor 
tempts it, the Mallow flourishes; and though it is 
water -loving, if a place where it is firmly fixed is 
drained, and the conditions changed, it will still 
live bravely on, though smaller and paler. 

In the hand, Rose Mallow is a coarse flower, 
perfect in color only on its first morning of 
blooming. Its leaves are rough and quick to lose 
their shape, and every stalk is made ragged by 
faded blooms and rough seed-pods. As it grows, 
each tint of color, from palest to deepest, reflects 
among the strong leaf shadows, and the whole, 
thrown in relief by a background of deep green 
reeds, is something to seek and gaze upon. Then 
we may keep its color memory alone, though its 
outlines may be treasured with the aid of the cam- 
era's eye ; for, like the field of Fleur-de-Lys, it 
is unpaintable by human hands. Are we not over- 
bold when we try to reproduce in detail by direct 
color, that perfection of flower beauty born of a 
combination of its natural tint, atmosphere, reflec- 

















w^ i 



ALONG THE WATERWAYS 6 1 

tions, and the veiling influence of the vision that 
transmits it to the brain ? 

Those who do not really know a flower in its 
home, as one knows the varying expressions of the 
eyes of a beloved one, clamor for a colored counter- 
part, no matter how crude. But those who really 
know, prefer the black and white suggestion of the 
scene, and leave the rest to memory. To paint the 
wild flowers as their lovers see them growing, or a 
child's face as its mother knows it, requires the 
gift of heaven -born genius. 

The sultriness left the air, and a refreshing 
breeze that blew down the river -glen from the 
northwest suggested a thunder shower back among 
the hills. Flower Hat sprang up and danced a few 
jig steps "to wake up her feet," she said, "which 
had been asleep, though she had not." 

Nell awoke with a snort, and then sneezed; 
we hastened to collect our traps and pack them 
away, after watering the pony somewhat inefficiently 
with a tin box as a pail, which, being shallow, 
necessitated eight trips down to the river. Why 
did we not take the mare to the water instead of 
the reverse ? Because at my last attempt, presum- 
ing on the privileges allowed her years, Nell, on 



62 ALONG THE WATERWAYS 

being unharnessed, had jerked the bridle from my 
hands, taken a long, and to herself satisfactory 
roll in the water, and crossed to the other side! 

"I wonder who lived there?" queried Flower 
Hat, looking at the little house that stood in the 
narrow strip of land opposite the mill, between 
road and rocks. The house was evidently aban- 
doned, for the gate was nailed up ; but a worn 
grindstone stood by the well and there was a strag- 
gling mass of hardy old-fashioned flowers, strayed 
evidently from a bit of garden at the south side. 

As I paused, unable to answer the question, 
Time o' Year came along on his homeward way, 
his cabin being a little farther on, Reading our 
thoughts, he answered them, saying: 

"The Keeler folks lived here. Old lady died, 
it must be three years back. Old man last spring. 
All their folks gone long ago. Nothing left but 
the posies to mind the old place, and soon that '11 
shake down, and then the posies '11 have it all to 
themselves. But I reckon she 'd 'a' liked it to be 
that way; she was always very private. There 's 
been many a house in Lonetown you 'd never 'a' 
dreamed was there, only for the posies. They 're 
always the last to leave." 




Ill 

"ESCAPED FROM GARDENS" 

ON a round hill-top, so abrupt that you 
might have jumped from it down to the 
winding river valley, stands the Lilac 
House. Those who built it there, long time 
ago, surely had keener eyes for beauty than their 
neighbors, for, as in the case of many remote 
farming hamlets, Lonetown had usually built its 
scattering houses in hollows, using the hills for 
windbreaks, its people being content to have before 
them no more distant prospect than a barn, a 
woodshed, a fowl -house, or a hayrick or two. 
The Lilac House might have been a watch - 



64 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

tower, so well does it command a view that 
spreads endlessly from ridge to ridge, and follows 
the windings of the valley until that, too, is hill- 
bound. Sun and river together made a calendar of 
the seasons for those who looked from the small - 
paned windows or paused to gaze, as they slowly 
dipped the heavy sweep to draw water from the 
hillside well. In late June the sun sets at the 
northwestern end of the river -valley, sinking slowly 
between the overhanging trees that appear to screen 
a doorway opened to it, while by Christmas time it 
swings back until it seems to rest a moment, be- 
fore making its sudden winter exit, behind a hill 
that marks the river's southern limit before it 
turns easterly to reach the sound. 

I do not know who built the Lilac House, or 
when or how the people who reared the other 
stone chimneys that now stand ruined here and 
there for miles around, by the sides of travelled 
roads, on crooked byways, or heading blind-lanes, 
came to live in such lonely places, that even now, 
in this time of push and traffic, they are on the 
longest road to nowhere. The fields from which 
these farmers must have drawn their food, are 
now occupied by Goldenrod, Joe Pye, and Boneset. 
The pastures where the cattle grazed fat cattle, 



'THE KENILWORTH |VY THAT CLINGS ABOUT OLD 5TONE 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 65 

for which the country was noted once for miles 
beyond Newtown are briary wood -lots. One thing 
is sure: women were in the homes, and lighted 
fires on the hearths, the stones of which in many 
cases are the only things that stay to tell of them. 
And no matter how hard the life, these women 
had at least one thought beyond the boundary of 
woodshed, barn, and hayrick. 

They all loved flowers, and from this love has 
sprung a half wild, shy plant race, which lingers for 
a time, at least, about the old home site, and then, 
according to strength and kind, wholly outlives tra- 
dition, and, mingling freely with the native growths, 
is naturalized. These flowers were first brought 
from far-off homes in other countries, like the 
Kenilworth Ivy, which clings about stone steps. 
Many came from English cottage gardens and 
passed, in shape of seed or treasured cutting, herb, 
bulb, or shrub, from hand to hand, cherished both 
from the memories they brought and for their own 
worth. Now they are recognized, and have distinc- 
tive places; and in the botanies, written against 
their names, we read, "Escaped from Gardens." 

The Lilac House, but for some woman's love 
of flowers, would be nameless now, unnoticed, a 
thing passed by without a thought or second glance; 
E 



66 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

for it is untenanted, windowless. Its shingles flap 
strangely in the wind, the woodshed doors are gone, 
the well-sweep, too. The sun shines through the 
warped siding of the barn upon the brooding swal- 
lows and phoebes, which have claimed it as their 
own for many generations. The bank wall yet 
remains that kept the knoll from slipping down hill ; 
the stone steps are in the gap, likewise the wicket 
gate. Time o' Year has shown me the names of 
its last tenants on a grim slate slab back on another 
hill; but the woman's hand has left a sign about 
the old house still better than graven sentences. 

The Lilac bushes once carefully set out between 
the foreroom windows and the porch have thriven 
and run riot, until the ruined house is walled by 
them. Straggling off, they have also crept about 
the outbuildings indeed, everywhere that grass- 
cutting has spared them. These Lilacs also, in 
their turn, have brought tenants to the house once 
more, robins that nest under the attic windows; 
a gray squirrel family, who live in a broken cup- 
board, using the Lilacs for ladders in frequent exits 
and entrances; and cheerful song sparrows, who set 
their nests among the gnarled roots and sing home 
ballads, perching on the sprays that brush the earless, 
voiceless house. 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 67 

Then, when in middle May the Lilacs put on 
all their bravery of bloom in mass of amethyst - 
hued flowers, which by their heavy odor tell of 
their presence far down the highway, as well as to 
greedy bees that fly across -lots, voices are heard 
around the Lilac House, feet press the grass, and 
again human hands make nosegays of the flowers. 

It may be that the visitor is some one who 
knows the place as I do, who goes back each sea- 
son to see young Spring following the river, to sit 
on the hill -slope and feel the ground silence, or to 
stand before the embowered ruin, listening to the 
massive music that the bees drone out, which 
seems like Lilac perfume turned to sound. Or the 
visitor may be merely a stranger, who, driving down 
the road, pauses a moment through desire for a 
bouquet. 

These sturdy Lilacs have kith and kin near and 
far. Throughout all Lonetown no ruined chimney 
is without its Lilac bushes; and when Lilacs ap- 
pear without a trace of a habitation, if you search 
among the tangled undergrowth, you will surely 
find a heap of stones, the opening to a cellar in 
what seemed at first only a bank of earth, or at 
least the stoned margin of a well or hillside spring - 
hole. The Lilacs are plain to see; but what hum- 



68 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 



bier plants have escaped from this and other old 
gardens, long hid under sod like their planters, to 
stray away down many hillsides, or have been in 
the seed borne down the river valleys and lodged 
by water or wind to creep into wild places? 

Many plants, indeed, have escaped ; not only 
among those grown for beauty of flower, but things 
of use as well, pot and garden herbs, and other 

growths which, once 
let loose from gardens, 
make dire mischief 
among maturing crops 
and hay lands. Such 
as these is Orange 
Hawkweed, or Devil's 
Paint Brush. This 
crept in, first as a bor- 
der plant, easy to raise 
and quickly spreading 
into great patches, 
showy with red -orange 
bloom. Then it o'er- 
stepped its bounds, and, 
being unchecked, has 
run its wild career in 
several states, starving 





i 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 69 

out meadow grasses by its greediness. So came 
and went astray Yarrow, the Ox-eye Daisy, Scotch 
Thistles, Elecampane, the Wormwoods, Chamomile, 
Tansy, and even, it is whispered, the unconquered 
Dandelion itself. 

In May, before the bushes round the Lilac 
House have lost their charm, other flower -children 
of that garden, set cornerwise between road and 
hill, are opening their eyes down in low, moist 
meadows. From deep-rooted bulbs spring tufts of 
leaves that hint of the Lily tribe ; from these come 
slender scapes of flat -topped flower -clusters, whose 
florets open white and full under the sun, but 
close at night and during cloudy weather, showing 
then a green striped under -side. This is the Star 
of Bethlehem, which flourishes, often luxuriantly, 
among the taller meadow grasses, giving at a short 
distance the effect of a field planted with white 
Crocuses. Sometimes whole fields will be strewn 
with the stars, so rank in their profusion that from 
the road I have more than once thought them 
Anemones, until the sight of some vestige of a 
house near by has hinted of my error. 

Even before this season, when Skunk Cabbages 
and Spice Bush share the swamp honors, when in 
the gardens of to-day only Snowdrops and Yellow 



7O ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

Daffies brave the late March air, along the runnel 
edge below the bank wall, and also in many sheltered 
places on the orchard slope, blooms the sweet 
White English Violet, its flowers held low above 
half unfurled leaves, all huddling for protection to 
the ground like some fragrant flowering moss. 

Two plants of old England's lore and literature 
live almost side by side on this New England hill, 
one carpeting the orchard, the other growing sparsely 
in a fence corner. One is the Wild Thyme of 
song and fragrant memory, waiting for summer to 
show its minute purple flowers in company with 
the various Mints and Catnip; the other Johnny- 
jump-up, father of modern Pansies, the magic 
flower of Puck called Heartsease, in legend once a 
White Violet, but transformed and dyed by Love, 
who stole its fragrance. 

"Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell: 
It fell upon a little western flower, 
Before milk-white: now purple with love's wound, 
And maidens call it Love-in-idleness." 

So by a flowery way comes Shakespeare's thought 
to Lonetown! 

In early summer, when all the wild fields are 
white and gold with Ox-eye Daisies, Moneywort 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 71 

trails its yellow coins over the orchard ground into 
cleared brush -land, and vies with other running 
weeds in further treading down the discouraged 
grass on the thin -soiled pastures. Summer is the 
flowering time of the great number of garden waifs, 
and through July and August a dozen kinds are 
locally plentiful enough to count in landscape color. 
Close under fences, sometimes following their 
line, at others gathering in great patches, grows a 
little plant, never more than a foot in height, with 
dark, bristling green leaves 
and flat yellow flower-tops. 
At a short distance it might 
easily be mistaken for a dwarf 
Goldenrod out of season, 
though a near view shows 
the florets to be of the odd, 
turbaned shape that marks it 
as a Spurge. This Cypress 
Spurge is one of a tribe which 
has a somewhat evil reputa- 
tation, for one member of the family 
is dangerous to handle, and this 
pretty flowering variety is poisonous 
to eat. Though quite conspicuous 
when in flower, the Spurge is an 




72 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

erratic bloomer, and is more frequently seen in a 
merely leafy state, like the Orpine or Live -forever, 
its companion on rocky road banks. Every one 
knows that persistent plant of thick, bladder -like 
leaves and many names by sight, but usually by the 
leaf alone, for I have seen waste fields and road 
banks covered with it season in and out, and found 
perhaps only a half dozen stalks of its pink -purple 
flowers. 

In July, when cheerful Toad Flax is at its best, 
the steep bank following the roadside from the Lilac 
House down to the turnpike often wears a tint of 
purple-blue, an unusual color in New England's 
byways before Aster time. Standing firmly rooted 
between stones, topping the brilliant yellow and 
orange Toad Flax, the Blue Bells of Scotland are 
ringing a midsummer call if unheard of men, still 
intelligible to the myriad flying insects that swarm 
about the flowers at the summons. Not alone on 
this hillside, but everywhere about the country, you 
will find this most captivating flower, far away from 
any house site, on sandy hilltops, or quarry edges, 
or set in jewel -like clusters in the emerald of a 
pasture. So again, through a pinch of seed and a 
woman's care, does Old World poetry creep through 
New England fields, breaking their rigor. 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 73 

When we have wandered over other hills and 
lingered about other old gardens, in late July the 
Lilac House calls us back again, for then when the 
grape-vines, clinging to the fence -pickets, have shed 
their spicy flowers, Bouncing Betsy comes out by 
the gateway and, rollicking to the roadside, quite 
fills the little corner with the fragrance of her 
wholesome pink-white flowers, with odor sugges- 
tive of Sweet William and border Pinks, to whose 
tribe Bet belongs. 

Of all the herbaceous plants that have escaped 
from gardens, Bouncing Betsy is the most con- 
spicuously vigorous colonist. Free from bad habits, 
she is sure of a welcome everywhere, whether she 
yields single pink-like blossoms, or in a fit of un- 
explainable generosity gives double flowers. 

"Escaped from gardens" is a term that covers 
many vines and bulbous growths, as well as border 
plants and pot herbs. As for the latter, you can- 
not walk a hundred yards across a low meadow or 
by an untrimmed road or lane, without having some 
one of their pungent odors rise from under foot. 
The simple leaves, squared stalk, lipped flowers, 
and aromatic scent are guide posts to the tribe of 
Mints, and though but half a dozen, like Bee 
Balm, Bergamot, etc., have color sufficient to make 



74 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

them count as landscape flowers, the mint per- 
fume, when liberated by pressure or moisture, gives 
them distinctive place. 

Wild Marjoram, of dry, waste places, is one of 
these, Calamint another, and Clear -eye, a cousin 
of the Salvia or Scarlet Sage, a plant that claimed 
a corner in the garden because it yielded a sticky 
juice that was prized for clearing the eyes of dust. 
Scarlet Bee-Balm, or Oswego Tea, though really a 
native plant, judging from locality, owes its pres- 
ence hereabouts to garden care, from which it has 
escaped again. 

Then come the true Mints themselves, profuse in 
growth as the wildest natives, yet all escapes. Of 
these Spearmint takes the lead as lender of juices 
for sauces and cooling drinks. Being a seeker after 
moisture, Spearmint delights in roadside runnels, 
and sometimes appropriates whole lowland pastures, 
giving no little trouble and bringing before one 
practically the ancient minstrel query: " 'Rastus, if 
a cow feeds on mint, what does she gib, milk or 
mint sauce, sah?" 

"Neever, sah! she doan' gib neever. She gib 
milk julep! " 

From still moister soil comes one of the most 
valuable medicinal plants of modern as well as of 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 



75 



past times. In fact, it is surprising and gratifying 
to find how many homely herbs are now in high- 
est favor, for Mentha is the base of many newly 
compounded drugs, and from the 
Wintergreen leaves that Time o' 
Year chews assiduously 
for stiff bones is distilled 
an oil, a specific for 
rheumatism at least 
for those whose stom- 
achs can stand its 
toxic qualities. }-^ 

Catmint, or 
Catnip, is a useful 
medicine too, both 
for man and beast, while 
the flavor of Summer 
Savory reaches the 
senses via the cook's, 
not the physician's, pre- 
scription, in company with Thyme, Marjoram, 
Sage, Bay leaves and other favorites of the kitchen 
bouquet; while Fennel, the seeds of which grand- 
mamma when young kept in her pocket hand- 
kerchief to chew slyly in church, and the Cara- 
way, always dear to cooky -loving children, both 




76 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

escaped from the old home gardens to lead gypsy 
lives. 

The common blue Self -Heal of waysides belongs 
to this same group of garden herbs, and Wood 
Betony also, though its colonies have overrun moist 
woods and fields, until, like many another immi- 
grant, it outranks the less pushing natives. But 
useful as these herbs are, and even interesting as 
plants, they appeal mostly to the senses of smell 
and taste, the eye having little pleasure in them. 

Flower Hat, who to-day begged to come again 
with me, (having of her own choice forsworn a 
trailing skirt and high heels on such excursions, 
thereby promising to be a more serviceable com- 
panion), exclaimed at last: 

"Have n't you spent time enough grubbing up 
smelly weeds ? I thought that we had come out 
to find strayed -away flowers and haunts picture 
things, you know. Here I 've been sitting for an 
hour against this fence until I 'm fairly bored with 
Bouncing Bet's society, and I know the Lilac 
House so well that I 'm sure to try to close one 
of those dismal windows that are n't there, the next 
time I have the nightmare. I don't object to 
tumble -down chimneys and old stone walls, or to 
ruined waterwheels and mill-dams, but I draw a line 




/ 






/& 




ESCAPED FROM GARDENS ^^ 

at spending so much time looking at an empty 
house. Really, a minute ago those two front win- 
dow-openings seemed to stare at me just like blind 
eyes, and I felt creepy." 

"Were you quite broad awake ?" I asked her 
teasingly. "But you may possibly feel creepy, for 
you are sitting on an ant-hill!" 

Then Flower Hat grew wide awake enough, and 
shook her skirts and shivered, until she found that 
the hill, like the Lilac House, was tenantless, when 
she started up the road on foot, quite in a huff. 

By this time even Nell had had her fill of herbs, 
having finished a roadside bed of Spearmint, near 
where I had let her loose to graze. So we all, in 
different ways, attached ourselves once more to the 
chaise, and jogged along up the river road toward 
sunset. 

Presently I spied a tall, lean figure, hoe on 
shoulder, coming across lots, and was surprised to 
find as it drew nearer that it was Time o' Year 
himself. I never before had seen him handling any 
tool of greater use than a gun or a fishing-rod, 
although I knew by hearsay that he had retained 
the few acres of good ground that lay behind his 
cabin, when he had left the hill farm so many 
years before. 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 



"Been hoein' corn," he said, half apologetically, 
as we stopped to greet him. "Great year for corn. 
Potatoes more 'n fair, an' hay was also prime. I 
reckon I never saw the beat. The weather was 
seasonable all through. But the weeds have had 
good feedin', too, and it 's hoein' every day now. 
It 's kept me back from the river and 
woods a lot. I declare, to-day I felt so 
lonesome, I jest had to quit up -field 
work and go down there for a spell to 
cool off. Where be you goin' up 
Lonetown way? 

"Up on the back Greenfield 
road," he continued, "there 's a 
sight o' Red Lilies that would 
please yer. Yer must 
know that big stone 
chimney that stands on 
the left after you pass 
the church and come 
this way. Yes, yer 
can reach it by the 
cross lane going 
back. The yard 's 
jest full o' Tiger 
Lilies, and the fence 




ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 79 

is full o' them, and some is growin' right out o' 
the hearth cracks, and some walkin' down the road. 
Besides, there 's Red Day Lilies, the kind that 
ain't worth pickin', and Spotted Day Lilies, the 
sort that has seeds something like Blackberries, all 
tumbling down the steep among the stones, back 
o' where the house stood. I reckon no picnic 
folks has passed that way sence they 've been in 
blow, or they 'd a yanked 'em up roots and all, or 
otherways spoiled 'em." 

At this Flower Hat grew eager. This promised 
something tangible, at last; something to please her 
color -greedy eyes, perhaps also something to sketch, 
surely something to photograph if the breeze, deli- 
cious enough for driving, would hold its breath 
awhile. 

Having a direct point in view, we straightway 
then discovered at every turn in the road or fence 
corner, beauty to lure us and delay our going. Here, 
it was a vine of Trumpet Creeper, using an old 
Bell pear tree for a trellis. There, as we turned 
abruptly to go up a hill, full of flat resting-places, 
like an easy flight of stairs, we faced a giant group 
of Elecampane. The great rough -topped, downy - 
lined leaves were clean and perfect, while the stalks 
were topped by the golden -rayed flowers that glis- 



80 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

tened in the sun with the quality of worked metal. 
Nell stopped short on the next flat when we ex- 
claimed in wonder; for after years of experience she 
has learned to interpret Oh's and Ah's as an 
equivalent for Whoa! 

Elecampane is often a disheveled sort of weed, 
a plant of waste places; but this bunch was fully 
six feet tall, and seemed like a traveller from a land 
of quicker growths than ours, that, losing its way, 
paused to rest in the rail -fenced corner. 

Outside the boundary of Lonetown, the houses 
have been oftentimes replaced by new buildings ad- 
joining thrifty acres. Then the old garden and 
the new are blended, and the escaping flowers of 
each set out in company, or else overtake one 
another on the road. We passed by such a farm 
almost as soon as we gained the hilltop. Of the 
old escapes, the dainty, trailing Coronilla, of Eng- 
lish birth, had claimed twenty feet of roadside for 
its vetch -like vines and rosy flower -clusters resem- 
bling clover -heads, the florets set crown wise, thus 
giving the plant its name. Then, a rod or two 
below, edging a tilled field, was a crowd of single 
Hollyhocks, pink, yellow, and red, the very same 
as hob-nobbed with Dahlias beside the path inside 
the garden; and a half mile up the road a Chinese 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 



81 



Honeysuckle, such as wreathed the house -porch, 
turned a bending tree, some fence-rails, and a heap 
of stones into a bower. 

The Honeysuckles, both the Italian with its 
pinkish flowers, and the yellow Chinese, are far- 




travelling escapes, for both, holding their berries late, 
when food is scarce, are bird -sown, and grow easily 
from seed. In fact, the endurance that plants have 
after their first escape depends largely upon their 
means of propagation. 

Birds scatter the seeds of all edible berry -bearers; 
the wind or hides of cattle the seeds of the com- 
posite tribe, according as to whether their vessels 



82 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 



are winged, hooked, or otherwise tenacious. Wash- 
outs, sidehill slides of earth, and streams carry the 
heavier seeds; then, too, many plants have several 
ways of spreading, both by seed, by 
running roots, like Bouncing Betsy 
and the Lilacs, or by rooting branches, 
like heedless Moneywort. 

All along the way we met single 
stalks of Tiger Lilies by the fences, 
and here and there bands of frail Red 
Day Lilies. One clump found lodg- 
ment in the corner of a thick 
stone wall, as if in an urn, 
though the house behind the 
wall was distinctly new, and all 
the other fencing was of pickets. 
Not far from this we came upon 
a tangle of the thorny -bushed little Cinnamon 
Rose, which is of transient color and faint fra- 
grance, but always found growing with yellow briar 
roses in old gardens. 

A great stone chimney then loomed up, sheltered 
by Privet Bushes in full flower. Prickly Ash, min- 
gled with a few half -dead Box Bushes, outlined a 
moss-grown flagged path; but no Tiger Lilies. The 
stones were covered by the scalloped leaves of Creep- 




ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 83 

ing Sailor, or Kenilworth Ivy, as it is often called, 
and the same persistent little vine could be seen 
clinging to the stone heaps a long way up the road. 

" See the patch of splendid blue Larkspur over in 
that shabby field," cried Flower Hat, standing up and 
grasping the reins. "Did you ever before see such a 
mass of blue growing wild? It 's as if the sky had 
fallen." 

"It is fine, certainly," I said, crawling under the 
fence (which here was of bars instead of stones or 
rails), followed by Flower Hat, who for obvious 
reasons, decided to climb over. 

"It 's not Larkspur. It is Bugloss, orBlueweed, 
as they call it," I said, as I drew nearer the patch of 
color. 

"Now here again is a plain, unforced illustra- 
tion of a flower that must be seen in -its un- 
troubled haunt to be known at its best. To look at 
that bank of blue, it appears, as you now said, as if 
a bit of sky had fallen. Yes, you are improving, 
Flower Hat. A year ago you would have said * blue 
silk' instead of 'sky,' as a simile. Now pick a 
stalk, and you have an odd, but a rather untidy 
looking flower, its bright blue suppressed by the 
poor quality of its foliage ; in truth it comes very 
close to the weed limit." 



84 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

"I don't know what the weed limit is," said 
Flower Hat. "I never could word it, somehow, 
though I usually know weeds when I see them. 
They are such ugly, homely things." 

"Like Peppermint and Marjoram?" I asked. 

"Oh, no; those are useful herbs." 

"Very good. Then suppose we amend Emerson, 
boil him down, and say that a weed is a plant which 
is neither useful nor beautiful." 

"Yes, but then how about that Orange Hawk- 
weed, and White Daisies and all the Goldenrods, 
you know? They are lovely, and yet you told me 
this morning that they fairly eat up good farm land." 

"Like many other things, it all depends upon the 
point of view, united to the very possible condition of 
having too much of a beautiful as well as of a good 
thing. But look, there is our chimney," I said in 
relief, for when Flower Hat begins to argue, illogical 
though she often is, I have thought at times that 
she would have been able by sudden strategy to 
corner Socrates, Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus 
rolled into one. 

There was the chimney standing alone with a 
single Tiger Lily before the hearthstone, while half 
way up in a jog where the flooring must have rested 
a plant of Matrimony Vine or Box Thorn, with its 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 



purplish green flowers and slender spines, shot out a 
few branches, the larger ones some twenty feet or 
more, climbing over the back of the chimney and 
falling in festoons to the ground. This vine belongs 
to the Potato family, and may be often seen in wholly 
wild places, as well as near old gardens, sprawling 
over bank walls and when out of bloom showing 
oval green or deep red berries akin to those of its 
wild cousin, the Climbing Nightshade. 

The Tiger Lilies, as Time o' Year had said, 
were lined along the fences and gathered in groups 
among the stone heaps, while 
the Blackberry Lilies, which are 
really a species of Iris, covered 
the slope back of the garden. 
Such lavish and vivid color is 
not often equaled in a garden, 
for Lilies which, 
from their stiff 
growth, should be 
urged to run riot 
and break ranks, 
when planted in 
neat rows do not 
fill the wild na- 
ture - loving soul 




86 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

with joy. Here the tall stalks, coming from old 
bulbs, were sheltered by the flowers from others of 
graded heights, and the whole stood out against a 
ground of either green Lilac, Privet or Hawthorn 
bushes. Even here on the edge of Lonetown the 
home -loving woman's hand had planted bushes of 
English May, which, less transient than humanity, 
stayed behind to whisper of her native land to 
the spring moon, if none else heeded. 

If you wish to know how far New England is 
bone of Old England, trace the ancestry of these 
plants that have "escaped from gardens"! 

The near slope was gay also with Orange Day 
and Blackberry Lilies, but these seemed pale when 
brought into close contrast with the barbaric black 
spotted Tiger Flower of the recurved, clawed 
petals. 

"Camera or water -color box?" I said to Flower 
Hat. 

"Both, and then, ten to one, we miss it wholly," 
she answered, going cautiously to the well to let 
down her water -cup by a string, for old wells are 
treacherous, both to drink or to dip from, and had 
best be left alone. 

"You take the chimney and single Lily and I'll 
try the easiest group," she added; "because the 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 87 

breeze has sprung up again and the flowers are all 
wabbling this way and that, like heads in a street 
crowd." 

"How I wish that these flowers might stay here, 
and go on growing and spreading. But some one is 
sure to come and root them up," I half said, half 
sighed, as, at the end of an hour, we turned to come 
away. "Your sketch is really very mussy, and the 
Lilies look very much like fat Poppies. If only the 
wind would drop for one single second I could get 
at least a fine outline of it all. But it is useless to 
snap at a brick -red flower when you wish detail. I 
wonder if the Lily by the chimney moved. I think 
not." 

"For my part, I prefer painting to photography," 
said Flower Hat, packing up her colors. " Now, 
I 'm perfectly certain that my sketch is mussy, and 
a failure, so my mind is settled about it, while you 
cannot be sure, yes or no, about your chimney until 
you go home and work magic with the plate in that 
stuffy dark-room. Such long suspense as that would 
quite unnerve me. 

"Please, Madam Pick -not- dig-not- but-stand- 
and- admire, may I take home a few of those Tiger 
Lilies to copy and paint neatly, accurately and inar- 
tistically on a china plate? " 



88 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

So we began to laugh as she gathered a huge 
armful from places where their loss would not alter 
the setting of the picture. But, as she stood in the 
chaise arranging the Lilies in the thrown -back hood 
which I so frequently used as a carry- all, I saw the 
expression of her face change. She gave a little gasp 
and stood quite still, looking back at the Lilies, upon 
which the slanting rays of the sun shone in a way 
to change the whole perspective. 

"I see now what you mean about a flower in its 
haunt having a different poise, a different meaning 
from a flower in the hand. You are quite right. 
I can already feel the difference between the grow- 
ing and the picked Lily, even though, at best, they 
are rather wooden, unsympathetic flowers." 

"Not exactly wooden, though not sympathetic," 
I urged. "Say decorative, pure and simple flowers 
of the landscape; flowers that, when gathered, we 
should arrange indoors, environed as nearly as possi- 
ble with the light, shade, background and colors of 
their homes. I think that this is the true secret 
of the house use of wild flowers. If we cannot 
touch them without their shrinking from us, if we 
may not bring and retain even the faintest sugges- 
tion of their surroundings with them, either in foli- 
age, bark or moss, as in the case of Spring Beauty, 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 89 

Arrowhead, Pickerel Weed, Cardinal Flower, then 
it were best to leave them where they grow." 

"Let us go home the back way by that deserted 
house we saw the other day, opposite the mill, where 
we took luncheon," said Flower Hat. "I want to 
keep a sketch and thought of that just as the old 
people left it, before it grows blind and deaf, win- 
dowless, doorless and weird, like the Lilac House. 
I wonder if there is anything newer to escape from 
that poor little garden than the other flowers we 
have found hereabouts!" 

"Here are two plants, in addition to Phlox and 
Bachelor's Buttons, which, unless I am much mis- 
taken, will soon be travelling down the roadway 
and be carried by the river to the fertile fields be- 
low," I said a little later, as we unhasped the gate 
and looked at the little array of flowers kept in a 
tangled line by a row of flat river stones set upright 
at each side of a path, made also of flat stones. 

"This prickly Mexican Poppy, with its white - 
striped leaves, has already sown itself below the 
road bank on the river -side. I noticed it the last 
time we were here. Then here is yellow Candy- 
tuft, whose seed has caught far up on that rock 
ledge yonder, and here is another Orpine, which is 



9O ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

sure to spread like the Live -forever we saw to-day; 
besides, these seeding tufts of Columbine are likely 
to become settlers. They bore white flowers in 
May; I saw them once in passing, and that day, 
too, the old man Keeler was fussing about the 
garden. This bunch of Prince's Feather, which 
droops its coarse red plumes over the wickets, is 
already common in places all up the road, as far as 
Georgetown and the Ridge. It is a sort of big 
cousin of the pink Knotweed, that edges the road 
at home, between the marshes, the beach and Sun- 
flower Lane. Then here are Bachelor's Buttons and 
Catchfly, that has strayed both up and down the 
road, followed by that white and purple Phlox. As 
for the common garden Sunflower, it has escaped 
everywhere. I think this very place has long since 
sent a colony down stream to locate by the cross- 
road bridge, where a different soil has somewhat 
changed its form of growth. Two years ago I saw 
them there, and, at a little distance, took them for 
Earth Apples or Jerusalem Artichokes, but they were 
only plain Sunflowers escaped from gardens. 

"This same Artichoke, now so often seen by 
waysides and in modern gardens, escaped far back 
in the dim past from a cultivation of which no 
record even remains; it was planted and tended by 



ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 9 1 

aboriginal people, of whose coming and passing we 
do not know. The plant belongs in Asia. Did 
a lost tribe bring it journeying eastward at a time 
when, through Alaska, the east and western conti- 
nents were one? Who can say, except that by a 
flower there lives a link, binding the now to things 
beyond the sight. So through a wayside plant race 
history comes to Lonetown." 

Time o' Year came down the road leading home 
his cow from her grazing -ground by the upper pond. 

"I think if I were not here he would tell you a 
bit of news," said Flower Hat. "I 'm sure that he 
has something on his mind." 

"Makin' a long day of it, considerin' ye 've 
spent it all along the roadsides," he said, pausing 
to let the cow snatch up a tempting bit of clover. 

"Yes; we 've been thinking of people and old 
gardens, instead of looking for really wild flowers. 
It is hard to understand why in all these forgotten 
places the flowers are the last things to leave ex- 
cept the very stones. I wish that I could read 
the meaning of it all between the lines." 

"Meaning?" queried Time o' Year, looking down 
the river, his rare smile spreading over his bronzed 
face as he paused a moment to listen to the rolling 
warble of a rose -breast. "There 's lots of meanings 






92 ESCAPED FROM GARDENS 

that we are n't meant to read in outdoor things as 
well as human ways, but I reckon that one 's plain 
enough. It 's that we ought to be keerful not to 
plant things in our gardens that, when we air gone, 
will trouble other folks and bring discredit on us." 
Time o' Year smiled again, as if he could see 
more meanings than he voiced, and, giving the rope 
a gentle pull, led the cow down to a clear, quiet 
pool to drink, the clean Mint fragrance rising from 
their trail. 



IV 
IN SILENT WOODS 

'YSTERY is the keynote of the wood- 
lands. When we enter them, the 
range of the eye is instantly short- 
ened, deflected in a dozen ways from 
the pursuit of a direct object. The 
light, set a -quiver by restless leaves, 
glances from tree -bole to tree -bole, 
destroying all sense of direction, and 
concealing the outlines of both ani- 
mals and flowers by an atmospheric 
color protection, so that it is quite possible to lose 
one's way in even a familiar bit of pathless woods. 
The forest juggles with the ear as well as with 
the eye. The wind in the upper branches causes 
the leaves to patter against each other like the 
first hurried drops of a shower, while below all is 
airless, suffocating. Then the pattering suddenly 
ceases, and a ground breeze sweeps through the 
Ferns, that bend and sway, but with an utter 
silence that is incomprehensible. A branch cracks 
a hundred yards away it seems at the elbow. 

93 




94 IN SILENT WOODS 

You step on a dead twig, and it gives out a per- 
cussion like the snapping of a distant trigger. Scar- 
let Tanager utters his clear call, apparently close 
above your head. You seek but cannot see him, 
for he may be either three or many rods away. 
You grope about half a day for a desired flower, 
and finally, sitting upon the moss to rest, in despair 
of finding it, you discover that it surrounds you on 
every side. In the woodlands one may always 
expect the unexpected; and it usually happens. 

It would also seem that a peculiar temperament 
in both animal and plant life is necessary to make 
the isolation from society, sun, and air endurable; 
for by woodlands I do not mean the woody fringes 
that border meadows, spring up under the pro- 
tection of highway fences, or thirstily follow the 
edge of a river, but the forest as nearly prime- 
val as we may find it in a heedlessly woodwast- 
ing region, where legitimate felling of the ma- 
ture tree for timber is too often followed by the 
destruction of the sapling for cord -wood, and of 
nearly all shrubby growths for kettle or pea -brush; 
the untracked forest, where the red -tail and red- 
shouldered hawks still nest, in company with a 
pair or two of great horned owls, where the oven- 
bird pitches its tent on a prairie of Ground Pine, 



IN SILENT WOODS 



95 



and the ruffed grouse scratches dry Beech leaves 
together, to nest her cream -brown eggs and at the 
same time help conceal them. These untroubled 
woods are where no roadway, nor bush -cutting, nor 
trampling to and fro has encouraged weedy under- 
brush, or caused the deep black soil to wash away 
between the rocks ; where, on moist 
plateaus, catching rare sunlight on its 
pinkish, sharply recurved petals, the 
Shooting Star is found. 

"Nothin' much that kin move seems 
to like the very big woods for livin' 
in," said Time o' Year one day, 
as he returned from the Hem- 
lock ridge, axe on shoulder. 

He was glancing at a stalk 
of blackening Indian Pipe, 
which was the flower of the day 
in the buttonhole of his shirt. 
Though he protested at 
the wholesale uprooting 
of wild things, he always 
wore a flower in shirt, 
vest, or coat, as season 
and garment varied; and 
when frost raised its fin- 




96 IN SILENT WOODS 

ger, a bit of aftermath Winterberries, a Witch 
Hazel pod a sprig of Cedar or of Hemlock re- 
placed the flower. 

"The coons and foxes that hole up in woods," 
he continued, "sort of keep to the edges, and al- 
ways go out field or along the rivers to feed. Even 
the kind o' hawks that set their nests in the tops 
o' the big trees, and the little warbling birds and 
two kinds o' thrushes that build low, seem in a hurry 
to be off when nesting and molting 's over. Take 
me now; I could n't live away from woods, but then, 
again, to live in 'em would be too solemn. Ye 
can't see what 's comin', only what 's been by and 
left tracks. As far as huntin' goes, that 's fair 
enough; but for livin', it 's right down discouragin'. 
You 've got to see ahead. For posies now it 's dif- 
ferent, though there 's heaps o' wood -bred kinds 
that straggle out into clearin's, or mebbe stay on 
when the woods air cleaned above 'em, that seem 
to do first-rate. But there 's others that are n't 
the same unless you go up in the woods to see 'em. 
Mebbe they 'd grow just as big, or bigger even, in 
dooryards, but they look homesick and strange. Af- 
ter they're once teched something 's gone from 'em. 
If ye want to learn wood posies ye must do it in 
the woods. 



IN SILENT WOODS 97 

"Ye ought to have seen that Pipe Plant up yon- 
der under the Hemlocks, the same place that pink 
Ladies' Slippers grow in May. It looked just like 
snow comin' up through the ground and burstin* 
into flowers; but take it out in the sun, it 's terrible 
dead to see. The Ladies' Slippers, too, were just 
like butterflies, a-perchin' up there on the bank; 
but them that some o' the Hill Top folks yanked up 
and put in the garden looked like lumps o' raw meat 
with flies a buzzin' round 'em. Take even Laurel 
and Dogwood, that 's tough and hardy; 't ain't the 
same when they 're all trimmed and platted out in 
beds in the open grass, even if they do grow." 

Time o' Year had the right of it, as usual. To 
transplant a wild flower without making a semblance 
of its haunt in its surroundings is to leave its attri- 
butes behind. Even those that thrive in cultivation, 
though they may gain in bodily vigor, lose the at- 
mosphere that lent them charm, and soon become 
the commercial plants of florists. Thus they take 
the first step on the road that leads parallel to the 
path to the hades of nature -lovers, the carpet gar- 
den, once within whose gates those that have en- 
tered willingly and knowingly must abandon all hope 
of better things. And yet the characteristics of 
wood plants are so marked that they will long sur- 
G 



98 IN SILENT WOODS 

vive the destruction of their haunts if they them- 
selves are left untouched. The surroundings may 
alter, the sheltering trees disappear, but so long as a 
footing remains, or a drop of moisture to refresh 
them, the wood things retain a native dignity. 

To consider every Flower and Fern that may be 
found in shady ways, on wood edges, on half -cleared 
lands or following the water courses as they wind 
through forests, would be to catalogue more than half 
the native flowers that bloom from Arbutus until 
Witch Hazel time; yet the greater number of the 
landscape flowers of the New England woods may 
be gathered from four tribes: the Lily family, the 
Dogwood, Viburnum and the Heath, though in the 
botanic world, for the reason of the great variety of 
forms it held, the Heath Family has lately been 
divided into separate households. 

When Time o' Year brushed the dead leaves 
from the pink Arbutus buds he opened the first page 
of this wonderful Heath Family register, which never 
closes the whole of the round year, for the pungent 
fruits of the Checkerberry or Wintergreen outlast 
the winter and often contrast their lusty redness with 
the snow of white Hepaticas. Though these fami- 
lies enter the woods almost in company, the Lily and 
Dogwood leading in landscape beauty, the Heath, 



IN SILENT WOODS QQ 

possessed both of shrubs with evergreen leaves and 
exquisite blossoms and also of many strange, lowly - 
growing plants, transcends them all. 

When, in May, Flowering Dogwood, either as 
a shrub or a slender -limbed, flat-branching tree, 
flashes the dazzling white of its flower wrappings at 
us from between the trunks of tall trees, whose leaf- 
age is quite up out of range, it seems as if this 
luxuriant blossoming among the stern woodgrowths 
must be wrought by magic. It is little to be 
wondered that Indian lore took this flower as the 
flag of truce between frost and growth, and that 
the Red Men hastened to plant their maize as 
soon as it unfurled before the breeze. Yet, con- 
spicuous as are these wrappings, for the flowers 
themselves make the small green central cluster, 
at a little distance they too blend away mysteri- 
ously, appearing like mere spots of light among 
the other shadows. 

At this season if the eye drops to the ground, 
where it slopes sunward and the undergrowth is 
herbaceous rather than densely shrubby, it may see 
the Lily family making its entrance, clad also in 
purity, where the clean leaves and graceful petals of 
the White Wood Trillium nod as they seem to bend 
and hurry down the slope, crowding at the bottom 



100 IN SILENT WOODS 

as if some Spring enchantment born of moisture and 
deeper soil were luring them there. 

Others of the tribe are blooming far and near. 
Bellworts are scattered all along the way in little 
gossiping groups; jungles of the leafy stalks of tall 
Solomon's Seal conceal the humble nodding blossoms 
by the weight of leaves; Wild Leeks are sending up 
their long flat blades, which disappear before the 
flower-stalk comes, White Hellebore is uncrumpling 
its wide leaves and shaking its greenish flower - 
plumes in wet places from which the yellow Adder's - 
Tongue is now fading; but it is the great White 
Trillium that turns the bit of woodslope into a 
picture unpaintable save by the Magician who alone 
can render detail without losing atmosphere. 

Almost every flower pose is taken by the tri- 
petaled blossoms which, so white in their first 
opening, flush as they mature until they often fade 
in rosy pink, things wholly apart from Wake 
Robin, their kindred of crimson petals and carrion 
odor. 

After the Trailing Arbutus has gone and the 
Pinxter- flower, too, of what does the Heath tribe 
boast? Useful offspring in the guise of Blueberry, 
Huckleberry, Bilberry and Dangleberry, of high 
estate and low, going through a score of species, 



IN SILENT WOODS IOI 

which fill the wood -edges and openings in May 
and early June with fine sprays of small, whitish, 
bell - shaped blossoms that suggest the old - world 
Heaths from which the tribe took its name. The 
blossoms are mainly inconspicuous, yet they count 
for much in masses and the berries are all edible, 
either for man or bird. The leaves, of a tender 
green at first, progress through many shades, until 
in Autumn they change to a rich leather-red, of 
the same color worn by the Pepperidge, and so 
carry the fire into the underbrush of the woods, 
where it burns as brightly as the Sumac flame on 
the bare hillsides. 

In late May and early June white still remains 
the flower color of the wood, of shrubs and of 
smaller trees. The Hobble Bush opens its cymes 
of florets, shaped much like a flattened garden 
Snowball, and soon the Maple -leaved Arrow- wood 
keeps it company, though the latter, like many of 
the Whortle- and Blueberries, is more noticeable in 
Autumn from the peculiar shade of pink worn by 
its Maple -like leaves. Meanwhile, close to the 
ground the Dwarf Cornel or Bunch -berry is imi- 
tating the blossom of its cousin, the Flowering 
Dogwood, and holding its greenish enveloped 
flower -clusters above a whorl of leaves. This plant 



102 IN SILENT WOODS 

is also better known by the bright red knot of 
berries that follow than by the bloom itself. 

Many wood -plants that blossom in the early 
season must be recognized by leaf or fruit, for 
people in general do not tramp the woods before 
late June, when the flowery carpet is turning to 
greens and other leaf-tones. So it is with the 
fragile feathers of White Baneberry ; its blooms 
have faded by June, but the compound leaves 
and red -stemmed clusters of white berries are 
conspicuous until frost and serve as punctuation 
points to the eye in glancing over the vague 
masses of Ferns and Summer leafage. Wild Sarsa- 
parilla also parts with its feathery white flower - 
balls in June, and its bristling seed -pods, seeming 
at first glance like those of Parsley, Caraway and 
Dill, tell its name throughout the Summer woods. 
Medeola, more widely known as Indian Cucumber 
Root, at the fertile season when May blends with 
June, raises a sort of two -story stalk, sometimes 
two feet or more in height, with a whorl of Lily- 
veined leaves in the middle, and another at the 
summit supporting an umbrella of greenish white 
flowers. So transient are they in their blooming 
that the outer florets often wither before the cen- 
tral ones unfold, leaving the cluster of shining ber- 



IN SILENT WOODS 



103 



ries to tell the plant's name all Summer, as they 
turn from light green through red to dark purple. 

As for Medeola's companion in damp woods, 
the slender -stemmed Trientalis or Starflower, cousin 
of Loosestrife's, it 
springs up as if stretch- 
ing to reach the light, 
throws out a wheel of 
leaves, a few star- 
shaped pale flowers , 
which so resemble the 
Chickweeds as to win 
for it the local name 
of Chickweed Winter - 
green, and vanishes 
again, having no tint 
of leaf, flower or berry 
to win for it a place 
in the wood - land- 
scape. 

Now also the Smooth Sweet Cicely, with its 
much -compounded leaves and flat clusters of fine 
white flowers like all the Parsley tribe, lures 
children to the woods to dig its pungent root, 
dire mischief sometimes following, for its com- 
panion in -moist, shady ground is often the deadly 




104 IN SILENT WOODS 

Poison Hemlock, the two plants being quite alike 
to unaccustomed eyes ; and it is not until the flowers 
of Sweet Cicely give place to the strongly Anise - 
flavored seeds that any one but a botanist can 
tamper with the roots in safety. 

Moccasin -flowers and a rare Orchis or two 
bring alien color to the wood carpet of dead 
leaves, Hemlock needles, Ground Pines and soft 
Mosses ; but Orchids must flock alone and not be 
inventoried with less usual plants. 

All this time, tight wrapped in buds of last 
season's growth, like many shrubs of both ever- 
green and falling leaf, the Mountain Laurel and 
American Rhododendron are preparing their bravery, 
the one climbing the rocky steeps of the drier 
woods, the other seeking moist glens and always 
keeping under high shade. 

All the year the abrupt branches and persistent 
smooth green leaves of this Laurel have relieved 
the monotony of gray rocks and tree -trunks. All 
Summer the thick oval leaves act as foil to the 
juicier greens of Ferns and fragile wood plants. 
In Autumn, as other foliage drops away, they 
stand revealed as evergreens, together with Christ- 
mas Ferns, the creeping Polypody, stiff Red Cedars 
and the sweeping Hemlocks. 



IN SILENT WOODS IO5 

In Winter, when snowdrifts fill the valleys and 
even the Cedars are a rusty bronze, the Laurel 
lifts its triumphant bay wreaths high up on ravine 
sides above ice-bound rocks. In late spring the 
old leaves droop awhile and look dim and mottled 
in contrast with the fresh new shoots. Then soon 
the bushes hold up their bouquets of rose -fluted 
buds that, by the Magician's jugglery, in June 
spring open into quaint five -pointed umbrella tops, 
with ten recurved stamens for spokes, their ends 
well socketed as if to support the expanded flower, 
remaining thus until shaken by an eager bee or 
the wind's jarring, when the spokes spring back, 
scattering the precious life-dust for the seed's 
nourishment. 

No flower of wood or field, marsh or fertile 
waterway can surpass the beauty of the freshly 
opened Laurel, when it pinks and pales, according 
to soil, location and individuality, through all the 
subtlest tints of flower- flesh. Yet no single flower- 
cluster can give an idea of the Laurel of the land- 
scape, the Laurel that wraps rough steeps in 
clouds of bloom ; that, pale and wan, climbs up 
the sides of somber, sunless valleys until, reaching 
the summit and high air, it basks in open places, 
rosy, as if with its exertion. 



106 IN SILENT WOODS 

Like the Flowering Dogwood, it has a startling 
way of stretching out a branch of dazzling blos- 
soms among deep shadows, as if it were a sentient 
thing, and knew that contrast heightened its tran- 
scendency. 

Peter Kalm, the Swedish botanist, when he first 
beheld the New World wilderness couleur de rose 
with this flower, in reference to the small Laurel, 
wrote in his journal: "Its leaves stay the winter; 
the flowers are a real ornament to the woods : 
they grow in bunches like crowns . . . around 
the extremity of the stalk, and make it look like 
a decorated pyramid." Of the Mountain Laurel 
he adds, "It was likewise in full blossom. It rivals 
the preceding one in the beauty of its color." 
We know that he took good report of it to Lin- 
naeus, his master, who named the genus after him, 
for our shrub is no kin of the Old World Laurel, 
the name having been given to it for a likeness 
in the leaf. 

As the Mountain Laurel drops its flowers and 
grows ragged for a time, the Wild Rhododendron 
begins to show much the same delicate tints of 
rosy color ; but the throat of its wide, five -cleft 
corolla is often sprinkled with varied golden spots. 
The Rhododendron's leathery leaf is double as long 



IN SILENT WOODS IO7 

and thick as is the Laurel's; the flower -clusters 
and florets also, roughly speaking, are twice as large. 

The Laurel, however, blooms with more uni- 
formity than its giant cousin, and carries its flowers 
more boldly. The Rhododendron gains strength 
and symmetry when living untouched in a wooded 
glen where the branches twist and interlace to 
form impenetrable barriers, studded with perfectly 
formed bouquets of wax -like flowers, each cluster 
growing from a wheel of leaves. 

With the fading of Laurel and Rhododendron 
the upper color of the deep wood vanishes. But 
on the lighter edges and river banks we meet 
white once more in Clethra and Swamp Azalea, 
both of the old Heath tribe ; then we must lower 
the eye to Mother Earth again, as in the Spring 
days of Adder's Tongue, Hepatica, Anemone and 
Yellow Violet. 

Days of June and young July, woods from which 

the Spring chill has passed, a bed of moss and 

silence. Take no books. The stillness is too ab- 
sorbing and profound for reading. Go close to the 
earth and smell its spiciness. Rest the body and 
travel with the mind. Focus the eye on the un- 
dergrowth with which the foot is the more often 



108 IN SILENT WOODS 

familiar. Seek out mimic landscapes of a country 
where stately Brakes and Royal Ferns are trees, 
various Wintergreens are shrubs, the various mosses, 
grass, crumbling stumps and lichened branches, 
ruined castles, and squirrel, lizard, white-footed 
mouse and whippoorwill the inhabitants, 

It is airless in the deep Summer woods, at once 
cool and oppressive. You push back your hair from 
a damp forehead and think of the open places, 
the glen where Time o' Year's waterway rushes 
through, a cool breeze always following in its wake, 
and you wonder why you did not follow the banks 
where from time to time you could at least dip 
your hands or handkerchief in cool water. The 
restless push of Spring has passed. You no longer 
fear that some long -sought flower picture of the 
season's moving panorama will slip by unseen. The 
white flower-balls of the Four-leaved Milkweed 
close at hand whisper of the sun -hot fields where 
live its sturdy kin, where even now Summer is 
holding its flower dance in open revelry, the Ma- 
gician lending all the colors of his palette for the 
costuming. Then the wind comes backward to 
the wood and for a time the eye leaves the search 
for broad effects and turns toward detail. 

For the Summer woods one must have human 



IN SILENT WOODS 



109 



companionship, else the silence is too oppressive, 
the stiffening tension of bodily inactivity on the 
vibrant nerves is too great. A woman may go 
happily on the flower quest in byway, lane, through 
open fields or along the waterways, if she numbers 
a woman friend, a dog, or a patient horse among 
her intimates ; but for the silent woods, man is 
woman's needful com- 
plement. May there 
not be paths to cut 
and gullies to cross, 
and even snakes to be 
killed? And it was not 
the feminine half of 
mankind who was told 
to bruise the serpent's 
head with her heel ! 

Lovers? Yes; court- 
ing days are in touch 
with the silence of 
wood rambles, but for 
the flower side of the 
quest, married lovers are best. Their vision has a 
far wider range. They have the tranquillity that 
heightens memory, and they go and come from a 
mutual home, follow the pathways of nature in 




IIO IN SILENT WOODS 

less fitful and feverish mood than those who say 
goodnight at the gate. 

All the ground odor does not come from the 
earth itself. As you gaze dreamily at the infinite 
shadings of the moss, small round leaves separate 
themselves from it, following a threading vine hither 
and thither until the mossy cushion merges into 
a leafy bank dotted here and there by waxy red 
berries. In passing the hand over the leaves, new 
shoots will turn back and show the velvety -tubed 
throat and the tiny, cross -shaped flowers of the 
Partridge Vine, another wood plant that holds its 
fruitage through the winter. Small as the flower 
is, its fragrance is exquisite, being a refinement 
of the same quality of perfume which we find 
in Clethra, Lizard's Tail, Buttonbush and Swamp 
Azalea. To pull a handful from the mass is but 
to find a straggling vine that almost depends for 
identity upon its unity with its haunt, but seen 
where it covers the ground with green -red -white, 
it must be counted with the decorative flowers of 
the mimic landscapes of deep woods. 

A bluish color, novel at all times in the woods, 
draws the eye to a partly open space where, clus- 
tered in the hollows between tree roots, there re- 



IN SILENT WOODS 



III 



main some belated tufts of low flowering Phlox. 
The first thought is of wonder that a plant "escaped 
from gardens" should have chosen so lonely and in- 
hospitable a lodging ; 
but memory comes 
presently to aid the 
eye, and names the 
flower Wild Blue 
Phlox, of the same 
tribe as both the 
Wild Sweet William 
of more southerly 
moist woods, and the 
Creeping Moss Pink 
of dry or rocky soil. 
Rosettes of smooth 

^-AjU 

round leaves follow WILD BLUE PHLOX 

each other from under a Beech tree, in the strag- 
gling procession suggestive of tap -roots, while 
groups with larger leaves support straight flower - 
stems hung with scalloped, bell -shaped florets, which 
give the perfume, at once sweet and aromatic, that 
is peculiar to the Round -leaved Pyrola, Shinleaf 
or Wintergreen, still called by Time o' Year Wild 
Lily -of -the -Valley. 

"Yes, I know it ain't a Lily," he said one day 




112 



IN SILENT WOODS 



when I, half laughing, referred him to his " study - 
book." "But it 's just the same to me as if it 
was, and that 's the name she called it. Not that 
I 'd wish to spread an error, but just between me 
and her and it, that posy '11 allus be Wild Lily- 
o' -the- Valley." 

I wonder whether the day will come when the 
old man will tell me of the dead wife whom he 
designates as "her," and about the boy of thirty 
years ago, and why he himself left the farm to 
live a hermit in the roadside cabin. If he does, I 
well know that the story will be told when he has 





OAK-LEAVED GERARDIA 



IN SILENT WOODS 113 

raised his finger warningly, whispered "Come and 
see ! " and led me to the cherished haunt of some 
flower that she knew under a homespun name. 

The soft, dry Beech leaves, crumbling to rich 
mould, end in a sort of fairy ring of frail young 
Maidenhair, and Hemlock sheddings cover the 
ground, where plants of a strange form stretch up 
scaly, flesh -like spikes, crowned by a few loosely- 
clustered flowers. The newly -opened blossoms are 
yellowish, the maturer violet -pink, but except for 
the four-petaled flowers the plant seems a fungus 
growth ; yet a faint odor steals from it to identify 
the flower, though it is half a parasite, as the 
False Beech Drops of the old Heath tribe, and half 
brother to the taller ice -white Indian Pipe. 

Surely the Indian Pipe itself is a plant to con- 
jure with, and Ghost Flower is the most fitting of 
its many names. What thought had the Magician 
when he planned its evolution ? Was he dreaming 
still of the Autumn frost -flowers born at dawn from 
frozen sap and a sun -kiss? Or was he seeking to 
incarnate a fantastic icicle in the flower world ? 

Silent even among voiceless ways stand the Indian 
Pipes, unbendable, and grouped like statues. They 
do not respond to the touch of the low ground 
breezes that turn the hedging Ferns rudely about, 

H 



114 IN SILENT WOODS 

leaving them in a mute flutter long after the wind 
has ceased. At the touch of man the flesh of this 
flower of translucent whiteness blackens; but un- 
troubled it will linger in its home, going through 
various changes from a drooping to an erect flower 
with tints toward pinkish purple for a month, or 
even two, and I have sometimes in November, after 
a hard frost, found its then really icy stalks. 

Yonder, quite under the Hemlock shade, the 
stalks shoot up six inches or more before they reveal 
the flower that caps them ; in shape it is a reversed 
pipe bowl. Here among the Ferns, on the Beech 
copse's open edge, though under high shade, the 
flower -buds barely pierce the ground before re- 
laxing, though afterward the stem attains a greater 
length. Such faint odor as the flower has is 
crude and chemical, as of something in a transi- 
tion state, not yet to be determined. 

There is one day in the July woods which, to 
me at least, is not like other days. This day is 
when we go to the river-woods to find the mot- 
tled-leaved Pipsissewa, or Spotted Wintergreen, in 
its perfect bloom under the great Chestnut tree. 
Not that it is a flower of a day, by any means, 
for it stays the month out in southern New Eng- 
land. It also gives good notice of the coming of 



IN SILENT WOODS 



its season by the whitening of the globe-shaped 
flower-buds hanging suspended above the sharp- 
toothed, dark green leaves, which show light 
marblings above and a dull mauve undertint. 

The trailing underground stem, sending out 
both leaf and 
flower branches, 
being unseen, 
makes every 
group appear to 
have a separate 
existence, but 
the hand that 
seeks to trans- 
plant them 
works sad mis- 
chief. 

The haunt 
where we go 
yearly to meet 
this flower is on 
a hillside. There 

giant Chestnuts touch branches, and the foot sinks 
in soft moss and Ground Pine, and the Trailing 
Christmas Green sets snares to trip the heedless. 
The place is a sort of steep knoll, bounded by river 




IN SILENT WOODS 



and a wandering bit of marsh which few have 
crossed, save sportsmen and the random seeker for 
strayed cattle. Bog Moss floors half the pathway 
over the low ground mingled with 
Shining Club Mosses, Sweet Flag, 
and Bur Reeds. Then comes a 
space of damp, sand -covered stones, 
/ once a brook bed, and now con- 
cealed by Creeping Scale Moss or 
Selaginella; and on the moist, shady 
bank above, the long, graceful white 
flower -spikes of Black Cohosh make 
a feathery thicket, through which 
we push to gain the knoll, trampling 
Starry Campion on every side. 

Once within this boundary, the 
deeply compound leaves and long 
flower -panicles of Spikenard make 
us pause a moment in admiration. 
This plant sometimes vigorously 
holds its blossoms up to the very 
chin, as if to bid us examine their 
minute beauty, though the wine- 
colored fruit that follows classes it 
with those frequent wood things bet- 
ter known by berry than by flower. 




IN SILENT WOODS II? 

Here, too, but little above a foot in height, the 
rare Ginseng has sometimes lodged, spreading its 
leaves, in shape somewhat like the Horse-chestnut's, 
beneath the yellowish flowers that also play second 
fiddle to the later bright red berries. 

A few steps more, and the goal is reached, Pip- 
sissewa everywhere! Occasionally the flowery trail 
is of the green -leaved kind called Prince's Pine, 
each plant rising a perfect mimic tree, but bearing 
smaller flowers than the Spotted Wintergreen, its 
brother. 

Down on my knees I go as when Time o' Year 
led me to the Arbutus bank, for these two wood- 
flowers are kin. On my knees; yes, and farther, 
down quite flat, until the flowers of recurved, flesh - 
white petals and pink stamens, ranged like the 
setting to a central green seed -globe, are on a level 
with my eyes, and their fugitive perfume is mingled 
with the odor of crushed leaves and moss. 

In Pipsissewa (lover of winter is the name's in- 
terpretation) culminates what might be called the 
leaf -mold flowers of the woodland season; those 
that, keeping close to Mother Earth, brighten winter 
bareness with their cheerful evergreen leaves, and 
by their flowering distil the leaf decay of Autumn 
into Spring and Summer fragrance. 



Il8 IN SILENT WOODS 

Pipsissewa is a picture flower in the little land- 
scape of wood undergrowth, and yet it is one of 
the few blossoms of its class that may be picked 
and taken home without loss of quality. Only, 
I beg of you, cut the tree -like flower -branches 
above the ground instead of pulling them, which 
uproots and wastes the trailing stem beneath. 
Place your bouquet, which groups itself with flow- 
ers above and foliage underneath, in a green glass 
bowl of water, holding the stems in place with tufts 
of shaded mosses, and you will find that you have 
brought sufficient of Pipsissewa's haunt with it to 
justify the picking. But do not try to dig the plant 
up, for the chances are that you will discover, when 
it is too late, that you have despoiled the woods 
of beauty, only to obtain a mass of rootless plant- 
stems. 

The later season has its wood flowers, but none 
are so dear and intimate as those that bloom from 
April to middle July. After this, the surprises are 
in the shape of Fern fantasies. In midsummer days 
it is the Fern that lures us to the wood -path, and 
into the moist glades, where already Jack -in -the - 
Pulpit has thrown off his hood and is wearing a 
cap of stout green berries. 

Once again in August the woods glow with a 



IN SILENT WOODS IIQ 

yellow, richer than any seen there since Marsh 
Marigold time. But in late Summer this color has 
left the low, wet shade, and come up to the dry 
Oak woods, where leaf - mold is compacted into 
blackened loam, and the undergrowth is of Laurel, 
Blueberries, Brakes, and slender Wood Sunflowers. 
In such haunts the straight, leafy stalks of smooth 
Yellow False Foxglove, the branches all turned 
upward, rise four, five, and often six feet. The 
wide-lipped, tube-shaped flowers, two inches in 
length, smooth outside but velvety within, make 
golden wands of the stalk-top and branches, the 
color creeping up and outward as the buds unfold. 

The old name of this plant was Oak -leaved 
Gerardia, from Gerarde of herbal fame and from 
its leaf form. It seems a fitting name, as the 
flower is dependent upon certain organic matter for 
maintenance and seems to find a satisfactory supply 
of this in Oak woods. 

False Foxglove grows in Time o' Year's woods 
also, and along the glen road below the Lilac 
House. But to see it in its glory, one must fol- 
low the river down past its mingling with the salt, 
then thread Sunflower Lane and take the narrow 
track made by hay wagons across the salt meadows 
to Wakeman's Island. 



120 IN SILENT WOODS 

"Are there Oak woods on the beach - crest ?" is 
your thought, I know. Yes, for the sea has eaten 
its way backward year by year and century by cen- 
tury, until fresh and salt water meet and mingle, 
where once were only dry woods, fresh ponds and 
a river glen. 

Nell well knows the way to this Oak -crowned 
crest, which, at the high tides of Fall and Spring, 
is an island. Even in late Summer it is reached at 
low water only by a soggy strip of road full of 
deep gullies made by the wagons carrying the 
heavy loads of damp salt grass back to the upland 
meadows for drying. 

When we last went on that road, Nell and I, 
Rose Mallows lined it, Sunflowers almost closed 
above our heads, Hyacinth Beans climbed over the 
Alder bushes, and the lovely purple Gerardia bloomed 
in the ridges between the wheel tracks. Then 
Mistress Nell wore a mosquito blanket and green 
boughs in her harness, and her mistress, in turn, 
was decked with an Asparagus bush upon her head 
that should have made the haymakers, if they 
knew enough (which they did not) think that 
Birnam Wood had missed Dunsinane and was wan- 
dering through a Connecticut marsh! 

The haymakers only paused and wondered per- 



IN SILENT WOODS 121 

haps why a female not financially interested in salt 
hay should come that way, when low August tides 
leave the marsh tract a freehold to the breeding 
mosquito swarms. And, truly, crossing that marsh 
road is for both man and beast to withstand the 
attack of a million flying warriors, whose swords 
are needles. But once over and safe within the 
Oak shade, the eye refocused from the glare of the 
noon sun, the picture repaid for all. 

A wheel -track road between low banks was 
edged with giant brakes and golden wands of the 
Yellow Gerardias. Beneath the Oaks a glow was 
spread among deepest shadows, as if the sunbeams 
sifting through the leaves were made prisoners 
where they lodged upon the undergrowth. Over 
and through this color, as a background, lay the 
marshes, with a thin covering of water here and 
there, the spaces between the pools blue with Sea 
Lavender. 

Another landscape flower to swell the list of 
the unpaintable; another blossom of a day, too 
frail to pick, unless, as I did, you shake the opened 
florets off and trust to the opening of to-morrow's 
buds for your reward. 

Not since the days when the green outer walls 
of the Lilac House hung with flowers had I heard 



122 IN SILENT WOODS 

such bee -droning and insect music as around these 
Gerardias. I thought to take a picture of a 
group that circled an Oak trunk, to piece out the 
memory of it in winter days. But when the sea 
breeze ceased, every flower bell seemed shaken 
from within by hungry diners, and disappointed 
new-comers went from flower to flower, failing 
to find even standing room. Then, at last, for 
three brief seconds wind and bees were quiet in 
unison. So was another cell of flower memory 
filled, and one more picture added to my photo - 
herbarium. 



V 
SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

INK Ladies' Slippers is wonderful plenty 
this season over in Old Hemlocks," said 
Time o' Year, coming suddenly upon us 
one afternoon in late May, when I was 
sauntering through the upper Hemlock lane 
looking for fertile fronds of the three flow- 
ering ferns, Royal, Cinnamon and Claytonia, 
which grow in the roadside runnels, Nell 
following at her browsing leisure. 

"I never see so many in bud and blow 
before," he continued. "There 's usu'lly 
some bunches of 'em in the Glen Woods, and a 
few scatterin* down the ridge by Tree -bridge, like 
as if they was steppin' careful and choosin' their 
footin' so 's not to get runnin' and fall in the river. 
But up there in Old Hemlocks they 're jest settin' 
round among the broken stubs and on the edge of 
root bowls thick as a picnic; yet for all that they 
don't seem a mite less curious than when they 're in 
twos and threes. Every one on 'em looks ' hands 
off !' and sets up a different way from the next." 
123 




124 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

Time o' Year thus keenly sensed the leading 
feature of the entire Orchid tribe unusualness. 
To the general public, even the word Orchid has 
a foreign sound that conjures up a flower of glow- 
ing color perched bird -like in the tree -tops of a 
tropic jungle, or entertained as an honored guest in 
a hothouse, where all conditions are arranged to 
suit the caprice of its air -feeding appetite ; for to 
the majority the Orchid is, above all things, an 
air -plant. Yet of the five thousand or more species 
that range over the temperate and warmer portions 
of the globe, it is only in the tropics that the epi- 
phytes, drawing their sustenance from the air, are 
of frequent occurrence. 

The tribe of the Orchid comprises many house- 
holds under one general roof, and the habits of 
this original family are as variable as their colors. 
An Orchid may grow from a bulb, a hard, coral - 
like corm, or a mat of fleshy or tuberous roots. 
It may live in a tree -top in torrid regions, or it 
may inhabit the depths of cold, sunless northern 
bogs ; it may lend rich color to the grasses of an 
open meadow, or flourish equally well in the dry, 
crumbling mold of evergreen woods. It may, ac- 
cording to its kind, bear flowers a hand's breadth 
in size, of exquisite coloring to attract the insects 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 125 

upon whose services this race so largely depends 
for fertilization of seed, or it may have a blos- 
som so dull in color or so minute that, as in some 
of the Habenarias, a microscope is needed to make 
its naming sure. The flowers may grow singly, on 
a wholly leafless scape, in spikes or in droop- 
ing panicles. They may have broad, fringed, thin, 
narrow, or bearded lips like the showy fringed 
purple and green Orchises and the rose -colored 
Pogonia, or be pouched, as in the Cypripediums or 
Ladies' Slippers, both foreign and native. You 
will, however, find a strong family cast of feature, 
an eccentric lip type in every one, and if you will 
carefully scan the features of the crystal white 
Rattlesnake Plantain and Ladies' Tresses of our 
woods and low meadows, you will see the same 
lineaments as in the rare greenhouse beauties which 
peer through a veil of costly ferns to make a 
bride's bouquet. 

Here in New England such Orchids as we have 
mingle humbly in the earth with lowly plants of 
bog and wood, and yet retain their marks of race 
and breeding, for even the children that pick them 
carelessly on their way "'cross lots" or going up 
through the Tree -bridge woods to school, carrying 
them in tight-fisted bunches to their teacher, 



126 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

recognize them fully as being "not just common 
flowers." 

Beauty and fragrance are the chief attributes of 
this royal race. Even though the seed -pod of one 
genus is the Vanilla Bean of commerce, and one or 
two of the tuberous -rooted species furnish a me- 
dicinal paste, the tribe is not so notable for these 
as that it harbors the dove-like winged petals of 
the Holy Spirit Flower, the Butterfly Orchid of 
the tropics, the Moccasin Flowers of our woods, 
and the lovely fringed Orchises of the wet meadows. 

Orchids offer structural problems quite as intri- 
cate as the higher mathematics. For every part of 
the flower, every color, tint and spot, as well as the 
specialized perfume, has its own share in the sys- 
tem of signals which the Magician has furnished 
the blossom, that it may call the insect best suited 
to its needs. However, this whole subject of insect 
fertilization belongs to science, to the biological - 
botanist ; it is too profound and serious a matter 
for a Summer day in the field, or to be awkwardly 
fingered by the nature -lover who follows the flower - 
trail for the pleasures of eye and ear, for the rest 
it brings to the brain and the peace to the soul. 
No less a man than Darwin has confessed that after 
devoting twenty years to their study, he doubted if 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 127 

he perfectly understood the contrivance to secure 
fertilization possessed by one single Orchid. 

Of the sixty species of Orchids found east of 
the Mississippi and north of Carolina and Ten- 
nessee, New England claims a scant fifty. Only 
a dozen of these can be called landscape flowers, 
even in the narrowest sense ; the rest belong to 
the realm of the analytic botanist. 

One thing is easy to remember about an Or- 
chid: the flower is made up of two groups, three 
petals and three sepals, like so many of the Lily 
tribe, its near kin; also that of the three petals 
the lower one, acting as a lip which is always 
noticeable, gives individuality and character to each 
species, while the sepals or the outer three petals 
often unite to form a sort of hood above the lip, 
lending the flower, according to its type, the appear- 
ance of a bird, a butterfly or some other winged 
insect. It is this peculiar combination of pouched 
lip and streaming petals and sepals that gives the 
rare Calypso of cold bogs, which ventures farther 
north than any of its brothers, creeping well up 
into both Alaska and Labrador, a more truly 
moccasin -like appearance than those that bear the 
name of Moccasin Flower. Calypso's shoe, raised 
on a stem above a single broad leaf, is dull pink 



128 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

and furred inside with soft hairs. It has a 
curious, overlapped, double -pointed toe of pale 
yellow; a little rosette of shaded pink and yellow 
trims the instep, while the narrower petals blow 
in the breeze like ribbons meant to fasten the shoe 
about the ankle of its phantom wearer. 

Orchids have the parallel -veined leaves that we 
associate with Lilies, and in these also there is 
much variety, the leaves of the species growing in 
woods and open places where they have plenty of 
room being larger and more fully developed than 
those that have to struggle through a heavy under- 
growth of grass and rank weeds in meadow and 
bog. So that with our native Orchids the leaves 
range from those of the Moccasin Flowers, where 
there is either a single pair as long and broad as 
the -hand, or several large leaves growing up the 
stalk, Bellwort fashion, to the thread-like appen- 
dages of the slender grass-growing Ladies' Tresses 
or Tracies, as the word once read. 

If the of ten -advanced theory is true that all the 
plants now bearing flowers originally consisted only 
of leaves like ferns, and that from these leaves the 
ornamental parts of the flowers were developed, 
then the Orchid has kept many traces of its 
ancient descent, for there are several species of our 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS I2Q 

inconspicuous Orchises whose petals still appear to 
partake strongly of the leaf nature. 

All this time six feet are loitering along the 
road toward the Old Hemlocks, two wearing 
leather shoes and four iron, both wearers absorbed 
in the spring greenery, Leather -shoes reveling with 
her eyes, Iron -shoes with her mouth. 

The Old Hemlocks are not the woods that 
follow Saugatuck, Time o' Year's stream, nor the 
midway Aspetuck, but the companions of a river 
that once threaded the mill-ponds on its course 
like a string of glistening beads, passing saw-mills, 
grist-mills, mills with great wooden overshot wheels 
that circled slowly like a moving flight of steps, 
spreading magic rings of greenery about them by 
their splash and spray. There was even a little 
place, half forge, half saw -mill, set in a deep ravine 
among the rocks, that turned out musket -stocks 
and axe -helves. Now all save one of the clatter- 
ing wheels along the river's course have been 
silenced by the decrees of so-called progress and 
the buying -power of a water company. 

Twice have these grand old woods been wasted 
by the axe and once by fire, yet much of their 
beauty still remains, for tirelessly these many times 

I 



I3O SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

does the Magician, Heart of Nature, renew his 
sway, bind together, replant, covering bare rocks 
with cheerful Polypodies and softening decrepitude 
and age with a drapery of vines, before he finally 
yields his kingdom, reluctantly, to Heart of Man. 

The great Hemlocks from which this wood took 
name had vanished, some by the axe, others blown 
over, lifting the soil with their roots so that de- 
pressions, sometimes three feet deep and fifteen 
feet across, remained to be filled in time with pure 
leaf-mold. These tree bowls, whether they are 
found in evergreen or other woods, are always sure 
to be gardens of odd plants, and two years before, 
soon after the brush had been burned, I had seen 
groups of the pairs of strongly -ribbed green le-aves 
that promised a wealth of pink Moccasin Flowers 
later on. 

In giving English, or, as the saying is, popular 
names to plants, it is well to have if possible a 
fixed code, free from localisms and based upon pri- 
ority and reason, as in the case of Latin names. 
Such a code is established by Britton and Brown in 
their "Illustrated Flora of the Northern United 
States," and by L. H. Bailey, in the "Cyclopedia of 
American Horticulture," etc., in adding the most 
tangible English name to every plant possessing one, 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 131 

and often giving the many local titles, in parenthesis 
as it were, to help the unlearned to establish flower 
identity. Yet when a common name, spicy with 
the odor of the new western world, is given to a 
plant, I think we should keep it, in spite of Lin- 
naean or pre-Linnaean nomenclature, and call our 
little group of inflated pouched Orchids, Moccasin 
Flowers, instead of Ladies' Slippers, as Britton 
does, a general title which confuses their person- 
ality with the European species. 

Ladies' Slipper is not a word in keeping with 
Hemlock and Beech woods, but the word Moccasin 
throws meaning into the black shadows and brings 
to mind the stone axe and flint arrow-heads found 
not long ago on the edge of a newly -plowed field, 
that was but recently a piece of these same woods. 

"With careless joy we thread the woodland way 

And reach her broad domain. 
Thro* sense of strength and beauty free as air, 

We feel our savage kin: 
And thus alone, with conscious meaning, wear 

The Indian's Moccasin." 

We stopped at a point where a pair of Chestnut 
stumps indicate the entrance to a wood road whose 
guardian gate-posts and rails now lie among the 
Ferns, keeping shape until touched, and then sepa- 



132 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 



rating into an intangible powder, half dust, half 
wood -mold. 

On this bank, peeping incautiously from be- 
tween Bellworts and the black stalks of a little 
forest of damp and only half -opened fronds of 
Maidenhair Ferns, was a single Moccasin Flower 
of unusual size and height, its pouch 
of an almost crimson hue. 

It stood like an outpost, com- 
manding a view both up and down 
the shady road. I straightway picked 
it, carefully wrapped its stem and 
leaves in damp moss, and hid it in 
the depths of the chaise -top; 
for, thought I, if, to-morrow 
being Saturday, any of the 
people coming down from the 
back country 
spy this flower, 
somebody will 
surely put two 
and two together, 
follow the trail into 
the woods , and 
make the whole 
colony prisoners. And 




SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 133 

among all our native Orchids this Pink Moccasin 
Flower is the most hopeless to transplant, as away 
from its haunt in a year or two at most it pines 
away, appearing to find some unknown quality in 
its natal soil with which it cannot be supplied. 

Within the wood edge pairs of leaves and single 
flowers soon became more frequent, but these sank 
to insignificance when I came in sight of the 
first tree bowl. There the Moccasins were hold- 
ing a woodland flower market of their own, peep- 
ing over each other's shoulders, crowding the edges 
of the leafy hollow, straying down the sides and 
clustering in the bottom, facing this way and 
that, wearing every shade of color from flesh -white 
through pink to a deep, veiny purple, and all nod- 
ding and swaying as they were continually jostled 
by the eager bees who came to make their pur- 
chases of pollen and nectar. 

Notwithstanding the great attraction that a Pink 
Moccasin Flower in the hand offers us from its 
oddity, it is certainly much more beautiful in its 
haunts. There the paler flowers counteract the 
somewhat veiny quality of the deeper, and the soft 
browns of the Hemlock -strewn ground act as a 
setting to the whole, together with the surrounding 
air of mystery making it one of the half dozen New 



134 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

England Orchids for which true landscape value 
may be claimed. 

Hereabout it is the earliest comer of the tribe. 
Oh, no! I am forgetting that there is one of 
another household still earlier, the Showy Orchis, 
which pierces the mold with its lily-like leaves in 
late April or early May, in company with Wake 
Robin, Bloodroot, Anemones, and Yellow Violets. 
Even Time o' Year does not know its haunt in 
the deep woods beyond Lonetown on the Ridgefield 
road, where I cherish a few plants of it, so rare in 
this region, by letting them alone in the hope that 
they will increase and that the seed may be borne 
to neighboring woods. 

This Orchis is most precise in its equipments, 
and when in its first perfection of bloom, it seems 
like an artificial plant of wax from its broad leaves, 
sometimes six inches in length and damp to the 
touch, to the tip of its spike of half a dozen 
spurred, shaded purple flowers with broad white 
or violet lips. Where it is common, it often 
gathers in crowds like the Moccasin Flowers or 
Fringed Orchises, but with the few rare plants 
of my discovering, each kept its distance from 
the other, as prim as children made ready for a 
party, who sit perched on chair edges in con- 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 135 

strained attitudes to keep finery untumbled until 
the moment for departure comes. 

In common with many of the tribe the Showy 
Orchis has, on opening, a delicate earthy fragrance 
that turns to a decided muskiness after the fer- 
tilization of the flower; a perfume inseparable from 
leaf -mold blossoms to whatever tribe they may be- 
long. One quality it lacks, and that is gracefulness. 
If its flower -stem grew longer before the buds 
opened, so as to raise them well above the leaves 
and give the wind a chance to sway and bend 
them, the primness would vanish, and the Showy 
Orchis be captivating indeed. At present it reminds 
one of a lovely woman with so short a neck that 
she cannot turn her head ! 

Another Moccasin Flower, a taller cousin of the 
Pink, has sent a few venturesome pioneers over the 
Hemlock ridge to test the climate and soil on the 
coast side of it, for this family needs bracing air 
and usually keeps well away from salt water in- 
fluences. 

The Yellow Moccasin, or, as the French call it, 
Le Soulier de Notre Dame, comes in flower as the 
Showy Orchis passes, and precedes the exquisitely 
painted Showy Moccasin Flowers, whose splendid 
rose -and -white blossoms, often two on a stem, 



136 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

seek high places and are seldom found in abun- 
dance south of Maine, New Hampshire and Ver- 
mont. It is well called Regina, for it is Queen of 
a princely family. 

The Yellow Moccasin is a striking flower of 
the highshaded woodland landscape. The uncleft 
shoe itself is of a clear smooth yellow, veined with 
purple ; the other two purplish petals hang as 
twisted strings, with a hood-like sepal arching be- 
tween. The flowers, singly or often in pairs, are 
raised upon a stout, leafy stalk a foot or two above 
the ground, clearing the more woody undergrowth 
which serves as a background to deepen their color. 

How the eye loves to linger upon yellow flow- 
ers! Of the three primary colors, yellow always 
seems to me the most harmonious under all condi- 
tions, from the first Marsh Marigold to the last 
brave wand of Goldenrod. Even after hard frosts, 
the same cheerful color wraps the low thickets 
wherever Witch Hazel blossoms, giving the land- 
scape, through this last flower of the season, a 
forecast of the Willow tints of early Spring. 

Roughly speaking, without attempting a census, 
it seems to me that taking the year through, the 
majority of landscape flowers are yellow. At least, 
such species as wear this color grow in greater 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 137 

abundance than those of other hues. And if the 
strange yet plausible theory of Grant Allen be 
true, that all flowers were originally yellow, but 
that in the processes of evolution they have experi- 
mented with other colors only to work back again 
to the original hue, it is easy to account for the 
plentifulness of this color. 

In May and early June, when the tardiest Ferns 
have unfolded and yielded their 
winter woolens to yellow war- 
blers and humming- 
birds for nest -linings, 
and the Beech 
leaves have 
freed their hands 
from their furry mit- 
tens, another Orchid 
appears in the Hem- 
locks, in Time o' 
Year's woods, and in 
the woodland strips 
near the shore where 
the smooth shining leaves 
of the Twayblade attract the eye 
even before it becomes aware of the 




138 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 



spikes of purplish, green -winged, broad -lipped flowers 
that suggest the form of many a greenhouse Orchid. 
The Great or Lily -leaved Tway- 
blade is by far the more striking of the 
two, and when a dozen plants grow 
in a circle they are of distinct landscape 
value. This Twayblade grows from a 
bulb, and the bulbs are usually found 
in pairs, one bearing the leaves and 
flower-stalk, the sec- 
ond either not fully de- 
veloped or else having a pair of 
smaller leaves, but not yielding 
flowers until the second year. 
The leaves, though primarily of 
an unctuous sap-green color, are 
often, perhaps through prema- 
ture ripeness, streaked with yel- 
lows, purples and other Autumn -leaf -hues, which 
add greatly to the beauty of the plant, though if 
they were so pictured, the rigid botanist would 
declare the colors unauthorized. All of which proves 
that the plant seen in the landscape, like the liv- 
ing bird in the tree, is often plus some charming 
quality not accorded it by the text -books. 

The smaller Twayblade, or Fen Orchis, is quite 




SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 139 

inconspicuous as to its flowers, which are more 
wholly greenish and are borne only four or five on 
a stem. Its oval leaves, too, are usually smaller. 
Though not generally common, when found it is 
usually in large colonies, so that at a little dis- 
tance the ground seems paved with the shining 
leaves that remind one of the Maianthemum or 
Small False Solomon's Seal of May woods. 

Both of the Twayblades flourish equally well in 
dry or springy woods. In fact, I have found them 
the two sturdiest and most constant members of the 
race, for they will endure transplanting and adapt 
themselves to new conditions very readily, if the 
soil is in any way suited to their needs. A few 
years ago I discovered a mixed colony blooming 
bravely in the hard, blackened soil of a bit of 
cleared woodland from which the stumps had been 
burned and where the plow was already at the 
work of turning it into a field. Under these cir- 
cumstances even Time o' Year could not object to 
the taking away of plants when their haunt had 
literally vanished from around them, so I rescued 
these Twayblades and put them into a wild, shady 
part of the home acres. They not only lived, but 
have spread, new plants appearing here and there 
at a wide distance from their parents, showing 



I4O SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

that the insects necessary for their fertilization 
have found them out in their new home. 

Except when we search for the Rattlesnake 
Plantain of late Summer, the Orchid path now 
leads altogether through open places, springy 
pastures, bogs and meadows, that were long ago 
redeemed from the bog condition but which are 
deep with the black soil and firmly -rooted growths 
of other days. 

Farther north in the Litchfield country, the 
pink -purple Arethusa may be discovered making 
rosy patches in the open Cranberry swamps of early 
June, if you have the patience, clear eye and steady 
footing necessary to penetrate her haunts; for, like 
Calypso, these flowers, with nymphs for sponsors, 
are furtive and elusive, even where they gather in 
considerable numbers. 

In middle June the Rose Pogonia or Snake - 
mouth, bearing a strong resemblance to Arethusa 
in shape and color, though a smaller flower, is 
found in the grassy bog meadows from Wakeman's 
Island all up along the waterways quite through 
Lonetown. It does not grow in water, but among 
tufted grasses where threading springs that ooze 
up, drop by drop, keep its roots moist, the haunt 
beloved by the Blue Fringed Gentian of Autumn. 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 141 

When you see the weedy -looking sprays of Wild 
Forget-me-not, then go slowly and you will surely 
find grass clumps set thick with the slender, nar- 
row-leaved stems, each holding one, or perhaps 
two, rosy nodding flowers, the flat lip fringed and 
crested. If they are newly opened and the wind 
is blowing over them, a whiff of delicate fragrance 
will reach you before close contact reveals the 
whole strength of their perfume that is suggestive 
of Parma Violets. As you stand quite still, holding 
a blossom against your face, while you search about 
with your eyes, you will perhaps discover a trail of 
pink all across the meadow touching the brushy 
edge of the bog woods, where a veery is rather 
calling you to him than warning you away by 
his shrill alarm -note, whew whe-ew! and where, 
in anxious concealment, a low -nesting night 
heron, the last of a once clamorous tree -top 
colony, is waiting for your departure to come out, 
driven by necessity to openly hunt frogs for his 
greedy brood. 

Small as this Pogonia is, it adds a rosy color, 
and becomes a feature in the landscape of the rank 
marsh meadows of June. 

Occasionally flowering with Pogonia, but usually 
later, its blooming season lasting from late June 



142 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 



CALOPdcON 



to middle July, comes the Grass Pink or Calopogon 
of Gray and the earlier botanists. Its first bloom- 
ing is dated variously in my outdoor journals from 
June 19 in 1890 to June 28 in 1900, but as there are 
often ten or a dozen florets on a single stem, in 
moderate weather two weeks may pass between 
the opening of the lowest flower to the fading of 
the topmost on the scape. 

The name of Grass Pink is decidedly in- 
appropriate for it, and suggestive of a low- 
growing plant like the Creeping 
Phlox, which is also called by 
the same name locally. Calopo- 
gon, from* the Greek signify- 
ing beautiful beard, in reference 
to its fringed lip, is far more 
r suitable. 

J Here and there we find it 
1 j following in the wake of Po - 
gonia ; its slender stalks, a foot or 
two in height, with long, grass - 
like leaves, bearing the flowers well 
above the grass and low growths, to 
rest against a background of tall Cin- 
namon and Royal Ferns or Brakes. 
To find Calopogon playing its part 




SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 143 

broadly in the landscape, we must go down toward 
the Sea Gardens, where Cat -tail Flags and the 
coarse leaves of the half -grown Rose Mallow mark 
the tide channels. 

One hazy day in the first week of July, Flower 
Hat and I went to the Sea Gardens together, 
I for the annual festival of Calopogon, she skep- 
tically, in order to be convinced that within half 
a mile of the village Orchids could be found in 
such quantities as to give their purplish color to 
an acre of wild growth. Because Nell always 
objects to standing in the middle of a sandy road 
with nothing to investigate or nibble, and as the 
meadow footing was too treacherous for her to 
cross, we went a-wheel. I prefer walking on a 
flower hunt, but Flower Hat considered it too 
slow. That day, however, she learned that it is 
quicker to walk all the way than to ride part way 
and carry your bicycle "'cross lots" the other half; 
for no real flower- hunter, by any chance, ever 
comes out of a meadow or bit of wood by the way 
he or she enters, or goes and returns on the same 
side of a stream, if it be crossable. 

The meadow, or, rather, the open common, for 
nothing is fenced there, on each side of the road 
was white with the flat flower -clusters of Purple- 



144 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

stemmed Angelica, topping stout stalks sometimes 
six feet in height, and of the same general type 
of growth as Wild Carrot, but more vigorous and 
rigid throughout and with less compounded leaves. 
In pushing between these plants, a strong aromatic 
odor follows the bruising of even a single leaf. 
Long wands of Colic -root, rising from rosettes of 
lily-veined leaves, waved their mealy white, bell- 
shaped blossoms above masses of Brakes, dwarf 
Wild Roses, and Purple Milkwort, while the Elder 
Flowers in the tangled background of Silver Birches 
and Wild Crabs repeated in shrub form the color 
of the Angelica. 

We stood upon a long mound, that was the 
relic of a dyke thrown up years ago to keep the 
high tides, which sometimes ventured across the 
beach -crest and down the road, from drowning 
out the meadows, and looked across the expanse 
unbroken on either side for a mile or so, save for 
a few groups of Oaks that made dark islands in 
an inland sea of summer green. The sun came 
out, and Flower Hat blinked as she vainly tried to 
make the coquettish open-work brim of her head- 
gear shield her eyes; and then, humbly accepting 
a huge leaf of Cow Parsnip for a parasol, again 
scanned the landscape. 



' 






SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 145 

"Do you see any Orchids?" she asked, after a 
moment or two. "I J m sure I don't. Everything 
is big and common and all huddled together in an 
overgrown mess. I like the woods and runaway 
garden things much better. If you find one plant 
at a time you can keep your presence of mind. 
To make anything of this jumble of hundreds of 
everything is like trying to play an unfamiliar page 
from Tristan on a strange piano with a new maestro 
standing behind taking your musical measure." 

I laughed, and merely pointed to a clump of 
Cinnamon Ferns a dozen feet before us. 

"Oh!" exclaimed Flower Hat, dropping the 
Parsnip leaf and starting forward. 

About these Ferns the Calopogons had gath- 
ered in a sort of bow-knot, and then wandered off 
in an erratic course across the open, embroidering 
the green with cross stitches and fillets of a color 
neither purple nor pink. 

Flower Hat gathered a handful of the flower - 
spikes there were so many that any moderate 
picking would not destroy the effectiveness of the 
picture and suggested that we should go over into 
the shade to look at them. 

"Dainty from tip to toe!" she exclaimed, as 
she held up a flower -stalk with many triangular 

J 



146 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

buds still tight and trim at the top, while two or 
three freshly opened flowers at the bottom showed 
the broad -winged lip exquisitely crested and bearded 
with orange -yellow and deep pink hairs. 

"How could you see such a delicate tracery of 
color amid all that barbaric mass of gold and green 
that takes twenty tints in the bright sunlight?" 
she asked. 

"Partly by a practised eye, partly by intuition, 
partly by life -long knowledge of the component 
parts of these early July meadows," I said. "How 
do you, by glancing at a page of music, trace out 
a faintly suggested theme amid a thicket of other 
notes? Each to his craft, that is all." 

"Why!" she cried presently, "these flowers are 
set on the stalk somehow upside down! What 
was a lip in Twayblade is a lid." 

As I was about to explain the lack of the usual 
twist in the future seed-vessel that made Calopo- 
gon wear its chin on its forehead, contrary to 
family rules, a burst of bird music from a Crab 
tree overhead made us exchange signals of caution, 
and pause with bated breath. 

Robin, grosbeak, purple finch? What bird, 
keeping the spring ecstacy until midsummer, was 
pouring forth such song? He was a ventriloquist 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 147 

also, for the notes appeared to come from two 
parts of the tree at once. Instantly Flower Hat 
was on the alert, her sensitive ear rejoicing in the 
melody. In spite of the briars which enviously 
clutched at her rose garland and ribbons, she leaned 
gradually backward, until her head almost touched 
the ground, and peered up into the tree. 

Meanwhile I, by stretching the other way, dis- 
covered the singer, or, rather, singers for there 
were two of them splendid orchard orioles, brave 
in chestnut -and -black suits. They were first sing- 
ing at each other and then swaying sidewise to- 
ward some unseen object, going through the most 
remarkable gestures, opening and closing their wings 
and using them like arms, with all the impressive 
agony of tenors of the opera. Suddenly they 
stopped, gave a few scolding notes, launched at 
each other savagely, then flew to some tall black- 
berry canes where we could watch them easily, and 
striking effective attitudes, recommenced their song 
with frantic vigor. 

"What can all this be about?" Flower Hat 
whispered. 

" Cbercbez la femmef" I answered, pointing to 
an Elder Bush. 

"It is too late in the season for courting," she 



148 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

replied, at the same time following the direction of 
my finger with her eyes. 

"Infant, it is never too late, especially if your 
early Spring plans have come to grief. Besides, 
I 'm sure by the frantic hurry that those two birds 
are in, that they are young widowers in whose 
elated breasts 'hope is triumphing over experi- 
ence.'" 

On the Elder Bush toward which Flower Hat 
gazed, perched "la femme," in a subdued olive 
cloak and yellowish petticoat. She scarcely turned 
her head, yet saw all that was passing, and when 
the song ended in a pitched battle during which 
feathers flew, she joined not the victor, but the 
vanquished, where he went to plume himself in a 
distant Crab tree! 

The next time we went to the Sea Gardens, 
it was the last week in the same month, which 
had been a time of such dryness that we could 
easily drive across the meadows. Flower Hat was 
still skeptical about Orchids. 

"Yellow Fringed Orchis, do you say, growing 
in this withering heat? If you had said that they 
were in the wet meadows by Time o' Year's 
woods, where we found the splended purple fringy 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 149 

ones last week, I might believe you, but never 
here," she averred. 

"Yes, here," I persisted. "Orange and White 
Fringed and Ragged Green Orchis, too, with its 
finely cleft cross -shaped lip. Shut your eyes, and 
don't open them until I say, Now!" 

"Do be careful not to drive into that boggy 
pond at the end of Meeker 's ditch in your en- 
thusiasm," she answered, closing her eyes and 
grasping my arm as we jolted and bumped from 
the road across a gully into the open meadow. 

Beyond, from over the beach crest fringed with 
fruit -laden Wild Plum Bushes, the vibrating heat 
rose in sheets above the sand. Angelica was still 
in flower, and the small, bright, pea-shaped blos- 
soms of Wild Indigo feathered the open with lemon 
yellow. But this color paled before the waves of 
color varying from orange to salmon that closed 
around the wheels of the chaise after we had 
driven eastward for a couple of hundred yards. 

"Now!" I said, "look and see an Orchis land- 
scape in New England!" 

For the first and only time in my recollection, 
Flower Hat was speechless. 

Each summer two acres in extent are literally 
overwhelmed and drenched with the splendid color 



150 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 



of this barbaric orange flower. Yet its haunt has 
already been encroached upon by the onion -raiser 
and small farmer who, with growing intelligence, 
finds the deep rich soil well worth redeeming, 
until, I fear, another half dozen years will see 
this flower driven to a few uncultivatable borders. 
The plant -stalk itself sometimes grows three feet 
in height, with lance -shaped leaves and a flower - 
spike of often thirty florets with 
beard -shaped, fringed lips and 
long spurs. It is of firm growth, 
and yet, like so many plants of 
slightly brackish or marshy soil, 
loses quality when picked, often 
refusing to revive in water. 

Here and there I pointed out 
to Flower Hat a spike or two 
of the White Fringed Orchis, 
which looks like a small al- 
bino brother of the Orange, 
and also a few stray plants of 
the dull green Ragged Orchis, 
with a cross -shaped cleft lip. 
This last has a weedy look 
and is without any of the 
dainty fragility of the Fringed 




SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 151 

Orchises; consequently it must be classed with the 
botanist's flowers of purely intellectual interest. 

" My eyes are blind with color," said Flower 
Hat, at the end of fifteen minutes. "I will believe 
anything you tell me after this, and I 'm going 
to buy a soft felt hat with a brim that will turn 
down all round like a cowboy's!" 

Thus was her conversion completed, though she 
never wholly abandoned flowery hats; and for a 
reward I took her for our next outing to Time 
o' Year's wood to spend the day with Ferns, and 
to see, as she begged, "a nice cool Orchid in a 
shady place, within sound of running water." 

When August comes, the reign of the Orchid 
tribe is well-nigh over, and from this month on- 
ward it is represented by the group of Ladies' 
Tresses, the slender plants of wet meadows and 
grass -lands, whose narrow leaves give them at a 
little distance the appearance of some odd flower- 
ing grass or of a delicate white flax. If, however, 
you pick a stalk, round which the florets are set 
spirally so that the spike appears to be twisted, 
you will find the tribal likeness, the crystal white 
texture, and the delicate earthy fragrance. 



152 SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 

Of half a dozen species, two grow plentifully 
hereabout, one in the drier grass, one in the deep 
bog meadows, loved by Pogonia. The first, the 
Slender Ladies' Tresses, a fragile little plant with 
two plantain -like ground leaves, and a slender stalk 
a foot or more in length, around the top of which 
the flowers appear to be wound, like garlands about 
a May -pole, is abundant in August and September. 
The other, called Nodding Ladies' Tresses, stronger 
of growth and more fragrant, is the farewell Orchid 
of the year, having Asters for its companions; and 
when its moist haunts are sheltered, it often lingers 
into late October, in company with Fringed Gen- 
tians, and the fresh growth of Meadow Ferns 
that springs up after the Summer heat. 

There is a boulder -scattered ridge that rises 
from Time o' Year's river to the next range of 
hills. Between these boulders, time out of mind, 
great trees grew that have fallen into decay and 
been replaced by another and yet another gener- 
ation, so that all between the rocks is in dark 
shadow, and deep with wood -mold. The granite 
fragments are cloaked with Mosses, Polypodies, 
and Liverworts, while the rarer Spleen worts cling 
to where the dripping rocks interrupt a spring's 
course, and every dead stump and fallen bough 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 



153 



is fantastically trimmed with Lichens and fungus 
growths. 

This ridge, or "the mountain," as the hillside 
folk call it, is reached by the Tree -bridge, a 
Chestnut trunk hewn level on one side 
and thrown across the narrow mouth of 
the ravine through 
which the river flows. 

The first impres- 
sion on entering the 
wood, to which the 
bridge is the only pass 
across the river, is 
that it is the realm 
of Ferns alone. 
Flower Hat dropped 
quickly upon the near- 
est rock, and resting 
backward on one 
hand, declared: 

"I thought the 
meadows were dazzling enough, but here I posi- 
tively can distinguish nothing. It seems like surg- 
ing waves of green, breaking over a coast of green 
rocks, with green spray rising in the air." 




SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 



"Look where your hand is resting among the 
leaves," I said. 

There on a sloping bit between two rocks, so 
steep that the earth could not have lodged except 
for the twigs and wood debris, that made a pocket, 
nestled rosettes of round green leaves netted with 
white veins. From each tuft grew a shaft ending 
in a cone-shaped spike of small, pouched flowers, 
that glistened in the light with the crystal white- 
ness of the Indian Pipe, tinged with green shadows. 
"There is the nice cool Orchid in 
a shady place within sound of running 




SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 155 

water, and its name suits its haunt," I added 
wickedly, "Rattlesnake Plantain, from the mot- 
tlings on the leaves, their habit of growth, and 
the reputed cure afforded by the plant for the bite 
of the reptile." 

"Are rattlesnakes ever found here?" said Flower 
Hat, looking anxiously at the numerous holes be- 
neath the rocks, which really had a suggestive ap- 
pearance. "It is exactly the sort of place where 
that young school-teacher, who was out flower- 
hunting, backed into a den of the reptiles, and 
Elsie Venner stared them out of countenance and 
rescued him. No? " 

"It is certainly cool here," she continued, "and 
the river sound makes it seem even chilly. But I 
am not quite reconciled to calling such a pale mite 
of a flower an Orchid. I cannot rid myself of the 
feeling that the word implies something magnificent 
in itself, or rich in its massed coloring like the 
Calopogon and Orange Fringed Orchis in the Sea 
Gardens. The Lily- leaved Twayblade made a pic- 
ture, but there is surely no such quality to this 
homely flower." 

As she spoke, her eyes, now focused to the 
shade, again rested on the mat of plants. The 
light was concentrated upon them, and in the 



156 



SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS 



short interval they had seemingly moved into the 
foreground, quite filling it, while the Ferns, Mosses 
and boulders, retreating up the slope out of range, 
became tributary, merely a frame to enhance the 
Orchid's quaintness. 




VI 



POISONOUS PLANTS 

OUCH not, taste not " is 
written against but com- 
paratively few plants of the 
United States. Among 
the four thousand and odd species, 
either natives, introduced weeds, or 
garden escapes, growing between 
Newfoundland, the southern boundary 
of Virginia, the Atlantic Ocean and 
the region of the Great Plains, not 
more than thirty can be asserted posi- 
tively to contain elements of danger to man or to 
beast, from either the tasting or handling. 

Small as the list of the condemned is, it is 
none the less important that it should be made 
public, and each name stowed away carefully in the 
memory with the other danger signals of existence. 
It also seems very strange that these forbidden 
plants have not been presented as a group, the 
only satisfactory way to memorize them, in any of 
the popular botanies. In fact, it was not until 

'57 




158 POISONOUS PLANTS 

three years ago that the United States Department 
of Agriculture, itself continually reminded of the 
importance of the matter by reports of the real 
and oftentimes merely alleged cases of plant poison- 
ing sent to it, gathered such statistics as were 
provable, and through the medium of a Farmers' 
Bulletin, V. R. Chestnut's concise summary of the 
"Thirty Poisonous Plants of the United States" 
was issued. But widely as the pamphlet was 
distributed, it has failed to reach many of the 
very people to whom it would be of the greatest 
use, the increasing band of nature lovers, tak- 
ing the wood path perhaps for the first time, 
to find bird, flower, and fern in their haunts, 
and also the ardent amateur farmer, both male and 
female. 

Flower Hat never dreamed of evil, when one 
day in following me along a narrow road between 
wet meadows and woods, she broke off a branch 
from a harmless -looking shrub to use for brushing 
away the gnats. In a few hours, however, her 
mischievous gray eyes were closed tight, her face 
looked as if it had been in collision with a hive 
of very angry bees, and Poison Sumac was literally 
branded in her memory. Poison Ivy, with its hairy 
climbing stem and compound leaves, growing dis- 



POISONOUS PLANTS 159 

tinctly in threes, had hitherto been the only plant 
that said "Hands off!" to her. 

A man of affairs, also the maker of a country 
home, imbued with the love of wild nature and 
the desire to reestablish the plants that had once 
lived in a strip of lovely river woods and wild 
meadows that he owned, set out many hundred 
plants of Mountain Laurel and Wild Rhododendron 
one Autumn. A mild day early the next Spring 
made him think that his young Jersey cows would 
enjoy an airing outside of the protected winter 
stock -yard; so he dropped the bars between the 
cultivated and the wild. The cows trooped out 
eagerly enough, and seized the evergreen Laurels, 
the only green sprigs in sight. In a few hours, 
my friend, as an agriculturist, was blaming his 
thoughtlessness and regretting the despoiling of 
his shrubs. That night the fine young cows were 
discovered lying on their stable floor, seemingly 
blind, breathing with labor, and all in some of 
the various stages of drowsiness and stupor that 
precede death by poison. 

Then that young man, after he had returned 
from a four -mile race on horseback for the veteri- 
nary surgeon, and had stayed up all night obeying 
his peremptory orders, buried his best cow the next 



160 POISONOUS PLANTS 

day. In his capacity of stock-breeder, he then 
vowed that he would learn something about the 
poisonous plants of his own country. 

Even Time o' Year, who had handled the 
"Touch Nots" from boyhood, confessed not long 
since, " Nothin' used ter poison me, and now 
for some years back Ivy and Sumac both does, 
and I can't walk on the near side of a brush heap 
where Swamp Sunflower is drying without sneez- 
ing and coughing fit to choke;" showing that even 
he, to the manor born, did not understand the 
workings of these acrid plant juices, or know that 
to be once immune does not mean always to be 
so, for in middle and late life many succumb who 
were invincible. 

As it happens, nearly all of these plants are dis- 
tinctive and easy of identification, while the blos- 
soms and foliage of many place them among the 
flowers of landscape value. To clearly memorize 
the names and attributes of such of them as are 
likely to injure either ourselves or the cattle grazing 
about our homes, it is best to divide them in two 
groups: the tribes of Touch Not and Taste Not. 

First, let it be distinctly understood that those 
plants are excluded from the list from which poi- 
sonous or narcotic drugs are distilled, but which, in 



POISONOUS PLANTS l6l 

themselves, are not directly poisonous unless con- 
sumed in such large quantities that the taking of 
them could not be regarded as accidental. Prob- 
ably the greatest amount of suffering comes to the 
novice in field lore from the first of the groups. 
The second class is fatal to open-mouthed children 
whose chief test of anything is by taste, and also 
to the "stranger within our gates," who is constantly 
eating unknown roots, berries, or mushrooms from 
a fancied resemblance to some edible species of his 
own country. The Taste Nots are also espe- 
cially dangerous to the cattle -raiser of the Great 
Plains, who, in the poisonous plants constantly 
found in grazing lands, has presented to him many 
knotty problems. 

THE TRIBE OF "TOUCH NOT" 

We associate the word Sumac with rocky hill- 
sides covered by abruptly branching shrubs varying in 
height from dwarf bushes to small trees, that wear 
in Summer either shiny or velvety compound green 
leaves of many leaflets, and thick pyramids of yel- 
lowish green flowers, held erect at the ends of 
branches. In Autumn berry and leaf rival each 
other in an intensity of crimson color. Yet three 



POISONOUS PLANTS 





of the nomad tribe of Touch Not 
are harbored by this family, and 
bring unmerited disgrace upon the 
heads of innocent brethren. Poison 
Ivy, Poison Oak, and Poison Sumac, 
or Elder, as it is locally called, are true 
Sumacs, and yet possess differences which should 
prevent any danger of confused identity. 

The Poison Ivy is a vine entirely too common 
from Canada to Florida, and from the Atlantic 
coast to Utah. It is made up of a tough woody 
stem, thickly bearded with hairy air -roots by which 
it climbs over rocks, fences and to the tops of 
high trees, with leaves composed of three leaflets 
only, and wears in June loose clusters of dull 
greenish flowers growing from the leaf -axils, soon 
replaced by glassy, opaque berries of a similar hue. 
Thus equipped, it pursues its career of mingled 
beauty and vice. Being myself as yet immune to 
its poisoned breath and touch, I cannot but dwell 
upon its beauty, for it rivals the five-leaved Vir- 



POISONOUS PLANTS 163 

ginia Creeper in being one of the two most truly 
decorative vines of New England, making up what 
it lacks in grace of growth by an abrupt vigor. 
It covers stone heaps and tumble -down walls, 
lends new foliage to half-dead trees, and turns 
fence -posts into grotesque plant forms ; for when 
it reaches the top of a support and can climb no 
further, it promptly abandons its trailing habits and 
turns into a shrub, sticking out short arms in every 
direction until, in some places, one may find miles 
of rail fences with every post decorated by this 
bushy crown. The berries, though not sufficiently 
attractive to be dangerous to humanity, are eaten 




1 64 POISONOUS PLANTS 

by many winter birds, and the seeds so scattered 
establish the vine more firmly each year, for the 
only method taken by townships to eradicate the 
plague is to cut it annually with a stub scythe 
where it grows on the highways, a proceeding 
that merely increases its strength of root. 

When Autumn comes, Poison Ivy chooses its 
colors of mellow yellows, salmon - pink, bronze 
and crimson with discretion, individual vines often 
keeping distinct tones, some always turning plain 
yellow, and others varying from pink to crim- 
son without a single yellow tinge. Alack, how 
we shall miss this vine in the landscape when 
twentieth century magic perhaps shall have taught 
us to outwit it! 

So much for beauty. Now for the bad side 
of its character. Poison Ivy is full of an acrid 
oil, which does not easily evaporate upon the drying 
of the plant that generates it, and which, like 
other oils, does not dissolve in water. Conse- 
quently when it is liberated from the leaf tissue, 
and the merest touch will do it this oil at once 
permeates the skin of its victim and spreads its 
irritation on the surface, and not through the blood 
as was once supposed. To the susceptible a tin- 
gling of the skin may be the first warning that 



POISONOUS PLANTS 165 

they have even been in the vicinity of the plant; 
for to absolutely bruise the leaf is unnecessary with 
those easily affected, a mere whiff of the oil, 
slightly volatile as it is, being sufficient to trans- 
mit the poison. The tingling sensation is soon 
succeeded by watery blisters set deep in the tough- 
ened cuticle. These blisters are often thickest be- 
tween the fingers, behind the ears, or in folds of 
skin where the oil remains undisturbed. 

Of course it is best to avoid Poison Ivy, but it 
is hardly possible so to do if one desires to learn 
more of nature than can be seen from a piazza or 
from a neatly graveled garden walk. In fact, even 
there this vine may be found sneaking its way 
along an arbor, where a myrtle warbler, seeking 
shelter on a wintry day, has dropped the seed. 
So, after having done your best to shun the vine 
with a hairy, woody stem, three leaflets and greenish 
white berries, try to rid the skin as quickly as pos- 
sible of the oil when once it has touched you. If 
you are by a roadside or in a field, take a handful 
of dust or fresh earth and rub the spot of contact 
thoroughly. Water will avail little in removing 
such a persistent oil. This is an invention of my 
own for absorbing the oil, that I use with great 
success upon my field companions, Flower Hat 



1 66 POISONOUS PLANTS 

having many times been saved by it. Then, when 
you can reach a drugshop, have prepared a saturate 
solution of sugar of lead in seventy -five parts alco- 
hol (alcohol cuts oil) to twenty -five parts water. 
Be sure that this prescription is marked poison 
and ornamented with a red skull and cross-bones, 
before you take a clean bit of cotton, sop your 
afflicted spots with the solution and put the rest 
away for future use. Sugar of lead is deadly when 
taken internally, but as an unfailing remedy for the 
horrible irritation of Ivy poison it is a clear but 
exceptional case of two wrongs making a right. 

The double qualities of beauty and evil possessed 
by this plant were truly if sentimentally summed 
up in a poem written by a North countryman, 
who once worked for us, his mind being more 
ready to immortalize weeds in legends than his 
fingers to eradicate them from the paths. Not 
being familiar with the language of the Sagas, in 
which the verses were given me, I asked for an 
interpretation. The Poet willingly dropped his hoe, 
clasped his hands, and, choking with the emotional 
memory of his recent and first experience in poi- 
soning by a gorgeous and deceitful vine that he 
had plucked and brought home over his shoulder, he 
began in a whisper, which rapidly arose to a shriek : 



POISONOUS PLANTS 167 

"Once there was a woman, very beautiful, tall, 
slender and bending. She had a lovely color in her 
face and wild eyes that shot fire and were gray 
and green and golden at one time. Her robes 
wreathed about her and were more beautifully gar- 
nished than the Spring fields. But she was false! 
Then for her punishment she was turned into a 
vine, wearing in its season the colors that her eyes 
had flashed, a vine so beautiful that all men 
desire to possess it, but deadly to the touch. 
Though some are of such strength and good 
blood that they at first may handle it, yet they 
know not when their hour of trouble may come! " 

Of the other two Sumacs, the Poison Oak, or 
California Poison Sumac, occupies the same place 
in the west as the Poison Ivy does in the eastern 
part of the country. Its leaves are thicker and 
more rounded, but its manner of poisoning as well 
as the remedies for it are the same. The third, 
the Poison Sumac, though not having found its 
way as far west and not generally as common as the 
Poison Ivy, is doubly dangerous because it is less 
known and its poison is even more intense, often 
producing the symptoms of erysipelas. This plant, 
locally known as Poison Elder, Poison Ash or Poison 



i68 



POISONOUS PLANTS 



Dogwood r is found sometimes as a low bush, only a 
few feet in height, sometimes as an uneven tree of 
twenty feet or more. Its leaves are compounded of 
many leaflets, 9-15, like those of other Sumacs, 
though these leaflets are less pointed and suggest 
those of a young Ash. Also, the leaflets do not 
lie flat to the central stalk, but are keeled, as it 
were, and curve up in a winged manner. In 
the early season the leaf stems 
and middle veins are a 
pale pink; this is an 
important point to 
note when the fruit 
is absent. The ber- 
ries of the Poison Su - 
mac are greenish 
white and hang down in loose 
bunches like stunted frost 
grapes. The berries of the 
harmless Sumacs are red, 
and held erect in solid pyr- 
amids. The Poison Sumac 
grows invariably in damp, if 
not absolutely marshy 
ground. The harmless Sumacs prefer dry and 
rocky soil. It is well for Nature students to 




POISONOUS PLANTS 1 69 

search out this shrub and identify it in its haunt, 
for future avoidance, as it is one of the decorative 
bushes of Autumn whose leaves work sad mis- 
chief through being gathered to decorate houses 
and churches, or for pressing. 

Many of the hillside folk call it Bush Ash, and 
deny the poisonous qualities which they have never 
personally experienced. One day when I was re- 
turning from a Lonetown excursion with the chaise 
full of the glistening leaves of the Smooth Sumac, 
a " berry woman " with whom I had often had 
dealings stopped me a very unusual proceeding 
to exclaim, "You '11 be p'isoned blind with that 
Shumac, sure as yer alive." 

I explained its innocence to her, reasons, red 
berries and all, and warned her that a large bundle 
of branches which she was carrying to decorate the 
school -house for a harvest -home supper, was chiefly 
composed of the true Poison Sumac. 

No, I was mistaken. What she had was "just 
Bush Ash." She 'd always picked it when she was 
a girl; a peddler told her the shiny kind was poison, 
and his mother was an herb doctor, and so he knew. 
Why, anybody could see that it was the poison that 
made the leaves shine ; it all lay in a varnish on top ! 

She proceeded on her way, but two weeks after- 



170 POISONOUS PLANTS 

ward I learned from Time o' Year that the poor 
woman had nearly died of Sumac poisoning. All 
of which proved that since the days when she 
had touched it freely, she had passed into middle 
life, that indefinite toll-gate on the road which 
had robbed her of the immunity of earlier days. 

In addition to these three Sumacs there are 
two plants, "garden escapes," which contain both 
acrid, milky juice and berries that are highly poi- 
sonous. These are the Caper Spurge and its 
brother, which is sold in catalogues under the 
name of "Snow on the Mountain;" both are re- 
lated to the Cypress Spurge of old gardens, and 
resemble it in the shape of the flowers. The 
Caper Spurge has small, greenish yellow flowers 
followed by showy, caperlike, three -seeded fruit. 
Snow on the Mountain is an annual weed of the 
Plains. Under cultivation it grows two or three 
feet in height, its lower leaves being green, oval, 
and pointed, while the upper, clustering around 
the flowers, are distinctly edged with white. Its 
milky juice is so intensely acrid and blisters the 
skin so readily that Texan stock -raisers have been 
known to use it for branding cattle instead of 
the customary hot irons. This plant should be 
carefully excluded from gardens, and dropped from 



POISONOUS PLANTS IJI 

seedsmen's catalogues, for I have seen the fingers 
of little children terribly scarred from picking it. 
It is also a menace to bee-keepers, for a little 
of the pollen will render honey uneatable. 

Several of the Goldenrods and Ragweeds have 
pollen which, when inhaled, has an irritating effect 
upon those liable to hay fever and catarrh ; and 
the Swamp Sunflower of our waterways has earned 
its common title of Sneezeweed from causing, by 
its pollen and dried blossoms, an irritation so mis- 
chievous as to make it akin to a poison. 

Every one knows this cheerful, Sunflower-like 
plant, with its thick, lance-shaped leaves, the 
flowers in a tufted center surrounded with toothed, 
wide -ended yellow rays, for it follows the water- 
ways from Canada to the Gulf, and finds enough 
moisture to sustain it even in Arizona. Cattle 
may be affected by eating the young plants, or the 
flowers dried in hay, the result being a sort of 
asthmatic giddiness, and sometimes, in the case of 
young animals, death from convulsions. 



THE TRIBE OF "TASTE NOT" 

Those plants should rank as most important 
that directly threaten the life of man. Among 



172 POISONOUS PLANTS 

these the Death Cup and Fly Amanita, Water 
and Poison Hemlock will stand first, second, third 
and fourth, Jimson Weed fifth, as poisonous plants 
that are eaten from their resemblance to edible 
species of their various families, and which there- 
fore are more to be feared than those plants eaten 
through a momentary attraction of fruit, or from 
the careless habit of chewing random leaves and 
twigs. 

The Fly Amanita and the Death Cup (Ama- 
nita pballoides) are primarily among the most con- 
spicuous as well as the most deadly of fungi. The 
majority of the family are fatally poisonous, and 
every year sees the list lengthened of those who 
have died from eating some member of it. 

In spite of Hamilton Gibson's delightful book 
upon "Edible Fungi" and Professor G. F. Atkin- 
son's recent exhaustive "Studies of American Fungi, 
Mushrooms Edible, Poisonous," etc., I would cau- 
tion the novice to content himself with gathering 
the common Meadow Mushroom only. This is 
easy to place, with its nutty odor, white or slightly 
smoky top; pink to brown gills, according to the 
freshness of the plant, and a stem dwindling just 
below ground, and NEVER set in a cup- like socket. 
I should advise him to let all other fungi entirely 



POISONOUS PLANTS 173 

alone, no matter how edible some species may be 
under proper conditions. The more or less distinct 
cup -like setting to the stem is a good mark of 
identification to the fatal Death Cup, for the nov- 
ice. Let him avoid it. 

Fly Amanita is the most picturesque and strik- 
ing of our earth -growing fungi, and where it ap- 
pears in profusion, as it does under the evergreens 
in our home grounds during the Autumn months, 
it is a plant of decided landscape value, introducing 
gamboge, orange, and even vermilion into deep shade 
which, the season through, knows no other colors 
than the green of Ferns and Partridge Vine, with 
the brown of leaf-mold. 

This Amanita is stout of stem and cap. I gath- 
ered some specimens last September that stood a 
foot high, and measured fourteen inches across the 
white gilled cap which varied through all shades of 
yellow to red and was covered with corklike warts. 
The swelled, scaly base of the stalk does not take 
a clearly marked cup -shape, as in kindred forms. 
Fortunately, however, there is no chance of mis- 
taking this gorgeous creature for the safe and Cin- 
derella-like Meadow Mushroom. The plant is a 
deadly poison, whose juices are used in Europe as 
the basis of fly poisons, and when eaten by man 



174 POISONOUS PLANTS 

it means almost certain death by heart paralysis. 
Cattle are also affected by it, and it is unwise 
either to handle the plants or to risk inhaling their 
fumes while fresh or the spore -dust when dry. I 
was made unpleasantly aware of the toxic qualities 
of Fly Amanita while taking the accompanying 
photograph at close range on a damp day, and thus 
spending half an hour or so in company of a double 
score of the fungi. 

But even this rank Amanita is less likely to 
cause trouble than its smaller, paler kinsman of the 
distinctly cupped stem the Death Cup. This has 
a smooth, satiny top, which may be either white, 
spotted, or tinted yellow; it also has white gills 
and a white stem. As a whole, at a casual glance, 
it does not look unlike a large Meadow Mushroom, 
and for this reason is doubly dangerous. It also 
sometimes strays from its proper wood haunts, to 
lawns and meadow edges. Remember the fatal cup 
at the root, and the white gills. Remember also 
that a mere fragment is enough to kill a man, and 
beware of it, for there is no rank taste nor odor 
to give warning, and the poison does not begin to 
work until eight or nine hours after it has been 
eaten. Then all care is unavailing. 

Two plants of the Carrot tribe follow in their 



POISONOUS PLANTS 



175 






turn, the Water and the Poison 
Hemlock, well known to the 
ancients. 

The Water Hemlock is the 
commoner of the two. It is a 
smooth, straight herb, and has 
a spindle-shaped, perennial root, a 
hollow stem, much-divided com- 
pound leaves, and flat clusters of 
white flowers of the Wild Carrot 



176 POISONOUS PLANTS 

and Parsnip type. It grows in wet places, and is 
therefore likely to be eaten by children who are 
hunting in Spring for the roots of Sweet Cicely. 
In the United States alone this plant destroys many 
human victims annually, besides doing untold injury 
to cattle that drink from pools poisoned by its de- 
caying roots. 

The Poison Hemlock proper has finer Parsley - 
like leaves and a biennial root; its stem is purplish 
and spotted, thus tending to confuse it with the 
Purple -stemmed Angelica. This Hemlock yields 
from its seeds and from the leaves at flowering 
time an alkaloid poison called conine, a drug well 
known to the ancients, and which furnished the 
death draught of Socrates. The dried seeds also 
cause mischief, as they are sometimes gathered by 
mistake for Anise. 

The fifth plant, Jimson (Jamestown) Weed, or 
Stramonium, belongs to the Nightshade, or, as it 
is now called, the Potato family, a tribe contain- 
ing plants of diverse attributes good and evil the 
Tomato, Potato, Tobacco, Henbane and all the 
Nightshades of which the European species yielding 
Belladonna is the most deadly. Common Stramo- 
nium is a rank plant of waste places, deserted back 
gardens and ash heaps, and therefore has many local 



POISONOUS PLANTS 177 

nicknames Thorn-apple, from its prickly seed- 
pods, Stinkweed and Jamestown Lily. It is also 
the "White Man's Plant" of the Indians. 

Near at hand Jimson Weed is an unlovely herb 
four or five feet high, with coarse leaves and heavy - 
scented white, five -ridged flowers of the tubular 
form of the Morning -Glory. At a distance it be- 
comes one of the boldest of landscape plants, its 
great white blossoms standing out with startling 
effect from amid the dirt and confusion of its sur- 
roundings. Children sometimes eat the seeds or 
suck the sickishly sweet nectar, and cattle are 
injured by the leaves, which oftentimes find 
their way into fodder and hay. 

Bittersweet, Wood, or Climb- 
ing Nightshade are the names 
given to a woody climber, also 
belonging to the Potato 
tribe. This vine, seldom 
growing more than eight or 
ten feet in length, is commonly 
seen from Massachusetts west- 
ward to Ohio, among the tan- 
gled shrubbery that follows 
brooks and ditches, though in 
the Lonetown region I have 




178 



POISONOUS PLANTS 



often found it trailing over stone fences in com- 
paratively dry fields. It has coarse, thin leaves of twc 
patterns a custom of many herbs and trees, from 
the Convolvulus to the Sassafras the lower leaves 
being of a strangely divided heart-shaped form, the 




upper spear-like. The purple flowers, suggesting 
the type of the Potato blossom, are followed by 
loose clusters of clear, bright red berries, which, 
though of a bittersweet flavor, are very attractive to 
children and are poisonous if eaten in any quantity. 
Black Nightshade, a near relative of this climber, 
is an annual herb two feet high, often found in old 
gardens and in cultivated soil that has been neg- 
lected. It has ovate leaves with waved edges, a 



POISONOUS PLANTS 



179 



small white flower of the typical Nightshade pat- 
tern, and round, black, juicy berries that cause 
cramps and other unpleasantness to the human 
consumer. The plant itself should also be kept 
out of the reach of the smaller animals, such as 
sheep and calves. 

A curious fact concerning some cultivated plants 
of the Potato family is that, while certain portions 
may be edible, other parts of the same plant are 
poisonous. Thus the tuberous roots of Potatoes are 
edible, but the seed -pods, looking like little green 
Tomatoes, are injurious, while with Tomatoes it is 
the fruit -like seed -pod that is eaten. 

Pokeweed is another rather poisonous plant, 
growing almost across the entire continent in moist 
places or where the drainage of compost and refuse 
heaps has enriched the 
ground. It is also locally 
called Pigeon Berry, Garget, 
or Red -ink Plant. 




ISO POISONOUS PLANTS 

This succulent herb, with reddish purple stems, 
large coarsely veined leaves and long sprays of small 
white flowers which droop like the blossoms of the 
Choke Cherry, springs from a tough, perennial 
root and in a few months will often grow to a 
height of eight feet. As the season advances and the 
flowers are followed by berries, at first green, then 
passing through red to a purple -black, Poke weed 
gradually leaves the procession of weeds, and devel- 
ops decided picturesque qualities, filling the corners 
of fields and pastures with its richly -colored groups, 
and reaching over gray stone walls and old fences 
to dangle its fruit by the roadside. The fresh 
shoots of this plant are sometimes cooked by coun- 
try folk in lieu of Asparagus. Great care, however, 
is necessary in the preparation thereof, and not a 
fragment of the root must be used, as it pos- 
sesses strong medicinal properties, acting as a vio- 
lent emetic, causing much distress, and even death, 
when it has been eaten by mistake for Artichoke 
or Horse-radish. Though birds eat the berries 
quite freely, they are believed to be poisonous to 
humanity. 

False Hellebore, the swamp plant with crumpled 
lily-like leaves and green flowers, that we found 
growing with the Skunk Cabbage and Adder's 



POISONOUS PLANTS l8l 

Tongue by the brook in early Spring, also carries 
poison in its berry, leaf, and root. It is harmful 
to chickens, horses, cattle, and man, certain people 
being especially prone to gather its young shoots 
and roots to use as "greens" in Spring a time 
when all such growths are difficult to identify by 
the untutored, and are therefore always to be 
avoided. 

The pretty purple -pink Corncockle, or Rose 
Campion of old rf^JKU^ gardens, has now 
become a noxious cJb&J/WvJ wee d> to be up- 
rooted wherever 
grain is grown. 
Though the whole 
plant contains an irritant 
poison, the seed does the 
most mischief when care- 
lessly mixed with wheat, 
ground into flour or min- 
gled in any quantity with 
other grains or with fod- 
der. The rough black seed- 
coverings are easily detected, 
however, and wheat or rye 
seed having a sprinkling of 
them should invariably be rejected. 




1 82 POISONOUS PLANTS 

Of herbs, shrubs and trees that affect grazing 
cattle more or less, there are twelve species, all of 
them of conspicuous growth. Among these are 
the Dwarf, Purple and Wyoming Larkspurs of the 
middle and extreme west, the first wearing blue or 
white flowers in Spring, the second beautiful deep 
blue blossoms in Summer, and the last, particularly 
common in the Montana grazing country, showing 
a single wand of intensely blue flowers, from April 
to July, according to location. 

The injury done to stock by the Woolly and 
Stemless Loco Weeds of the Great Plains has 
caused immense bounties to be paid for their ex- 
termination. Through these plants horses, more 
frequently than range cattle, suffer from what is 
apparently a slow wasting disease, ending in death, 
as if by starvation. A similar poison is contained in 
the closely related Rattlebox, a rough, hairy herb of 
the Pea Family, whose small yellow flowers bloom 
all Summer, followed by short, black pods in which 
the seeds can be heard to rattle. The range of 
the plant is westward, from the Atlantic seaboard, 
and it is quite common in sandy and dry soil here 
in Connecticut. 

The Heath tribe distributes a poison particularly 
affecting the respiration, in Mountain Laurel, Small 



POISONOUS PLANTS 183 

Laurel or Lambkill, Rhododendron, Staggerbush, 
and Branch Ivy or Calfkill. Staggerbush is a low 
shrub growing south of Connecticut, with thick 
leaves and handsome clusters of white, blueberry - 
shaped flowers. Branch Ivy, with saw - toothed 
evergreen leaves, and inconspicuous white flowers 
having a nauseating odor, is unknown here, 
and is only troublesome in the Alleghanies be- 
tween southern Georgia and West Virginia. 

Lastly comes Black Wlto ctfe fifty 
Cherry, a graceful tree, 
that has stepped out of 
its native forest in the 
Middle Atlantic States 
to saunter along 
roadways, following 
fences across lots and 
quenching its thirsty 
roots at the pasture 
springs. In May and June it waves its glossy green 
leaves and fragrant white flower -sprays on every side, 
in early Autumn replacing these with brilliant foli- 
age and bunches of pungent, juicy black cherries. 

Yet a fatal sort of beauty has Black Cherry, 
for, owing to that very quality and to the ex- 
cellence of its fruit for compounding the delect- 




1 84 POISONOUS PLANTS 

able cordial called Cherry Bounce, few people 
dream of the mischief it may do to cattle, until 
they are taught by at least one fatal experience. 

The green and growing leaves and branches are 
harmless, but when broken by the wind, as often 
happens, or in any way left to wither in a place 
where cattle can eat them, they become a source 
of danger. When cattle eat either withered leaves 
or branches, sickness always follows and frequently 
death, from paralysis of the lungs caused by the 
prussic acid in the tree. This same acid is what 
gives the pleasant and harmless flavor to the fruit 
juice, but at the same time, if the pits are swal- 
lowed by children and the kernels digested, the re- 
sult is sometimes fatal. Birds devour these berries in 
quantities, but, as can plainly be seen, they digest 
the pulp alone and the pit is passed unchanged. 

So much for the poisonous plants, few in num- 
ber, easy to be identified, to be neither touched nor 
tasted, but visited in their haunts. While, at the 
safe distance that knowledge spreads between us 
and them, we may enjoy the better part of their 
dual natures as, blended with worthier stuffs, they 
weave their varied patterns and hues into the end- 
less garment of the Magician. 



VII 




THE FANTASIES 
OF FERNS 

IN the old flower lan- 
guage, the Fern was the 
symbol of sincerity. In the 
wood language, the mystic 
speech of the Magician, the 
Fern stands for silence. Are 
not these interpretations the same? 
The Fern is a voiceless sentinel 
of the silent woodlands; it has no 
flower to draw to it the hum of 
insects. Around the margins, or 
following the veins of its fronds, 
gather the intangible spores scarce 
deserving the name of seed till, 
in a further stage of development, 
they generate the dual forms which 
mutually perpetuate the race. 
185 



1 86 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

The Fern does not appeal directly to insect 
or man through a specialized color, or perfume. 
The wind passing through the trees of the forest, 
or among the reeds of the marshes, moves them 
to seeming articulate speech, but it tosses the 
heavily massed banks of Ferns, and sweeps the 
brake jungles on the wild commons, swaying them 
to and fro, while the silence that follows their 
motion is as deep as when the pad -footed cat 
hurries over soft turf, springs noiselessly, misses its 
quarry, and crouches once more, to the eye a 
bewilderment of unheard action. 

From the very circumstances of its evolution and 
growth, the Fern is more aloof than the flowering 
plants and also lacks the personal attributes which 
have given familiar names to blossoming things. 
These varied attributes have led flowers through 
the gates of poetry into the more serious realm 
of prose, until they not only have become a part 
of literature, but have a literature all their own, 
while their hold on household love increases like 
their race. 

Not so with Ferns. They have scanty litera- 
ture and few gracious names. Their tribal Golden 
Age had passed before man came to read their 
meaning. Back in the time of ancient life they 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 187 

were evolved, and held sway when fishes were the 
highest type of animals. Then gigantic forms of 
Ferns, Lycopods and Horsetails, did their work 
of absorbing the carbonic acid gas from the sur- 
charged air, and transforming it into mighty forests, 
the only terrestial verdure. This work complete, 
the atmosphere purified, these forests were in their 
turn submerged, turned slowly to vast beds of coal, 
and higher plant forms appeared above them. 
Though the Fern tribe as a modified type remains, 
it has dwindled in numbers and stature until the 
extinct species far exceed the living, so that the 
tribe that once was all in all, now holds a little 
fiftieth part of the earth's flora, and is a mere back- 
ground, as it were, for the varied forms, glowing 
colors, and soft perfumes which blend to dower the 
flowering plants with the fascination of personality. 

"I wonder why Ferns are such nameless sort of 
things, not nearly so livable and lovable as flowers," 
said Flower Hat, as she leaned against a sloping 
rock, cushioned with moss and Polypody, cast aside 
her hat among a mass of Christmas Ferns, and 
rumpled her hair after a fashion of her own "to 
let it breathe," as she said, all the time fanning idly 
with a broad Fern frond. 



1 88 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

It was the afternoon in early August when we 
had gone to Time o' Year's woods, crossing Tree- 
bridge to find Rattlesnake Plantain and then to 
have a Fern hunt through haunts that were in part 
both moist and dry, continuing along the grassy 
meadow edges and strip of bog that, together with 
the river, bounded the woods on three sides. At 
that moment we sat resting, listening to the sound 
of the water coming down the rocky glen, its voice 
deepened and strengthened by two days of steady 
rain, and looking at the graceful draperies that the 
Ferns were casting about the rocks and trailing 
down the river banks, heaping their gauzy fabric 
so recklessly near the water's edge that it seemed 
as though a breeze would blow it in, while the 
long, pliant Lady Ferns, drooping, covered each 

other's roots until 
they had all the sin- 
uous grace of vines. 
"Of course it's be- 
cause so few Ferns 
have easy remember- 
able English names, 
and the lack of the 
name, I suppose, is 
because Ferns have 




THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 189 

no flowers with color and shape to suggest it," con- 
tinued Flower Hat. "We used to go on 'botany 
walks' when I was at school near Hartford. In 
those days even, Ferns seemed such dumb plants; 
and, to my obtuse mind, there were only three 
kinds. One was Maidenhair, which is easy to 
remember because it is quite unlike anything else. 
Another, the Climbing Fern, with scalloped leaves, 
is almost all rooted out by this time the kind that 
twists its stalk around the wood Goldenrods and 
weeds in moist places; the vine sometimes ends in 
a spray covered with rusty dust, looking like seaweed 
or leaves that had gone wrong. The third was 
the Walking Fern, which grew high up on rocky 
places; a Fern that we had to scramble on our 
hands and knees to find. And when we found it, 
every one cried 'Ah! Oh!' yet it was n't much of 
a Fern after all, even though it had a reasonable 
name. It was merely a tuft of lengthened -out 
leaves, each one stretching as far as it could, then 
dipping down to root at the end, and start another 
plant, like a sort of vegetable measuring - worm. 
The seed-dust, spores, or whatever you call them, 
were scattered zigzag over the under side of some 
of the leaves, for all the world like the caraway 
seeds on cookies. These three Ferns I could re- 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



member, but all the rest seemed alike to me, com- 
mon Ferns. 

"Lately, however, since fate has decided that I 
must live in the real country for more than half the 
year, and I 've taken to following you * thorough 
brake, thorough briar ' like an obedient spaniel, I 've 
noticed a great deal of expression in these same com- 
mon Ferns. They seem to have little ways all their 
own, and meanings, too, if we could read them, 
nothing wonderful, nothing really grand like what 
the trees whisper to one, only something airy and 
mysterious, scraps of songs without words which 
they think to themselves perhaps." 

w< If trees are Nature's thoughts or dreams, 

And witness how her great heart yearns, 
Then she has only shown, it seems, 
Her lightest fantasies in ferns,'" 

I quoted, "and if you wish to see a score or more 
of these common Ferns in their haunts, and call 
each one by a name easy to remember, this is the 
season, for all Ferns have reached perfection now; 
and this is the place also, for here in a half-mile 
circle through Time o' Year's country, grow most 
of the familiar landscape Ferns which you would 
find if you tramped New England over. 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS IQI 

"Oh, you are eager forward, march! Take a 
few steps, stand by that great rock and look down. 
Is not this place in truth haunt of the Ferns ? " 

Around the feet and below on the river edge, 
grow the great fronds of the Osmundas, or Flow- 
ering Ferns, so called because their fruit is borne on 
partly or wholly separate stalks 
from the green leafage. There 
are three of these, swamp 
Ferns, growing in de- 
cided crowns, with 
fronds often six 
feet in length, the 
largest of their 
tribe as we know 
it in New Eng- 
land. They are all 
landscape Ferns 
beside, upon which 
we must depend 
in late Spring and 
Summer for the dense jun- 
gle-like effects in woods 
and shaded road -edges, which the 
Brake, with its much-divided, 




I Q2 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

spreading leaves gives to the open common and 
drier wild pastures. 

In Spring this "flowering" fern clan is the first 
to assert itself, for it is their sturdy, wool-mittened 
fists that push through the mold, under sheltered 
banks, in company with Wake Robin, Anemones, 
and Violets, and the unfolding of the heavy, succu- 
lent leafage is a charming feature of the Spring 
woods and roadside runnels. 

Of the three, Clayton's and the Cinnamon Fern 
are the most conspicuous in their early stages. 
When Clayton's Fern unfolds, the small fronds 
(as Fern leaves are called) are wholly green, but 
with the taller fronds, midway up, the color is 
interrupted by a few pairs of fertile leaflets, or 
pinna , as they are known in Fern lore; then the 
green leaves are resumed again, and continue to 
the summit. 

From this manner of bearing the fruit midway, 
Michaux called it the Interrupted Fern, a most 
tangible name, and one that suggests itself the 
moment the eye rests upon the plant. After Mid- 
summer, when the spores are ripe, and their cases 
turn dark, these fertile leaves have a shabby look, 
and generally die away, giving place to great, palm- 
like tufts of the broader, sterile fronds. 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 1 93 

Cinnamon Fern carries its fertility wholly on 
separate spikes, green and woolly at first, then 
taking a cinnamon hue after the spores have been 
shed. This tint both supplies the plant's name 
and gives a warm color to the masses of coarse 
green fronds that, springing in crowns from a vig- 
orous, deep -set rootstock, often take possession of 
entire swamp meadows in such numbers that they 
are mown down in late August, together with the 
coarse grass, for cattle bedding. 

Regalis, the Royal Fern, is more dainty and 
clear-cut of leaf than the other two, and loves the 
water. Here down upon the river edge it is now 
growing in fresh luxuriance, the outer fronds dip- 
ping in the stream that mirrors them. The fertile 
leaflets are on the top of some of the much -di- 
vided fronds. At first they are green; then, when 
the spores are shed, they turn first snuff -colored, 
then dark brown, and finally wither away, so that 
its greenery of late Summer is due to the wholly 
sterile fronds that are constantly replacing old or 
shabby growths. 

Delicate as even the stoutest Ferns appear to 
be, they have a wonderful persistency about them. 
Lovers of shade and moisture, when once well 
rooted, they will remain in a haunt after the shel- 

M 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 




taring trees have been removed so long as their 
roots can find a drop of moisture. Of course they 
suffer in quality, the growth is stunted, the fronds 
are less relaxed and spreading, but beyond Sun- 
flower Lane, on the edge of the Sea Gardens, 
there was once a wood where is now a spongy 
meadow opened to the untempered blaze of the 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 1 95 

sun. Out in this open place, adding strange tints 
to the tawny marsh colors and the whites of An- 
gelica and Colic Root, are masses of Brakes, Cin- 
namon, and Royal Ferns, still growing bravely, even 
though their seared tops are constantly drying away 
and calling upon the roots for renewal. And these 
sturdy roots, can you reach them by any moderate 
digging ? No ; deeper and deeper they have crept 
for self -protection, and to supply the juices de- 
manded of them by their unaccustomed situation. 

As you leave the larger Ferns by the water and 
look up the bank from the river to the mountain- 
side, Ferns, and Ferns only, fill the eye, but of a 
wholly different character, not waving and droop- 
ing in languid succulence, but smaller, more rigid 
and leathery, of a deeper color, the distinct round 
fruit -dots following the veins on the leaf -back, 
in short, the Common Rock Fern or Polypody, 
which carpets with cheerful evergreen fronds the 
rocks that are piled step -like up the slope, tier upon 
tier, as far as eye can see. The Polypody has 
slender, creeping roots, that bind the plants to- 
gether, as they almost hang over the ledges, like 
mountain climbers held from falling by a retaining 
rope. They decorate decaying tree trunks, when- 



ig6 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



ever these interrupt the line of march, and gather 
about the hollows between the boulders piled by 
glacial force. Each fox-lair becomes a fairy grotto, 
and we are no longer in New England woods, 
but in an enchanted forest of Romance Land. 

"Where nimble fay and pranksome elf 
Flash vaguely past at every turn, 

Or, weird and wee, sits Puck himself 
With legs akimbo on a Fern !" 

We certainly owe a 
debt of love to the half 
dozen Evergreen 
Ferns of woods and 
open. Upon them, 
in many places 
where neither Lau- 
rel nor Hemlocks 
grow, devolves the 
wearing of the Magi- 
cian's green gage 
above the white -spread 
lists of Winter, where 
Frost holds tourney, challeng- 
ing all to deadly combat, and 




A few steps more! Stand- 



BBBjjfl| 




THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 1 97 

ing and turning about slowly in this enchanted 
place one finds Fern pictures crowding in on every 
side. At the feet group the dull, dark green, once- 
divided fronds of the Evergreen Wood Fern, grow- 
ing from six inches to almost two feet in length. 
The stems are covered with chaff where they join 
the root, and the round spore -cases follow the frond 
edges, on the underside as Fern rule orders. 

Away toward the left, where the sky-line shows 
through the trees, a bed of clean -washed Christmas 
Ferns spreads its enameled, feather -divided leafage 
about the trunk of a Beech, the sifting light 
catching and reflecting upon the glossy leaves as 
on a mirror. 

Above Tree Bridge the woods have the double 
quality of being both wet and dry. By this I mean 
that the soil is never boggy, being made of lightest 
leaf-mold, and yet the moisture follows the mass 
of rocks, and rising from the river, is condensed in 
such abundance that, to the eye at least, nothing 
ever seems dry. 

Once above the abrupt, rocky slope, there is a 
stretch of rolling, high -shaded wood, which rises 
gradually, to be divided by a lane road that winds 
through alternate wood and wild meadow in what 
is called the Den District. 



ig8 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



These woods are carpeted chiefly by the Lady 
Fern, the common Fern of thickets and moist tan- 
gles. It also follows stone walls with its twice - 
parted feathery fronds, which often rival Silver 
Spleenwort in height. The Lady Fern is es- 
sentially graceful and of a lace -like texture, 
the stems are often somewhat colored, 
varying from green to yellow, with a 
pink cast. In late Summer the fronds 
themselves take brownish and golden 
tints, which give them added land- 
scape value. The spore cases are 
slightly crescent-shaped, and curve 
outward from the veins that hold 




THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



1 99 



them, oftentimes being so deeply im- 
pressed as to make an imprint on the 
upper side of the frond. 

Mingling with the Lady Fern, 
toward open edges, and creeping out 
into the fields by way of damp places, 
is the Slender Wood, or New York 
Fern, as Doctor Britton calls it, thus 
properly giving the translation of its 
Latin title, Noveboracensis. Though 
this Fern sometimes grows two feet 
in length, it is usually much smaller. 
An unfailing guide to its identity is 
the way in which the lance-shaped fronds 
dwindle both ways from the middle, the 
general tendency of Fern leaves being to 
slope upward from the base. The leaf itself is 
once divided, the divisions being deeply toothed, 
the round, brown -edged fruit -dots following the 
margins. 

A casual glance would lead one to say that this 
same Fern also grows out in the marsh meadows 
that divide the open woods at intervals ; but though 
the two often meet, a nearer view shows the 
meadow lover to be the Marsh Shield Fern, a 
different species, though a first cousin. Here 




200 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 




again you may rely upon the leaf shape for iden- 
tity rather than upon the tufted fruit -dots that 
edge it. Mounted on a long, bare stem, the frond 
begins abruptly at its full width, and then slopes 
gradually to a top less slender than that of the New 
York Fern. This Marsh Shield Fern is the com- 
panion of Gentians, 1 Ladies' Tresses, and Turtle - 
head, appearing to walk freely through places wher- 
ever there is a hint of moisture, standing out boldly 
on bog tussocks, climbing sturdily down the banks 
of ditches, and persisting in growing cheerfully until 
the season of hard frost, no matter how many 

1 See page 153. 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 2OI 

times it has been mown down, or its territory even 
burned over. 

Two Ferns of widely different characters are the 
companions of its moist haunts: the Crested Shield 
Fern, almost an evergreen, and the Sensitive Fern, 
which shrivels at the mere suggestion of frost. 

The Shield Fern is an eccentric in its ways of 
growth. When seen clustering about a bog tussock 
the erect fronds are often two feet in height and 
six inches broad at base. The leaflets being rather 
triangular, once divided and notched, are somewhat 
glossy and crisp, and the fruit of the fertile fronds 
is round and set between the margin and midrib. 
This, however, is but one of its many types ; I 
have also found these Ferns growing in 
the chinks of an old well where, ow- 
ing apparently to lack of light, the 
fronds, though a foot and a 
half in length, were only 
two inches broad, and 
drooped with all the 
limpness of a vine, 
while between these 
two extremes there 
are many intermediate forms. 

Locally, the Sensitive 




2O2 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

Fern is very common, not only in wet meadows, 
but along roadsides, or wherever water settles, or a 
few stones afford a shelter from scythe and plow. 
The fronds of this Fern have more the appearance 
of the leaf of a flowering plant than any of its 
kindred, save perhaps the Walking Fern. They are 
broadly triangular, deeply cut and toothed, and of a 
crisp, tender green in which the netted veining is 
very conspicuous. These leaves, in open places, 
seldom grow more than a foot or so in length, but 
in rich bogs the fronds from old strong rootstocks 
often rival the Osmundas in height if not in grace, 
for the great basal breadth of the Sensitive Fern 
gives it strength as massed color, but detracts from 
the general effect. Like the Cinnamon Osmunda, 
its fertile fronds are wholly separate, and shaped like 
a contracted, sterile leaf, upon which green spore 
globes are set so thickly as to be confluent. After 
the spores are discharged, these spikes blacken and 
remain over Winter, often being seen side by side 
with the fruit of a second year. 

The Sensitive Fern, as well as the Marsh Shield 
Fern, adds a great variety to the greens of mead- 
ows that are cut once or twice a year, for after 
the Summer mowing the young Ferns spring up, 
following their creeping rootstocks hither and 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



203 



thither, brightening the duller grasses with bands of 
freshest green. 

Two other Ferns of swamps and moist grassy 
woods also carry their globular fruit somewhat after 
the manner of the Sensitive Fern, and so are asso- 
ciated with it. These are the Virginia and the 
Ternate Grape Ferns. 

The former has a much cut and divided leaf, 
such as we associate with the Parsleys and other 
members of the Carrot Family. 
With the Virginia Fern the fertile, 
grape -like portion rises from the 
center of the sterile 
leaf stem, the plant 
varying in height from 
six or eight inches to 
nearly twenty. This is 
a Fern of rich woods, 
while its mate belongs 
equally to the old 
turf of pasture -edges 
and to hillsides. 

The Ternate Grape 
Fern is most conspicuous 
in early Autumn, when its leaf, 
cut finely and in some phases almost 




2O4 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



curling like Parsley, wears a deep bronze hue, which 
remains constant all Winter. To the novice it does 
not look like a Fern in any way, for its texture is 
fleshy like that of so many of the flow- 
ering plants of Spring. Without the fer- 
tile stalk, which does not often appear 
before September, there is little to place 
it in its tribe. Even when once identi- 
fied, the leaf presents 
so many variations in 
individual plants as to 
be very puzzling. 
Now we go through an- 
other piece of still lighter woods, 
before coming to the lane bor- 
der. Here and there are single 
crowns of the Spinulose Shield 
Fern, which at first you will take for the Lady 
Fern; but it has twice -divided fronds, the lower 
leaflets are unevenly triangular, and the toothing 
has a thistle -pointed fineness. 

Once in the lane, poor Flower Hat dropped on 
the grass in a bewildered fashion, mumbling to 
herself, and began to stick scraps of Ferns between 
the leaves of the paper-covered book she carried, 
writing cabalistic sentences on the margins, and 











CHRWTMA3 FERNS 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



205 



then pinching the corners of the leaves together 
most recklessly. 

"No, don't stop me," she exclaimed, as I was 
going to speak. "I know it is a shabby way to 
treat a book, but a novel printed from damaged 
plates and bought in a ten -cent store is n't a 
book. It's a crime! Besides, I can remember 
these Ferns better from seeing them where 
they grow and keeping these bits of leaves, 
than in putting my eyes out and warping 
my tongue by working them out prop- 
erly with a botany. My mind, you ^H 
see, is of the kindergarten order, that 
needs nice interesting object les- 
sons, such as your dear 
Magician always gives. 

"Oh, what are those 
great, silvery -looking Ferns 
straight in front of me, with 
the sweeping, slender stems? 
Silver Spleenwort? What a com- 
bination for a name! Yes, I see. . 
The silvery effect in the distance 
that disappears near to, comes from the whit- 
ish shade of green and the light leaf lining. 
Then the leaflets are round-edged instead of being 




2O6 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

sharp-toothed, like many others, and the seed cases 
run out from the middle ridge exactly like feather - 
stitching. What an exquisite, cool moonlight shade 
of green they spread under the oaks; but why are 
they not called Feather - stitched Silver Ferns ? 
Spleenwort is so suggestive of herb tea and a 
mussed -up liver!" 

Quite out in the open, on the very edge of the 
wheel-tracks, a mass of the triangular leaves of the 
Broad Beech Ferns, with keeled lower leaflets, were 
huddled close around a boulder, as if trying to draw 
from it all possible shade and moisture. But do 
the best that they could, now that a sheltering 
tree had been blown over, the sun beat down upon 
them fiercely and they were much more contracted 
and crisped than their brothers growing in the 
shade. However, they will make a good fight, and 
come up anew year after year, until some near-by 
saplings grow tall enough to give them shade and 
perfect shape again. 

On each side of the lane, where it divides old 
pastures, waves of delicately cut Ferns followed the 
old stone walls, and, as it were, broke over them, 
and then swept toward the wood edge, to be lost 
in the underbrush. Some of the Ferns were a foot 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



207 



high, some two feet or more, while others, though 
perfect in shape, were small as Polypodies. Some- 
what narrow at the base, the leaves increased but 
slightly and dwindled to a graceful point, while 
the cup-shaped fruit-dots and rounded, saw- 
toothed edge distinguish it from the Lady 
Fern, which it much resembles. All these 
points, together with a certain crisp tex- 
ture which, when crushed between the 
fingers or dried, yields a sweet odor, iden- 
tify it as Dicksonia or the Hay -scented 
Fern. Really, to use a cant phrase, it is 
the best all-around Fern we have beau- 
tiful in its various haunts on broad, open 
hillsides and commons as well as in woods, 
gracious under cultivation, a useful 
setting for garden flowers when 
arranged in vase or rose -bowl. Of 
a light, intense green in Summer, 
and often renewing its growth, 
wearing a delicate leaf yellow un- 
der the bleaching touch of light 
frost, fragrant even in its decay, 
bearing a good semblance of life 
when preserved beyond its season 
by pressing, such is the Hay- 




2O8 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

scented Fern. And with all its good qualities, not 
the least is that with us it is one of the most 
abundant of its race. 

The shadows were beginning to lengthen when 
we turned to go down the mountain and retrace 
our steps across the bridge to where Nell had been 
left comfortably tethered in one of the sheds belong- 
ing to the deserted cider-mill. How the landscape 
on every side, through every vista, was replete with 
Ferns Ferns great and small overwhelming every 
other form of ground growth. On the level hill- 
top before the rocks slanted too steeply, the spaces 
between were often filled by beds of Maidenhair. 
When seen from above, the shining dark stems 
were quite hidden by the density of the curving 
forked fronds, that have a circular sweep not un- 
like the umbrella leaves of the Mandrake or May 
Apple of Spring. 

The Maidenhair stem always seems overweighted 
by the heavy top, which has, to the eye at least, 
none of the airy qualities of the rarer Ferns, but 
hangs as if heavy with moisture. Yet, in con- 
tradiction, when the ground breeze passes, the 
mass is all a -tremble, like a grove of Aspens. 
Neither, when looking down upon it, does the 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 2OQ 

graceful poise of this Fern become evident. It 
should be viewed from below in order to appreciate 
the sense of perfect balance and the effect of light 
and atmosphere. All the summer through I had 
tried to carry away a picture of it as it lives, but 
it still evaded my efforts. 

As we came down the mountain, carefully 
creeping slowly from rock to rock for the pit- 
falls of that delectable place are many, and one 
foot may be on firm ground, while the other leg 
suddenly sinks into a hidden hole which swallows 
it to the knee my eye rested on a feathery green 
tuft clinging to the side of a dripping rock, the 
bunch of leaves protruding through a bit of ragged 
bark that was in its way. I hastened toward it, 
slipped and then fairly coasted down the treach- 
erous Moss to the object in question, to find it 
a plant of delicate Maidenhair Spleenwort, with 
shiny, purple-black stems and small, oval, ever- 
green leaflets a Fern so exquisite in its fragile 
grace that it almost seems out of place set amid 
the rigors of the New England woods. Why had 
I never discovered it here before? In fact, I had 
not found it within many miles of Tree -bridge. 
Simply because the overhanging rock concealed it 
wholly, and the Mosses gave it color -protection 

N 



210 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

except from the side where, in crawling down the 
rocks, I had chanced within its range. 

How to leave it in its haunt and yet take it 
away in a picture, how to find footing for either 
camera or self ? After a time, however, both 
things were accomplished, and I, too, sat down to 
rest, propped against the same sloping, Fern -cov- 
ered rock that had couched Flower Hat in the 
early afternoon. All the while, above and below, 
the Ferns wove their airy fantasies, and the locusts 
in the lowland trees never ceased their sharp dron- 
ing, and would not wholly desist until their tune 
should be carried into the night in a higher key, 
and in shriller accents, by the katydids. 

We drove along the road once more, past wood 
and forge and mill-pond, the same homeward 
bound road of many a day afield. On a narrow 
stretch below the pond we turned sharply toward 
the rising bank to make room for an ox -cart that 
was coming up the hill laden with an aftermath of 
fragrant Fern hay, the wind bringing news of it 
even before the eye could distinguish its quality. 
As it drew nearer, the silver head and long silky 
beard of Time o' Year appeared atop the load, 
while a bronzed youth walked beside it, guiding 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



211 



the slow oxen with the usual contradictory native 
jargon. 

"If 'gee!' means go, and 'haw!' means stop," 
whispered Flower Hat, "what does 'gee-haw!' sig- 
nify to the poor oxen ? Possibly to do both at 




once, which order they obey as best they can by 
their halting gait." 

Time o' Year gave us a cheerful greeting, 
started to speak, hesitated, and while he did so 
the load passed by and continued its creaking way 
up hill. 

The old man had an anxious look upon his 



212 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

face, quite different from his usual expression of 
cheerful serenity. I wondered what it meant. 

"He has something on his mind that he wants 
to tell you," said Flower Hat. "I 've seen it in 
his face ever since that day when we were hunt- 
ing for the flowers escaped from old gardens. I 
spoke of it then, you may remember, but you 've 
never been here alone of late, and I 've surely 
frightened him off. He never has passed by like 
that before. See, now, he is looking back." 

Secretly I resolved to come that way again as 
soon as possible, without my bright companion, for 
the old man's sad look went to my heart, and his 
was a nature that if it told a trouble at all, must 
do it privily, with the same mystery that he said, 
" Come and see ! " in leading me to a rare flower. 

In regaining the road, the chaise wheel caught 
in a hidden rut dug deep beside the track to carry 
off the rain water that often gullied the hillside as 
it tore down. A jerk, and we should have tipped 
over had not clever Nell stopped short. As it was, 
we found ourselves laughing and the chaise leaning 
awkwardly almost against what ? One of the 
most beautiful Fern pictures that I had ever seen. 

The bank here retreated in a sort of bay that 
was part rock, part loamy leaf -mold. Beech sap- 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 213 

lings, Dogwoods and high Oaks shaded it heavily, 
while among the underbrush dead boughs gro- 
tesquely decked with lichens had fallen picturesquely 
here and there. Between and over these hung 
great fronds of Maidenhair, tier above tier, in suc- 
culent density. 

From the road the grouping was quite perfect, 
the Ferns were fully developed and all in the deep 
shadow that they love; but with enough refracted 
light upon the fronds to perfectly reveal their detail. 
To lead Nell from the ditch and adjust the camera 
was a moment's work, but how about the wind? 
It was at that moment whirling stray straws along 
the road with unpromising vigor. 

"Is one permitted, by the gracious Upholder - 
of- Nature -as -it -is, to remove obstacles before a 
landscape, or perhaps I should call this composi- 
tion * still life'?" asked Flower Hat laughingly, as 
she proceeded to pull up some weeds and break 
off a dead bush that blurred the foreground. 

"I only wish that it might be still anything for 
ten seconds, for that is the time I must have to 
make a clear picture in this shade," I said, look- 
ing to see from what quarter the wind came. 

A few moments of holding out a handkerchief 
settled that the wind blew from the west and came 



214 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

down the river valley in intermittent gusts. I 
watched some tall Grasses that were bunched at 
the road edge just above the hollow in the bank 
that held the Ferns. The breeze always struck 
them a second or so before the Maidenhair began 
to vibrate. 

I explained the fact to Flower Hat, and sta- 
tioned her a few steps back of me as a sentinel, 
to cry "Now!" when the Grasses signaled the 
wind's coming. Two plates only remained from 
the afternoon's photo -sketching, and I jarred the 
camera through haste in exposing the first. 

With the last it was now or never! The lens' 
eye was opened and closed six separate times to 
avoid gusts, before the measure of time was given. 
Yet, there is the picture of the Maidenhair poised 
motionless ! 

"If you had taken a moment longer, I should 
have screamed, from the tension of watching the 
breeze," said Flower Hat. "I wonder what time it 
is. I forgot my watch to-day and the sun is n't 
as low as it ought to be, considering how long it 
is since we had luncheon." 

I too was watchless, so I suggested that we 
should ask the time as we passed Aspetuck post- 
office, but they did n't know: "The clock broke 




* " 







THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 215 

down last week. But it ain't six yet, because the 
sawmill whistle ain't blew nor the carrier come 
with the mail, and he allus jogs along about half- 
past five," was the answer we received. 

"Did you ever? And a post-office, too !" ejacu- 
lated Flower Hat. 

Presently we asked a man who passed along the 
road with a load of straw. He squinted at the sun 
and "calkerlated it was all of four o'clock" ! 

The next people we met were a couple in an 
ancient rockaway, the back seat of which over- 
flowed with sturdy children. They all nodded and 
grinned, but did not understand our question, 
evidently being a Hungarian family who had lately 
come to wrestle with an abandoned Lonetown farm. 

In desperation we stopped at the second house 
on the main road after crossing the river, as it 
looked more neatly kept than any of its neighbors. 
Flowers blossomed in two straight borders on either 
side of the walk and a thrifty poultry -house united 
the barn and cow-shed. 

"The time, mem?" queried a pleasant -faced 
woman, curtseying as she opened the door. * 'Alf 
hafter five hexactly; my good man is a watch- 
maker 'imself and works over town. Yes, we be 
strangers in these parts, moved in last boxing day. 



216 



THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 



'E works at 'is trade, an' Hi raise heggs. Could 
n't find the time out nowheres, now could n't 'e, 
mem? That 's wot Hi calls shameful in a civilized 
country, not that hit his that, mum, and the 




people, mum, they 're jays, that 's what they his, 
mum, with no more sense than hidjits ! What do 
'e think now, but last May, mum, two chaps 
come drivin' along collectin' heggs for market, and 
they pulled up 'ere. * Hi 'm right sorry,' says Hi, 



-. '. THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 217 

'Hi 'ave n't heggs to sell the day, but Hi 'ave n't 
a hegg in the 'ouse.' 'She 'ave n't a hege in the 
'ouse,' mocks the man, an' they two chaps drove 
horf laughin'. Now wot was they laughin' hat, 
that 's wot Hi 'd like to know? Did n't Hi give 
'em a civil answer? Hinglish? Yes, mum, and 
thank ye kindly, Hi 'm Hinglish a Devonshire 
dumplin' too, bless ye! But 'owhever did 'e guess 
hit, mum?" 

As we thanked her and walked out of the 
yard, admiring the woman's honest unconscious- 
ness, and swallowing our rising mirth lest we too 
should be ranked as jays, some thick tufts of 
Ebony Spleenwort, small sword -shaped feather - 
parted Ferns, caught the eye. They were grow- 
ing in the dry bank outside the fence, at the roots 
and in some clefts of a mossed and decaying cedar 
stump. 

The once -divided fronds had purplish -black mid- 
ribs of the same color as the stems of both the 
true Maidenhair and the slender Maidenhair Spleen - 
wort, while the seed -cases fairly crowded the back 
of the fertile fronds which were the longest. Usu- 
ally seen on dry hillsides or among scrubby grass, 
often broken and imperfect, we do not realize 
what a dainty little Fern this Spleenwort is, until 



2l8 THE FANTASIES OF FERNS 

we find tufts of it either amid the soft gray moss 
of Evergreen woods, or in some such point of 
vantage as the crumbling old stump. Rarely, as in 
the Hemlock woods, it grows from the moist clefts 
of rock ledges, somewhat after the fashion of 
Maidenhair Spleenwort, and then the fronds are of 
a more delicate texture and perfect growth. 

If the flower, with all the subtle expression of 
form and color, is more beautiful in its haunt, then 
is the silent Fern doubly so, and it is in their haunts 
alone, whether of river -bank, wood, moor or hill- 
side that we may ever seek to interpret the Fern's 
fantasies. 










, V* * \ 



VIII 

FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

VERY hue of flower and leaf crosses 
the open fields at some time of 
the year, and coming, lingers, never 
leaving the wild gardens until dis- 
missed by the leveling touch of frost. 
It appears as if the Magician had chosen 
these wide spaces for palettes upon which 
to broadly mix and blend the pri- 
mary colors before penciling the 
more intricate and delicate traceries 
of wood, waterway and hedgerow. 

The first green of March, born on 
the margin of some warm spring, 
creeps along the field borders and pushes 
its way outward wherever moisture lures 
it, until the brown is gradually submerged by the 
rising tide of verdure. As yet the only matching 
tint in wood or on the hillside is the somber 
weathered green of Ground Pine, Wintergreen, 
Laurel, or Cedar ; and in the swamps, the listening 
ears of Skunk Cabbages, pointed and satyr-like, 
219 




220 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

seem waiting, alert, for the redwing's reveille, the 
roll-call of the Marsh Frogs, and the meadow 
lark's announcement that now, at last, it is "Spring 
o' the y-e-a-r ! " 

In the well-groomed farming country the flowers 
of the sun are routed from the open fields, and 
forced to take refuge along the fences or on the 
rocky islands of shallow soil that remain invincible 
fortresses, unconquered by the plow. But in two 
places these sun -lovers still run riot, dominating the 
shiftless attempts at agriculture, both in the aban- 
doned fields of Lonetown and in the upland moors, 
between Sunflower Lane and the Sea Gardens, 
where at most an annual cutting here and there 
of the coarse grass is the only disturbing ele- 
ment, great stretches being left wholly untouched, 
so that the ground is often fairly drenched with 
color. 

The flowers of the sun are, superficially speak- 
ing, of two kinds, simple and composite. Of the 
simple flowers the Wild Rose, Milkweeds, Convol- 
vulus, Meadow Lily, and Prickly Pear are types ; 
while the tufted aggregations of small, tubular blos- 
soms, the outer row of which may or may not have 
an extended, raylike petal, giving the flower-head 
a disk shape, are the composites, of which the com- 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 221 

mon Ox-eye Daisy, Sunflowers, Goldenrods, Iron- 
weeds, and Asters are typical. 

Owing to the strength of cooperation and to 
vigorous constitutions, the composites are an all- 
powerful race, and their sway rounds out the year 
itself, for may not the Dandelion be found in 
some sheltered, sunny nook from New Year until 
Christmas ? The composites are almost as much 
fixtures in the landscape as the trees, so surely 
can we count on seeing them follow each other 
in a stolid procession the season through. The 
very fact of their massiveness leads us to regard 
them more as pigments, of rich color value in the 
landscape, than as individual flowers of personal 
and lovable attributes. But then, it is always thus: 
massed effort invariably kills individuality. So we 
must let the composite battalion march by itself, 
if we wish to be unconfused, and single out and 
identify the more winning though less numerous 
flowers of the sun. 

Nearly all flowers flourish better in the open, 
or in sheltered rather than in deeply -shaded situa- 
tions, the few exceptions being leaf-mold plants 
with rootstocks that creep close to the surface. 
Almost all of these plants might also live in the 
open if the supply of moisture was sufficient. By 



222 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

flowers of the sun, however, I mean only those 
that we associate with the brilliant light of the 
summer landscape and its heavy, full-fed greens 
flowers that need the direct sun rays to develop 
the most perfect luxuriance of form and color. 
Some we also find in early autumn, before any 
thought of decay dims the plant horizon and while 
the few prematurely red leaves that decorate Maple 
and Sumac do not suggest hectic color, but serve 
merely to heighten the opulence of maturity. 

In the fields we do not look for the delicate 
half-tones and stipplings such as we find in woods 
and along the waterways though, to be sure, the 
Water Lilies are all sun -lovers but for strong 
primary colors; so we are constantly meeting with 
surprises. Of the three primaries, red, blue and 
yellow, the last is the only color found in its purity 
in large quantities, red ranking next, and blue, 
with flowers, as with the plumage of birds, being 
the rarest pigment of all. 

There is another curious fact about the distri- 
bution of these primary colors in the plant world. 
When left to natural selection the three are not 
often found in the same genus, if at all. Thus we 
have a red and a blue Lobelia, but no yellow; a 
red and a yellow Field Lily, but no blue; a blue 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 223 

and yellow wild Aster, but no red; and so on in- 
definitely. Even with the garden flora the same 
fact obtains. The blue Rose is missing, also a 
clear red Pansy. Verbenas, Sweet Peas, and Salvia 
skip a true yellow, and Dahlias and Hollyhocks 
are never blue. Hybridization may introduce a tint 
approaching the lacking color nearly enough for 
commercial nomenclature, but not the distinct pri- 
mary itself. Why this is so remains a problem for 
science, but the answer will undoubtedly be found 
meshed in the mazes of plant fertilization by insects. 

For three months these flowers of the sun reign 
in the meadows, from the May Buttercups until 
middle August, when the vigor of the composites 
largely overwhelms the frailer plants. 

The delight of finding the flowers in their 
haunts never palls; it is renewed like the seasons. 
But if you wish to make the pleasure keener, it is 
only necessary to guide to them one who is both 
enthusiast and novice. Such a one was Flower 
Hat, of keen ear and color-gauging eye, when I 
first took her to my beloved sunlit meadows with 
a June landscape for initiation. Summer, coming 
in with a swirl, had swept away the Painted Cup, 
Wild Geranium, Celandine, and Iris or Great Blue 



224 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

Flag, before our pathways, which had touched and 
crossed in other years, met again, to run as nearly 
parallel as those of unsheeplike people may. 

One day, between early and middle June, we 
sauntered, Nell's usual gait, born of experience 
when off the highroad, along Sunflower Lane, 
pausing often to look through gaps in the hedging 
bushes across hayfields where stiff Timothy already 
rustled crisp as Rye. On the left a few well-kept 
upland meadows, rosy with lush Clover, made vistas 
between narrow strips of woods, and beyond these 
the marsh meadows and the Sea Gardens glistened 
with brilliant samphire green. 

The brushed and wooded places were overflow- 
ing with bird melody, and the hungry twittering of 
fledglings, answered by the warning call -notes of 
anxious parents, came from every side. Bobolinks 
swayed and sang in tree -tops, and, clinging to arch- 
ing Blackberry canes snowy with blossoms, launched 
themselves into the meadows, where they suddenly 
disappeared with the impetuous dash of a diver 
cleaving the waves, leaving behind, not a wake of 
spray, but a veil of music, to cover their retreat. 

Above the tall Black Alders in the moist ditch 
beside the lane, redwings were fluttering and call- 
ing wildly as of old, showing that at least one way- 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 225 

side colony had held its own, through the perilous 
dark ages of thoughtlessness, until the awakening of 
intelligence in the cause of bird protection. An 
osprey sailed majestically across to his fishing -grounds 
beyond the beach, and a myriad of tiny warblers 
flitted on before us, darting in and out of the 
blossoming Grape-vines, whose fragrance wafted 
from overhanging trees and followed us from leafy 
trails along the fence -rails. Beside the runnel, that 
was outlined by Ferns and the unopened flowers of 
Water Hemlock, great masses of the stalwart Cow 
Parsnip held its broad white -flowered umbels on 
six-foot stems. Once a quail mounted an old fence 
post and called "Bob White!" hurriedly, three or 
four times, disappearing in the brush without wait- 
ing for a reply. 

We did not speak, Flower Hat and I, but 
continued to where the lane ended in the open 
fields. There, before we had quite left the shelter 
of the last tree, Nell instinctively stopped, while 
Flower Hat drew in her breath and released it 
slowly in a sigh of pleasure. To define the differ- 
ent tints of green alone, that were blended by the 
sun and an almost imperceptible sea -mist, would 
require an artist, both in temperament and words; 
yet these greens were but as the settings to the 



226 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

sapphire, amethyst, ruby and gold that jeweled the 
open stretch, where, for a mile, the eye roamed 
uninterrupted over dry, moist or brackish meadows, 
unbounded save by an occasional stone or stake 
bearing some cabalistic sign, the dubious landmarks 
of many claimants. The gems of gold were the 
countless clusters of Sundrops, the daytime brother 
of the paler Evening Primrose, lowly tufts of Star 
Grass and sturdy Yellow Thistles; the sap- 
phires, the lily -shaped flowers of the stout 
Blue -Eyed Grass; and the sparkling 
amethyst, its taller cousin, the slender 
Iris or Blue Flag, which blends, in the 
exquisitely penciled flower, the gold 
and blue of its field mates with a 
purple tint of its own, while the 
freshly opened heads of escaped 
Clover and the native Milkwort car- 
ried the ruby tint right into the shining 
emerald sedge. 

"Oh, for a musician to write a sunlight 
sonata!" murmured Flower Hat, half to 
herself. " Some one gay and bubbling, like 
Papa Haydn, but who would leave out the 
piping of shepherds and give instead the vital breath 
of the earth a tone poet both serious and emo- 




FLOWERS OF THE SUN 227 

tional. See listen! there is the Allegro motif, 
the bobolinks and twittering swallows carrying the 
theme, while the very grass marks the rhythm as it 
blows to and fro. One must be deaf and 
blind not to hear and al- 
most see the music that 
expresses it all." 

"Yes," I said, "it 
is music and paint- 
ing as well, a perfect land- 
scape, its horizon hidden in 
sea-mist, inland boundaries 
of Oak woods for contrast, 
and every flower and leaf in 
it as much a part of the 
whole, and as dependent for 
full meaning upon the com- 
plement of surroundings, as 
are the separate notes of a 
glorious chord." 

In middle July we were again in the back country, 
and resting from the noon heat under some great 
Sugar Maples which, as they so often do, topped a 
road-bank, standing like a stately grenadier guard, 
exactly so many paces apart, in regions where there 




228 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

are no present signs of habitations to account for 
their planting. Inside the fence was a rocky waste, 
then rolling and rather barren hills, but across the 
road were fields, dry at the edge and hedged with 
vigorous Wild Rose Bushes, but soon dropping to 
less barren if not absolutely moist soil, and a bit of 
low pasture. 

There was no breeze; waves of heat quivered 
above the sandy road; the leaves hung heavy, as 
did the languid air, which seemed to make respira- 
tion slow. Some cattle, grouped under a single 
Chestnut in the middle of the pasture, chewed their 
cuds slowly, while a red -eyed vireo in the Maples 
repeated his monotonous song over and over. 

Even the flower colors, though bright, seemed 
less emotional than those of the June fields, per- 
haps because the sun's fierce rays somewhat ab- 
sorbed and neutralized the reds and yellows. The 
great patches of Prickly Pear or Indian Fig, with its 
thick leaves set with tufts of spines, had managed 
to find lodging in the earth, which in spots failed 
to conceal the rock ledge in the near-by field, red 
with Sheep Sorrel, bringing a picture of the arid 
plains to the hillside. The showy blossoms, flow- 
ers of a day, three inches across and set singly on 
the leaf edges, are of a clear yellow, the petals 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 



229 



having that peculiar quality which we see in the 
Night -blooming Cactus, while the stamens form a 
thick ornamental tassel. Although 
the plants were still in full bloom, 
there were many withered flowers 
and also some of the 
prickly pear-shaped 
fruits, which in time 
become a dull red, 
and are edible for those 
liking their flat, sickly- 
sweet flavor. 

Across the road the 
Wild Roses varied from 
pale pink to deep car- 
mine, according to the 
fulness or the newness 
of their bloom, and in 
dry places thorny wands 
of Sweet-briar, studded with its 
flesh -white flowers, made grace- 
ful arches. Farther afield, where 
the remains of a stone fence, long since tumbled 
down, gave protection and drew moisture, was a 
long line of white foam, the flowers of Meadow 
Sweet Spirea. This white line, as it broke abruptly 




230 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

away from the fence and invaded the richer meadow, 
rose higher in spray and here proved itself to be 
the tall, feathery Meadow Rue, with much -com- 
pounded leaves. 

With the Rue a stately plant appeared. The 
straight stalk, five feet in height, was capped by a 
pyramid of nodding flowers and buds, fifteen in all. 
The open flowers, with recurved petals of deep 
yellow, and tiger -spotted, tawny -capped stamens, 
vibrated at a touch, until it seemed as if they 
would tinkle forth music as sultry as the day 
itself. A giant Meadow Lily this, grown doubt- 
less from a veteran bulb, for the others that nod- 
ded drowsily over the field grasses grew in twos 
and threes on stalks at most a foot or two in 
height and varied in color from yellow through tawny 
to Indian red. 

A springy spot was marked by the faded pink 
spikes of Steeple Bush, a cousin of Meadow Sweet, 
and another species that promises so much and 
yields so little. Glints of red among the meadow 
grass gathered in an erratic trail toward the shade 
at the farther edge. Another Lily, but this time 
the purple -spotted flower is held erect, chalice-like, 
and when two or three branch from the straight 
stalk, circled at intervals by its wheeled leaves, the 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 



231 



I stopped 
with 



effect is of an exquisitely wrought and enameled 
candelabrum. This is the Red Wood Lily, so 
called because it is said to grow in shade; but I 
have always found it, as now, shedding its light 
over the open fields, though, of course, it may be 
a case of the flower having survived the sheltering 
trees of its real haunt. Hereabout, at least, it is a 
true flower of the sun. 

Flower Hat followed lazily, comparing the Lilies 
that she held in each hand with those 
in the grass, moving them to and fro 
to change the effect of light, 
suddenly, shading my eyes 
hand, and she, unheeding, 
almost fell over me, crying: 

"What is it, a big black 
snake at last? No? We 
shall have to meet one 
some day, and I am not 
sure but what, like the 
woman who looks under 
the bed for burglars, I 'm 
half disappointed that we have 
not met even a little one as yet. 
It deprives bog -trotting of half 
the adventure that I had 




232 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 



thought a part of it. Considering the places, too, 
that you have rashly dragged me through the past 
month, I 'm beginning to think that this part 
of New England was really 
discovered by St. Patrick 
in an unrecorded voyage, 
but rinding the territory 
rather large to cover with 
spells, and opportunities of 
escape great, he retired to 
practice snake -charming in a 
spot where he could drive his 
victims into the ocean after 
the dramatic, orthodox, and 
rapid fashion of the devil - 
possessed swine." 

"Superbum, Turk's Cap 
Lilies, you say where?" she 
continued, hardly waiting for 
my explanation. "Oh! in- 
deed they are superb. Truly, 
I don't wonder that you stopped short and could n't 
believe your eyes; surely to-day we are allowed to 
see the Lilies of the field in all their fine raiment. 
What reds and yellows! See that patch of orange 
yonder where the land begins to roll: what is it?" 




FLOWERS OF THE SUN 



233 



A field sparrow perched upon a stalk of Mul- 
lein gave his little song in a slow and listless man- 
ner that lacked the precision of a month ago. A 
chippy hidden in the grass followed with his insect - 
like trill that belongs to Spring dawns, and, heard 
at noon in July, seems doubly unbirdlike. We both 
paused a moment as we climbed over the old, tum- 
bled down, vine -covered wall that was little more 
than a zigzag stone heap, and looked back at 
the Lily field. Not a breath of air troubled the 
grass through which the sweep of the land seemed 
to move in a legato measure 

"This is the second movement of your Sunlight 
Sonato, Adagio," I said, when we had reached the 
orange blaze on 
the hillside, which 
proved to be a glo- 
rious mass of But- 




234 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

terfly Weed, the queen of Milkweeds, in perfect 
bloom, an oasis in a desert of wiry grasses and 
Mulleins. Close to the Milkweed was a bed of 
Toad Flax, or Butter-and-Eggs, as we call it locally, 
the jolly yellow - spurred flowers with orange lips 
seeming to crowd and jostle one another on the 
spike. 

No one would have thought of grouping these 
two flowers together, but the Magician sanctioned 
it, and the result was a barbaric color effect, with 
the bluish gray heat haze for a background. 

"Let us get back into the shade and rest," said 
Flower Hat, covering her eyes. "I 'm fairly ex- 
hausted with color." 

So we found our way to a partly shaded cart- 
track, that crossed the fields and led toward the 
road where Nell waited under the Maples. Milk- 
weeds of various kinds were scattered along the 
open side of the track, and swarms of brick -red 
butterflies, called Milkweed Monarchs, hovered over 
them, while the color scheme was still further 
carried out in tint and form by the star -shaped 
flowers of common St. John's-wort, of fragrant 
foliage, being the Herb John of old gardens, the 
golden Partridge Pea with sensitive leaves, and by 
the paler -hued Yellow Loosestrife. 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 235 

With the exception of the orange Butterfly 
Weed, the Milkweed family use a different color 
scheme, varying from the white of the Wood Milk- 
weed through pink to dull purple. 

Here by the cart-track the most conspicuous 
was the Common Milkweed, of the silk -filled pod, 
robust habit, and great, almost globe-shaped clusters 
of flowers of a color difficult to describe, so strangely 
does pink blend with a dull gray tint. In early 
morning or toward night this flower exhales a 
penetrating fragrance, so that in passing along a 
roadway edged by swamps I have been deceived 
by it into looking for the Clammy White Azalea. 
Next in color comes the Swamp Milkweed of low 
grounds and waterways, which is a decided pink; 
and deeper yet are the less luxuriant blossoms of 
the Purple Milkweed, with deep pink flowers dull- 
ing to carmine -purple, and leaves more sharply 
pointed than the Silkweed near which it grew 
along the cart-track and climbed the hillside. 

"Shade, rest, and luncheon! This is indeed 
Adagio for mind and body," murmured Flower Hat 
drowsily over a closed book an hour later. Her 
enjoyment of outdoors was as yet more physical 
than mental. She was soothed rather than stimu- 



236 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

lated. Later on the balance would be more equal, 
and though she might rest balmily in the open, it 
would not be with closed eyes, and she would aban- 
don the formality of holding a book in her lap when 
the Magician spreads his open pages before her, 
turning them to suit every mood, with fingers 
none the less real because invisible. 

We had been sitting with our backs toward the 
west. Suddenly the sun -rays that flooded the road 
were withdrawn, and we turned together to see 
the thunder -heads racing up the sky toward their 
favorite point, from which, however, they have often 
veered. But this day determination was written on 
each puffy ridge, and emphasized by a smoky yellow 
underscud that made me immediately wish for the 
sight of a farmhouse, ever so small. 

"Did I say Adagio a moment ago?" cried Flower 
Hat, on her feet in an instant, and jamming the 
things into the chaise. "That is over, and in a 
moment the Rondo will be jangling over us. Really, 
though this movement is out of its authorized place, 
the Sonata is progressing finely. If we only had 
the musical impressionist to transfer it from the air 
to paper! Did you see that flash? Don't put the 
drinking-cup on top of the plate - holders ? I didn't 
mean to ; but please do hurry with that camera, and 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 237 

let us get away from these trees. Trees are very 
bad things to be under. Go over in that old shed 
yonder? Never! you know that hay attracts light- 
ning, and I see wisps sticking through the cracks." 

"Then," said I, "there is nothing to be done 
but to pull up the chaise top and boot and follow 
the road until we come to the first house, which is 
all of a mile away, I 'm sure. Oh ! there are the 
first notes of your Rondo, and, of course, as a mu- 
sician, you must expect many repetitions of them," 
I continued, teasingly, as a heavy peal of thunder 
started a downpour of staccato rain. 

"Do keep in the middle of the road," begged 
Flower Hat, as branches brushed the chaise top. 

"Doan* you look to de lef, doan' you look to de right, 
Keep in de middle ob de road!" 

I hummed, assuming a gayety which I did not feel. 
Poor Flower Hat, however, was not looking at 
anything except the trembling sleeve in which her 
face was hidden. So I whipped up Nell, much to 
her indignation, which, however, showed itself effec- 
tively in a snort, curvet, and spurt of speed it was 
a down-grade, to be sure which soon brought us 
to the farmhouse. I also confess that I do not 
like thunder-storms, and prefer, when caught out 



238 FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

in one, to have a masculine companion. Why? 
For purely logical reasons. If there is any trem- 
bling to be done, I want to do it myself. And 
I like the manly reassurance, " There is nothing 
to be afraid of," whether I believe it or not. 

Flower Hat went to the mountains in August 
soon after our last day at Tree -bridge, and so 
missed the great flower show of the composites. 
But she reappeared one perfect middle September 
day, and begged for another trip to complete the 
Sunlight Sonata, if it were not too late. 

"Too late?" I said hesitatingly. "Not for com- 
posites, but rather late for the simple singing 
flowers. However, we will try, though it will not 
be to find orange and yellows, but rather more 
fragile and uniquely clad blossoms." 

"Better yet!" she cried. "They '11 be the theme 
for the Scherzo or slender light -stepping Minuetto." 

Then we departed from our usual haunts in the 
Sea Gardens and Time o' Year's woods, and turned 
Nell in a northeasterly direction, to where low 
meadows basking in sunlight borrowed moisture 
from adjoining springy woods, where in time it 
collected in pools, that gained motion and mean- 
dered off as little streams to find the Housatonic. 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 239 

It was a sparkling day. A keen breeze out of 
a cloudless sky kept everything a -titter. The grass 
greens were still of Summer freshness, but here and 
there a Pepperidge, Scarlet Oak, or Sumac thicket, 
a Maple or a Trailing Creeper, showed the Autumn 
coat of many colors which soon would wrap the 
countryside. The perfumes of the way were not 
born of Elderflowers, Clethra, or Milkweed balls, 
but of the spice of ripened grapes heated through 
by the sun's ardor. 

In wooded lanes the leaves shook with the 
pattering sound of rain as in the Springtime. Out 
in the open the long grasses swished forwards and 
backwards with the crisp, sweeping sound that fol- 
lows the scythe. Quail coveys, protected by the 
close season, often ran fearlessly along the roadside, 
then rising in unison, with a whirr as of one pair 
of wings, dropped, and disappeared in the fields, 
where the corn was already cut and stacked. 
Flocks of mixed warblers that were feeding and 
waiting for night to continue their migration, fid- 
geted about restlessly, and high in the clear sky 
a company of broad -tailed hawks were soaring in 
wondrous circles, after their Autumn and Winter 
fashion, as if for pure pleasure. 

"There is a new color," said Flower Hat, laying 



24O FLOWERS OF THE SUN 

her hand on the reins and pointing to a low meadow. 
"It is too deep a rose for Clover. What a wonder- 
ful mass of bloom!" 

"A new color and two shades of it to boot, 
two flowers, I think," I said, looking carefully, 
"and the field is evenly divided between them. 
The lower half is one sheet of the magenta, 
cross -shaped flowers of Meadow Beauty; and in 
the drier upper half the large Purple Gerardia, 
which is really a crimson -pink, is growing as thick 
as Clover in June. Surely the Magician has led 
us to-day, for I have never before seen either 
flower in such splendor." 

A few miles farther on, and the rolling ground 
showed patches of tall Blue Lobelia of a more 
brilliant hue than the Bugloss or Blue Weed that 
we had found as a garden escape. 

"What a perfect blue!" cried Flower Hat. 

"Wait a mile or two more before you say perfect 
blue," I answered, and then thought, What if it is 
not there this season? But it was! 

Between two lightly wooded hills ran a green 
river of marsh weeds, moss and tussock grass, the 
whole thickly set with flowers of two colors, deep 
sapphire and white. 

At a distance the detail of the flowers was not 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 



24! 



discoverable, merely the color ; but as we threaded 

our way in from the edge, the blue brightened and 

became Fringed Gentian, and the white, glistening 

like pearls, divided itself into countless 

spikes of the crystal Ladies' Tresses 

and the single, five-petaled blossoms 

of . the Grass of Parnassus, a heavily 

veined flower, held upon a long 

stem above the tufted, 

plantain -like leaves. 

The fringed petals of 
the wide-open Gentian, 
caught and twirled 
by the wind that 
blew through the gap, 
drank in the full sun- 
light and wore the azure, the hue 
of heaven, with which Bryant 
paints the flower that, unless seen blooming in the 
open, belies its famed charm as well as color, for 
the half -opened blossoms of the shade are purplish, 
contracted, and more interesting botanically than 
as flowers of the landscape. 

Flower Hat stood in silence, looking first at the 
sky, across which thin, feathery clouds now sailed, 
then at its reflection in the flowery maze before 

P 




242 



FLOWERS OF THE SUN 



her, where Gentians, Marsh Ferns, and Ladies' 
Tresses were blended and swayed with the breeze 
that also brought zither music from the slender 
Birches, while the ripe grape odor and the rustling 
reeds on the marsh edge suggested the rhythmic 
treading of the wine press of pastoral days. 

"This is the finale," she cried. "Minuet or 
Scherzo, as you will. We have seen, we have 
breathed, we have heard! Yet, alas! who will 
imprison our Sunlight Sonata for us, that others 
may believe ? " 




IX 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

UGUST ushers in the reign of 
the Composites, whose 
realm, wide as the land, is 
,entered by many ways. 
Every road that escapes the 
annual "turnpiking" and 
fence -clearing, so dear to the 
heart of s'lectmen, becomes a 
highway through it, while Sun- 
flower Lane is the direct passage to 
the Palace of the golden -crowned mon- 
archs, where, even before July has left, Joe 
Pye, of robust stature, takes his place as chamber- 
lain, with Boneset for court physician, Black -eyed 
Susan, jolly though not in her first youth, for 
lady-in-waiting, Dent-de-lion, scattering gold coins 
upon the grass, as chief almoner, Ironweed for 
armorer, and Fragrant Everlasting as perfumer; for 
the Composite Tribe, it will be noticed, are very 
old-fashioned and conservative in the matter of 
perfumes, seldom venturing beyond the herby odors. 




244 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

A little space before the lane merges in open 
fields is the Throne Room itself, where, until frost 
snuffs the lights and locks the door, Giant Wild 
Sunflower is king, and reigns majestically, holding 
his head high above his tallest subject as he watches 
his progeny crowding every bit of hospitable ground 
far and wide throughout the meadows, even ven- 
turing to tiptoe into the brackish overflow that 
quickens the Sea Gardens. 

For some strange, but doubtless scientific reason, 
of recent date, the tribe of the Composite, in being 
given an English name, is by Britton and Brown 
called the Thistle Family. Why Thistle, instead of 
Aster, Goldenrod the most widely distributed of the 
tribe or, better yet, Sunflower, the tallest and most 
conspicuous of the group, I cannot fathom. In 
England the race is called the Asterworts; yet, after 
all, the direct translation, Composites, under which 
it figured in Gray's familiar botany, is the best, 
favoring, as it does, no one household, and aptly 
describing this class of plants where numerous in- 
dividual blossoms are colonized and gathered into a 
head, making what, to the casual observer, appears 
to be one single flower. 

Strong with the power of cooperation, the 
Composites have a perpetual representation at the 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 



245 




Sun's council fire, about which the twelve months 
sit awaiting in turn for the season to give their 
varied offerings. From November until early April 
the Dandelion, opening bravely in 
thawed places and warm corners, is 
the only resident member. In late 
April the woolly leaves and light pur- 
ple wheels of Robin's Plantain may 
be seen carrying the hue 
of the paler Violets into 
dry ground and well up 
hillsides where the aster- 
like flowers keep com- 
pany with the white 
fluff of the early 
Everlasting, that quite 
suggests its local name 
of Pussy -toes. 

In May, Chamo- 
mile takes the field, with 
its fine -cut leaves, a fore- 
runner in shape, though 
not in size, of its cousin, 
the Ox - eye Daisy ; and before June has fairly 
arranged her exquisitely brocaded draperies, this 
same Daisy is seizing upon waste fields and road 




246 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

edges, cutting "across lots" through the most care- 
fully tended of hay fields, living as a squatter im- 
possible to uproot around the edges of pastures, 
and impertinently lounging along the grass borders 
of the garden, even after being violently turned 
away many times from the flower-beds where it 
sought shelter behind the large branches of her- 
baceous perennials. Of itself clear-cut and hand- 
some, the flower that children love and may 
gather by the bushel unchidden ; of wonderful 
landscape value when massed; this poor Ox-eye 
Daisy has gained ill repute from an inherent tact- 
lessness, for which it is no more responsible than 
is the English sparrow for his inordinate appetite, 
fertility, and manners unbecoming a gentlemanly 
bird. Both flower and bird usurp the places of 
their betters with a familiarity of demeanor which 
has bred in us an aggressive contempt. 

"Both had ought to be drove out!" ejaculated 
Time o' Year one day as, looking across his best 
hay meadow, resown only two years before, he 
realized that it was more white than green, while, 
at the same time, a partly disabled bluebird tumbled 
to the fence in front of him, having been worsted 
by a sparrow as he defended his home in a hollow 
apple branch. 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 247 

"The mischief of it is," he continued, ruefully, 
picking up the bluebird, smoothing its feathers, and 
setting it upon a shaded branch, while he shied a 
stick at the invading sparrow, "both on 'm works 
more hours a day than we do, and has more time 
ter give ter holdin' on than we to rootin' and 
drivin' 'em out. So naturally we can split our 
throats a-provin' that they 'd orter go, but they 
don't, all the same!" 

In late May and early June the fragrant Yellow 
Thistles show their bristling leaves, which give a 
hornet's sting to those that touch them, along the 
edges of brackish marsh meadows. This Thistle 
is an unpickable flower, but one that adds great 
charm to the foreground of the meadow land- 
scape, otherwise somewhat monotonous with its 
straight -growing grasses, by weaving through it a 
unique brocaded pattern of leaf and flower, that is 
of infinite relief to the eye seeking in vain for 
focus amid the blending colors of the unfenced 
expanse. 

Next to the Dandelion and Ox-eye, the Thistles 
are the Composites most constantly with us, for 
their picturesque if mischievous flowers, represented 
by the Field, Pasture, Swamp, Creeping, and Scotch 



248 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

varieties, nlay be seen from May until November, 
and the rugged Bur Thistle, like the veritable 
tramp that it is, only disappears when literally 
snowed under. 

June also brings the white bunches of Yarrow 
with the pungent herbage, while as the month 
passes the white of the Ox-eye Daisy grows 
dingy, and Black -eyed Susan, vigorous and bus- 
tling in a blaze of Indian yellow, takes its place, 
giving the keynote of the color scheme that will 
gradually dominate, until, in many places, the field 
flag of August and September is a tricolor of 
gold -green -purple. 

In July the golden buttons and vigorous fern- 
cut leaves of Tansy draw attention to the roadsides 
and waste corners that it brightens, at the same 
time giving a wholesome, herby odor, telling of its 
medicinal qualities, which have, in fact, gained for 
the flowers the somewhat dubious name of Bitter 
Buttons. During this month, also, the various 
Coneflowers, Black-eyed Susan's taller kinsmen, 
draw the eye from the open fields to the low river 
borders, where the notched yellow rays of the 
green -headed Coneflower, held well above the 
deeply-cut leaves, rival the Giant Sunflower in 
height, bending above the intervening barriers of 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 



249 



Joe Pye, Ironweeds, and rank -grown river tangle, 
to be clearly mirrored in the water. 

One glowing August morning, when a fresh 
easterly wind, having dispersed the heat 
haze, brought an invigorating hint of 
September, Nell and I started 
out to look for Time o' Year. 
It was the first day that I had 
ever deliberately tried to find 
him. I had oftentimes wondered 
as to his whereabouts, or ex- 
pected to see him in some ac- 
customed field, or following the 
river path, but usually I had 
come upon him unexpectedly, 
or he had overtaken me in a mys- 
terious manner, as if in answer to 
a telepathic impression, at the very 
moment when he was most needed 
as a guide or counselor. 

Where to locate him this day 
was indeed a question. His range 
was wide, and his little cabin the 
most unlikely place to find him 
between sunrise and sunset. So, 




25O A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

after crossing the hills and leaving the more fre- 
quented roads behind, I let the reins hang loose, so 
that Nell might choose the path herself, as any 
one of the three roads that diverged from the hill 
below the Lilac House led to an equally uncertain 
hunting ground. 

Already the Goldenrods were bright in field and 
swamp, crowding close to the wheel - tracks and 
climbing to the tops of gravel banks where little 
else could find footing. The landscape from middle 
August to middle September is so identical as to 
make one wish that the conventional division of 
the seasons followed the natural law, and that Sum- 
mer might have all the golden days that really be- 
long to her until the autumnal equinox is reached, 
September twenty-first. 

Almost all the common Goldenrods were repre- 
sented, either in the wayside crowd or in the more 
exclusive groups that peeped out from the woods, 
or carried gleams of sunlight along the swamp 
edges to cheer the stately somberness of Cat -tail 
Flags. 

The Silver Rod, with its leafy wand of whitish 
blossoms, mingled with the Blue -stemmed Golden - 
rod, which bears its flowers in little bunches in the 
leaf axils, on the partly-shaded banks of the upper 



, 




A COMPOSITE FAMILY 251 

Hemlock road, while the two Bush Goldenrods, the 
Robust and the Slender -fragrant, with flat -topped 
flower -clusters held well above leaves of two de- 
grees of narrowness, continued the yellow through 
arid open places until, at the top of the next hill, 
these also merged in a confusing 
throng composed of the Elm- 
leaved, Showy, Anise -scented and 
Cut -leaved species. 

Goldenrod, collectively, is a 
delight to the eye from its color 
and an indispensable factor in the 
landscape. For decorative pur- 
poses it is eminently satisfactory, 
sought out and beloved by all 
men, as is amply proved by "Gol- 
denrod weddings," and by the nu- 
merous jars, pitchers, water cans, 
and bean -pots filled with it that 
decorate suburban stoops, shield- 
ing the feet of the sex whose 
idea of rural pleasure is to 
sit exercising the patient 
piazza rocking chairs. 

The Composites, as a 
whole, are first and last flow- 




252 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

ers of the people, flowers that may be gathered 
freely, that are undiscouraged by much handling, 
reviving cheerfully and living for weeks after a 
protracted journey under the seat of a picnic wagon, 
and dangerously easy to transplant, in short, to 
be considered and used decoratively more as we 
regard textile fabrics than as flowers. 

Taken individually, however, and from the 
standpoint of calling each member of this Com- 
posite household by name, the Goldenrods, outside 
of half a dozen well-marked species, offer the Chi- 
nese puzzle of the floral world. In fact, they are 
a byword among plant students, who say that if a 
botanist is ever condemned to the severest punish- 
ment that the underworld can mete, the penalty 
will be to write a monograph, accurately describing 
and identifying all the known Goldenrods. 

As I have often found, in connection with 
tramps afield, when I least expect the unexpected, 
it happens. Nell lifted the Goldenrod haze that 
had made me oblivious as to exactly which of 
the wood roads we were following, by stopping 
suddenly and giving a sort of interrogative whinny, 
as much as to ask, "Do we tie here?" To my 
surprise I found that we were abreast of an old 
shed, under which she had often spent the middle 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 253 

of warm days while Flower Hat and I roamed 
about the Tree -bridge region. The shed was one 
of Time o' Year's scattered bits of property and 
only separated by a tangled strip of garden flowers 
from his cabin, behind which he was now sitting on 
an Elm stump used for a chopping-block, his fine 
head held between his hands, his deep eyes open, 
and gazing straight before him at nothing, unless 
it was the yellow ribbon of dwarf Brook Sunflowers 
that started from below the overflow tub by his 
well, and looped and twisted to join a broader band 
that outlined a meadow pool. 

Nell had already turned into her familiar quar- 
ters under the shed, and I hastened across the lot 
below to come within distant range of the old man 
without surprising him into betraying any trouble 
that he might not wish to reveal. I paused a mo- 
ment to look up at a gigantic stalk of Canada 
Goldenrod that held its plumes high above my 
head, and at once became conscious that he was 
coming toward me, his wide straw hat pulled well 
over his eyes, one hand twisting nervously in his 
wonderful beard that glistened like spun silver or 
the newly released silk of Milkweeds. 

"There wa'n't no other way out of it. I 
allowed when the breeze came up long about sun- 



254 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

rise that you 'd jest have ter come to -day," he said, 
by way of greeting, speaking more rapidly than I 
had ever heard him. "Is that quick -movin', fidgety 
young lady along that always shifts about and 
grabs posies up first and is drefful sorry a'ter- 
wards?" he added anxiously. "No, I ain't sick. 
Do I look worriet ? Well, I be, and if you can 
spare time to set down in the shade a bit in 
patience, I '11 unfold it ter you. It 's more 'n 
thirty years ago since I took counsel o' any one, 
an' then it was of a woman, an' so long as I had 
her light to go by, things never went altogether 
wrong; but when she left me I groped along the 
best I could, and by keepin' her lights in sight and 
stayin' alone or mostly in the wood path, I allowed 
I could n't get far astray, and I was happy 
though sometimes I e'ena'most followed Job's do- 
ings in the Scripters. But late days som'at 's 
come that 's upset everythin', and the lights has 
bobbed about uncertain as the Jack o' Lanterns 
over the swamp yonder. So I thought, seeing as 
you read birds' feelin's and the natur' of posies, 
and talk to yer mare like a sister, maybe you 
might understand me, for I 'm only a bit of a weed 
agoin' to seed by the wayside." 

As Time o' Year said "when she left me," he 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 255 

made a backward gesture toward the hillside bury- 
ing-place a quarter of a mile beyond, with its 
uneven slate slabs, which I had never before noticed 
was plainly visible from his home. 

We had gravitated toward the shade behind the 
cabin where he had been sitting. He disappeared 
for a moment and brought out a low, straight - 
backed chair a woman's sewing chair, I surmised 
which he placed facing the river, and again 
seated himself on the chopping-block. 

Two or three minutes passed, which seemed 
like half an hour. A kingfisher flew over, some 
jays argued noisily below in the dense arbor of 
river grapes, and the distant commotion among a 
flock of crows that made their roost from late 
Summer onward in the Cedar woods, suggested 
that an owl had impolitely invaded their territory 
and was provoking discord. 

Still Time o' Year sat silent. For occupation 
I counted the various Asters that made a fringe 
along the uneven garden fence. There were five 
kinds, but growing in such luxuriance as to ap- 
pear forty. The tallest of the plants, a sturdy 
bush, in fact, was the common Blue Wood Aster, 
with large, heart-shaped leaves and violet-blue 
flowers; with it mingled the Early Purple, Violet 



2 5 6 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 



Wood and smaller bushes of White Heath Aster, 
the familiar Michaelmas Daisy of roadsides, while 
groups of patens, the Late Purple Aster, so called 
because of its long blooming season, with ovate 
clasping leaves and deep violet, daisy -like 
rayed flowers, made broad splashes of rich 
color within the garden itself. 

"Ephraim is dead," said Time 
o' Year, suddenly, and then paused, 
as if announcing the end of some 
one so well known as to be a part 
of history. 

I searched my brain for an 
interpretation, and at the mo- 
ment when I remembered 
that it was his own baptismal 
name and therefore probably 
that of his son who had dis- 
appeared so long ago, he took 
up the thread again. 
"He was my boy. You prob- 
ably never heard o' him, being 
young if even born when it hap- 
pened, and anyway, only acquainted 
with posies hereabout, not folks. 
"He seemed a terrible likely child, 














C^T^ TAI4.4 Af4D J#*-W# GDl^EH*00 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 257 

our only one, and bright -minded, quick at his 
book-tasks, in which his mother" (how gently the 
word was uttered), "havin' been a school- 
ma'am herself, took pride. His fault 
was allus seeing things better than they 
be, or makin' 'em out so, any chance. 

"A good way o' lookin' at things? 
No, I don't mean bein' jest sort o' 
cheerful about bothers. 
That way 's upliftin'. 
His mother, she was like 
that. But I mean the 
stretchin' o' facts 
till they get so out 
er shape, no one 
would know 'em. If 
he caught a pick'rel, it 
was allus six when the news 
got out. Not that thet black- 

, ,. , . WHITE HEAJH 

ened him, cause an increase 

often happens ter fish when 

out er water. But he 'd tell things that had 

no backin' and put folks ter inconvenience. 

'Long about the winter when he was sixteen, 

eggs was terrible skeerce, hadn't had fresh ones 

at the store in two weeks, and the meat peddler 




258 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

that usu'lly picked 'em up over twenty miles o' 
country even got out o' limed ones. 

"Come about Christmas time folks got nervous, 
expectin' company and no eggs for makin' cakes and 
squash pies. Eph, he was down to the store for 
oil and heard the talk. 'Pshaw !' said he, an' the 
minister stood right by him when he said it, 'We 
folks has got plenty o' eggs, and ma 's a-limin' of 
'em down. She 's got a trick o' mixin' sassage 
meat into their meal ter make 'em lay, and keepin' 
their nesthouse hot with the old wood stove.' 

"Of course this sounded likely enough to shet 
off any suspicions. That night it snowed heavy, 
and next morning we saw two sleighs with a plow 
in front breakin' the way up hill. 'What's mis- 
chanced?' quoth she; 'there 's the doctor's cutter, 
and the Jedge and the minister a-ridin' together 
behind it.' 

"'I dunno,' I allowed, bein' more startled than 
I showed, mistrustin' somethin' inwardly. 'Jedging 
from those that 's comin' it might be for a weddin', 
a bornin', or a bury in', only there 's no folks ripe 
for either up this cross road.' 

"Eph came out from behind the stove where 
he was readin' a tale of Injins that they give away 
that fall with cans o' gunpowder down ter the 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 259 

Center. He took a scared look out o' the win- 
der, and slipped over toward the barn, jest as 
the folks halted and began to get out baskets. 
'We 've come fer eggs!' shouted the doctor, 
hurryin' so 's to be first. ' Name yer own price 
in cash ! * 

"This tells you how eggs was prized then, for 
in those times things was mostly traded, and I re- 
member one year the only cash went through my 
hands was a three -cent bit and two paper quarters. 

"Naturally it all come out that Eph 'd said we 
had eggs, and they was terrible put about, breakin' 
three miles o' road for nothin'. The minister, he 
preached on lyin' the next Sunday, and called for 
the prayers o' the congregation for Ephraim, in 
which the doctor, bein' a deacon, led, and left 
nothin' unsaid. The result was such hectorin' all 
round that in the spring, as soon as the roads was 
good, the boy ran off with a feller that travelled 
around sellin' maps and sech, who had been hang- 
in' about the Center interviewin' the school com- 
mittee. 

"Practical joke? Folks didn't understand him? 
Had too much 'magination? Ye 're kindly disposed, 
I see, just like his mother was. She allers allowed 
his meanin's was misread. Maybe in a big town it 



26O A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

would 'a' been overlooked and he been guided into 
a story -writer, as yer say, but here around Lone- 
town he was just plain liar. The minister had 
proved it by Scripter, and that ended it, and folks 
was shet of Eph, for ministers was dreadful unre- 
lentin' those times, and felt it their duty to keep 
God stirred to wrath constant. This minister in 
particular was one o' them that did n't even approve 
o' parts o' the New Testament, thinkin' * Suffer 
little children' led to breach o' discipline, and 'Our 
Father' too comfortin' and free a way o' speech 
to be advisable. 

"We never heard o' Ephraim for nigh two 
years, and before we did his mother died. The 
doctor called it lung fever, but it was just shame 
and sorrow, together with opening the winder a 
crack at night, when the wind made queer noises, 
to hear if be was comin'. 'If ever he comes 
home,' she said, 'don't raise the past. And if he 
don't come, back him up all you 're able when- 
ever you can.' 

"Then I rented out the farm for ready money, 
and moved down here so as to save a little to help 
him if the right time came. I knew he 'd never 
come back though, and I was content he should n't, 
for I felt her grave between us. Then like Job 





BROOK SUNFLOWER 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 26 1 

in his sorrow, I went out to dwell in the cliffs of 
the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in rocks, 
to become a 'brother to dragons and a companion 
to owls/ Not that there were even exactly drag- 
ons hereabouts (nothing worse than catamounts), 
but I dreaded folks and found the ice storms 
kinder than their jedgments, and God more often 
encouragin' and to be met with in walkin' in the 
wood path in the cool o' the day, than restrained 
and havin' meanin's that he never meant put into 
his mouth up in the meetin' house. 

"After maybe ten years of hearin' from Eph 
now and then, the letters bein' from first one 
state and then another, he wrote he 'd settled in 
Calif orny and was growin' grapes for wine-makin'. 
Then for a year he wrote often and pestered me 
to come out to him. But I wa'n't constituted 
to transplant and leave my haunts here, and her 
up yonder, so I sent him a bit of money, promised 
more, and told him, so 's to make him feel I was 
trustful, and not to hurt his pride, if he did n't 
need it, to keep it for me. 

"He wrote back and said he was well-to-do, 
and would turn any money I sent to account to 
make me rich! It sounded just so like him, but I 
did n't let myself doubt his word, and next I knew, 



262 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

one Christmas he sent me a good gun, my fish- 
ing-rod another, and then a box o' wine that 
sick school-marm that loved posies that I told 
you of got most of it and so on. Then I did n't 
hear so often, though I sent him a trifle once a 
year. A couple o' years ago he wrote he was 
married, been married quite a spell, but never said 
when or to who; and now it 's forty years next 
Spring since he went away, and Ephraim's dead." 

Time o' Year paused, went over to the well, 
drew up a bucket, filled the tin dipper, offered it 
to me, then took a long draught, replaced the 
faded flower in the buttonhole of his shirt with a 
fresh pink, and returned to the chopping -block 
again. 

"His bein' dead ain't all. He did do well in 
grape farmin' and minin' ventures here and there, 
and his partner sent me on a letter, to make sure 
I was alive; and when I answered it sayin' I was, 
and askin' particulars, back come a check for all 
I 'd scraped together and sent Eph, swelled out as 
big and unknowable as a thin face that 's stung 
by bees. He had laid it out to profit for me, me 
who was half doubtin' all the while, and he 'd fixed 
things so I 'd get it anyhow." 

I could see the veins in the old man's forehead 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 263 

knot and his speech struggle in his throat as, to 
conceal it, he drained the dipper again. Then, 
coming back, he fumbled in a leather wallet worn 
inside his shirt, and drew out a strip of paper 
bearing the five figures that would not only place 
Time o' Year beyond need, but make him a per- 
sonage among the neighboring farming folk. 

As I was about to tell my pleasure, he raised 
his hand. "'Sh! that's not all. I ain't reached 
the real trouble yet. He was married, it turned 
out, more 'n twenty years ago, and he 's left a 
grown-up darter, and last night the carrier brought 
this letter, and was terrible curious about it." And 
from his pocket Time o' Year drew a square en- 
velope of lilac paper, heavily scented, and addressed 
in a bold, nervous hand, his name prefixed with 
Squire, and "Hill Crest Farm" added to the usual 
address. It read: 

DEAR GRANDFATHER: 

Now that dad is dead, I have no people but you. Dad 
married ma right out of the convent, where she, having no 
people, was left a baby. When I was born, she died, and I 
lived at the vineyard with dad until it was time to send me 
off to school to be rubbed up a bit, like the other girls, and 
then I went for four years to San Francisco, and only got 
back a year ago. 



264 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

Last Winter when father got ill, and we went over to the 
beach and stayed in a hotel, then I found it was just the 
right thing to come from eastern people. There were girls 
that scored high from having come from fighters in that old 
shindy between England and the States Daughters of the 
Revolution, they called themselves, and wore pins according 
to the States they claimed, as proud as peacocks. 

Dad said your grandfather was a general in that war, and 
that he would get me the papers proving it, but he died be- 
fore he did it. Now, grandfather, I 'm going to marry 
daddy's young partner, who was raised east, though his 
grandfather did n't fight, and I don't want anything you can 
buy me for a wedding present, because I 've enough money. 
But I do want you to fix me up those papers and send me a 
few bits of the family silver and a picture of you, the oil 
painting dad says hung in the dining-room, and perhaps the 
family Bible with the old silver clasps, if you can spare it, 
something to show, you know, for family relics when we 
have the eastern crowd out to see the vineyards. And do 
write me about yourself. How many hands do you keep, and 
do you reap with steam or horse power ? 

Some day I 'm going to surprise you with a visit and 
coax you back here with me, next Spring maybe. How do 
you like my last picture ? It looks sad in a black dress, but 
I 'm really never sad, and I love pretty, fluffy clothes. Adieu. 
Don't forget the papers and the silver. 

Your affec. ALOIS. 

Daddy said Lois was his mother's name and Adele was 
my mother's, so he pieced them together for mine A-lois, my 
patron saint. 




NEW 



ASTER 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 265 

The photograph was of a girl of perhaps eigh- 
teen, with a strong, oval face, black hair and eyes, 
speaking of Spanish blood, and nostrils that curved 
like those of a spirited horse. I gained time by 
looking at it a moment, and then faced Time o' 
Year, who was gazing at me with a pitifully sad, 
hunted expression in his gray eyes. 

"I don't mind that she 's a Romanist the 
woods has driv' such distinguishin' feelin' out o' 
me but why need he have made out things to her 
so differint, so much better 'n they be that they '11 
give him the lie after he 's gone, even if I say 
nothing," he whispered, half to me and half to the 
river. "We never had family silver except six 
teaspoons and the little tea-caddy that came from 
Lois' grandaunt. The Bible never had clasps, and 
it was hers and I can't give it; there 's no oil por- 
trait. My grandfather never was a general, jist a 
plain soldier. He did fight with Putnam, though, 
and fit good too, and so did her great-grandfather." 

"Send her the record of two fighting ancestors, 
to make up for the lack of one general," I said, the 
pathos of it all dimming my eyes. "Have the papers 
made out and I will have them copied on a piece 
of parchment with a border of wood flowers. Then 
you can make a frame for them yourself from 



266 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 
I* 




birch-bark. Send her the tea- 
caddy and that odd mahogany 
chair that stands inside the 
cabin door, but say you do 
not wish to give away the 
Bible. As for the portrait, 
I will take a picture of you 
with your rod and fishing - 
basket which will neither lie 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 267 

nor shame you, and it will please her. As for 
the rest, we must think it out, but this is enough 
to start with ; and there is no need of making a 
mystery of the fact that you have a granddaughter 
who wishes to join the Society of the Daughters 
of the Revolution, for that is a matter as well un- 
derstood among these hills as elsewhere. Have 
the papers ready the next time I come, and that 
1 fidgety young lady ' with the flowery hat will 
gladly print and decorate them for you, I am 
sure." 

"There 's nobody like womenfolks for either 
scenting out trouble or curing it," said Time o' 
Year, a more peaceful expression replacing the 
pained one which his face had worn. "And as 
you say, backed by Scripter, as it were, mending 
part of the evil is sufficient for one day and a part 
of the lie can be eased up without sharing it." 

"Yes, and another part, too, and honestly; for 
do you remember that you were living in the farm- 
house and not the cabin when Ephraim went away? 
He knew nothing about that ; so in his loneliness 
he must have looked back at his home and mother 
until its comforts and grandeur seemed far greater 
than they were, the fields broader and the hill- 
crest it stood on far higher. Perhaps, dear old 



268 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

friend, when we have the wedding gifts ready to 
go, you may see your way to living at the farm 
again." 

"Yes, an' back up Eph 's well as I can, though 
it 's only his memory, as she asked, help him by 
halvin* that last mistake that mebby came through 
homesickness," said Time o' Year, catching his 
breath as he moved slowly toward the river path, 
desiring to be alone. 

I sat still a moment, looking across the meadows 
glowing with bright flowers, before I went to re- 
lease Nell. 

We lingered on the river road awhile before 
going over the hills, for the breeze was taking a 
noon nap. The New England Aster in its first 
freshness bloomed in its favorite haunt, the moist 
edge between road bank and river. What a strik- 
ing plant this is when seen standing in uncrowded 
groups close to the water, its rough green leaves 
veiling the stout stem which, at the height of four 
or five feet, is crowned with clusters of rich purple 
flowers, giving a perfect foreground to the river 
picture that disappeared in the shadows of a green 
cave, whose walls were low -arching trees. Surely 
this is the most admirable of all the Asters! 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 269 

Along the road that traverses the Hemlocks the 
various shade-loving Asters kept us company, the 
familiar White Wood with rather heart - shaped, 
toothed leaves and white ray- flowers, and the tall, 
white, Flat Topped, with sparse ray -flowers gathered 
in flat heads like Yarrow. On the dry and rocky 
ground in the Hemlock woods themselves, a 
few Composites of several tribes had found 
footing, and a great bunch of the dark- 
stemmed Stout Ragged 
Goldenrod filled a gap 
between the Hemlock 
trunks through which 
the distant waters of 
the Sound were visi- 
ble, making withal a 
charming picture. 

By the time 
we were over 
the hills, the 
sun was veiled in gray 
haze, and the breeze 
abroad again, bringing 
a message that a 
long line of surf was 
murmuring to the beach, the promise 




270 



A COMPOSITE FAMILY 



of a cold August storm before the next high tide 
should reach its utmost sand mark. 

Not alone in Sunflower Lane and by the way- 
sides do - the Composites throng; the beach-crest, 
well within reach of the high storm tides, 
has its colony also, where lives the suc- 
culent Seaside Goldenrod which 
may be easily identified by its 
star - shaped flower -heads and 
thick leaves. There the wheel 
tracks in the road to the 
beach cottages are outlined by 
the evergreen - looking bushes 
of White Wreath Aster 
with bristling leaves and 
crowded flowers, while on 
the beach edge itself and on 
drifted sand islands all through 
the Sea Gardens the dark 
wands of Blazing Star, set 
with bright purple, thistle - 
like flowers, lure one into the re- 
gion where the Fragrant Everlasting 
mingles with the purplish white flow- 
ers of the dwarf Pine Starwort that 
lodges in the grass, the leaves sugges- 




A COMPOSITE FAMILY 271 

tive of prickly evergreens like those of the White 
Wreath Aster. 

Oh, those Gardens of the Sea with their lavish 
yield of beauty, spread forth freely for 
the seeing and the gathering! 

The glowing flower colors sweep 
broadly, even as the waves on 
the beach beyond the sand 
crest, over the rich black earth 
that is in one spot brackish and 
marshy and in another dry and 
crumbling, the dividing line being, 
perhaps, merely a ridge of wind- 
drifted sand. 

The Sea Gardens are the Market 
Places of the Flower Kingdom, in 
even a greater degree than the way- 
sides, for owing to this blending of 
moist and dry land, plants of divers 
natures find footing and stand well- 
nigh side by side, Beach Plum and Service Berry, 
Thistle and Water Plantain, Wood Lily and Sun- 
drops; while Rose Mallows, Wild Rice, Salt Marsh 
Fleabane and Samphire wade into the water on the 
muddy side of a tide channel, and on the higher 
sandy edge perch Fragrant Everlasting, Knotweed, 




272 A COMPOSITE FAMILY 

Beach Heather, Rabbit's Foot Clover and a wealth 
of Asters; all growing in patches and long trails, 
as if these gardens were the Magician's nurseries 
for the testing and proving his wild -flower crop. 

As the tide rose, the sky grew more leaden, and 
the surf called louder, the air became chilly, and 
that night a fire on the hearth greeted the master, 
twenty degrees having slid down the mercury in 
the thermometer since noontime. Surely the New 
England climate, mingling Autumn with Summer, 
like all other things of the Magician's realm, man, 
beast, bird, and flower, is a Composite! 



X 

WAYFARERS 




MANY moods lead us to seek the flower 
in the landscape; as many as the months, 
and like them, grouping naturally into 
four seasons. First the awakening, the mood inti- 
mate, that draws to close contact and minute in- 
spection, in contrast to the mood impersonal, that 
sees from afar and is satisfied with wide expanse 
and general effect. The insatiable ranging mood 
implies a dash of sporting blood in the veins; while 
the passive mood of the mere spectator, for whom 
the passing of the flower pageant is an unexacting 
amusement, is by far the most usual of all. 

As man, in the making of highways and the 
threading of grassy lanes, has invaded the haunts 
of the wild flowers, these in turn, true to their 
R 273 



274 WAYFAREllS 

native soil, surviving the slightly changed conditions, 
have become wayfarers, thronging the shaded banks, 
open borders, and runnels beside travelled roads, 
according to the locality traversed. There, pro- 
tected by fences from plow and brush -hook, they 
form a wayside calendar of the year, a guide to 
the happenings in wood, field, and swamp, that 
those who may not go afield on foot may ride and 
read. 

A roll-call of the wayfarers that can be found 
by the wheel-tracks that back the sand dunes, bor- 
dering the raised road across the Sea Gardens, hedge 
Sunflower Lane, follow the turnpike through Lone- 
town, and round about the Den District to Tree- 
bridge, would be to repeat the list of the entire 
local flora, from the vagrant Tansy of waste places to 
the delicate Maidenhair Fern, half concealed by way- 
side bushes; save perhaps some of the rarer Or- 
chids, and the plants of deep bogs, through which, 
as a matter of course, if roads are built, the neces- 
sary drainage changes the characteristics of growth. 
Many garden flowers also make their escape from 
cultivation first as wayfarers, having been trans- 
ported by seed or root in earth used for filling gul- 
lies or the space between road and fence, from 
thence travelling across lots to complete freedom 



WAYFARERS 275 

that, after a generation or so, places them in the 
ranks of naturalized plants. 

To find the smaller flowers, whether in wood 
or by the wayside, the quest must be on foot, but 
many an entrancing flower landscape has come in 
my range when sauntering with 
a comfortable horse along the 
byways; and these pictures are 
the more sympathetic from the 
human interest that the bit of 
road lends to them, for the 
vistas opened by it through the 
trees give a depth of focus 
wholly lacking in the un- 
cleared wood or rolling 
meadow. Also, a wide 
knowledge of the berry- 
bearing shrubs and smaller 
trees of any locality may 
be had merely from fol- 
lowing the trail of an 
average country road the 
season through. 

In May the Shad- 
bush and various 
Thorns, together with 




276 WAYFARERS 

the native Apple, Dogwoods, and Viburnums, com- 
bine to draw the eye from the low, moist woods, 
where the leafage begins to shut out the sun that 
at the first coming of Spring awakened the Marsh 
Marigold and Adder's Tongue. 

PussyWillow, the pet name of the Glaucous Wil- 
low, Salix discolor, is the first catkin to give a hint 
of Spring in the uppergrowth, but its little fur pads 
seem better calculated to greet a March snowstorm 
than a melting April shower. At this time the 
faithful yellow wands of Willow trees of river banks 
and along wet waysides are the olive branches that 
pledge a season of peace from Winter storms before 
the snow has wholly retreated and left the earth 
free. 

Shadbush, then, is the first wayfaring shrub to 
wear a complete flower of really decorative quality, 
the delicate down upon the unfolding leaf, with its 
suggestion of hoar frost, being as attractive as the 
blossom itself. 

The Thorns, both as ornamental shrubs and 
small trees, may be seen along brush -edged roads 
at any time from the opening of the Yellow - 
fruited Dwarf Thorn the first week in May, until 
June, when the flower -clusters of the Cockspur 
Thorn, a species which often reaches tree height, 



WAYFARERS 277 

call attention to its stout spikes, that sometimes 
grow four inches in length, serving to identify it. 
Of some half dozen native species of Thorn that 
may be found in byways, the Red -fruited is perhaps 
the most striking, both from its flowers and orna- 
mental fruit, while the White Hawthorn or Eng- 
lish May is to be seen in the Lonetown region 
guarding gateless gaps in old stone walls, to- 
gether with the Lilacs, telling the story of van- 
ished homes. 

The foliage of the Hawthorn is always crisp and 
clear-cut, and the flowers well set and symmetrical. 
Where a mass of the bushes, untrimmed and throw- 
ing out long sprays, forms a natural hedge, the effect 
of a solid barrier is lent to the landscape an effect 
wholly different from that given by either Dogwoods, 
Viburnums, or Elder flowers, and making one wish 
that the climate would allow the Hawthorn's uni- 
versal use to make in America living fences such as 
border even the railways of the Old World. 

The Choke Cherry is also frequently a wayfarer, 
and though, when untrimmed, it grows ten feet in 
height, its constant repression by the roadside stub 
scythe usually keeps it a dwarf bush. In blooming 
time its foliage, which is of the plum -leaf type, 
alone separates it at a casual glance from the Black 



2 7 8 



WAYFARERS 



Wild Cherry of cordial -yielding fruit and poisonous 
leaf, for the flowers are similar. But whosoever 
in early August mistakes the one for the other, 
and eats the dark red, translucent fruit, will dis- 
cover the mistake, and learn also at the same time 
from what the plant derives its name, by promptly 
choking, as poor Flower Hat did; because, though I 
had warned her, she could not believe that any- 
thing that "looked so well could be so perfectly 
horrible quite as bad as the nitrate of silver that 
I had my throat swabbed with last winter." 

Her second experience with the deceptive fruit 
of the Wild Crab Apple, a beautiful but astringent 
member of a kindred family, was equally distressing. 




WAYFARERS 279 

Two Apples may be called wayfarers hereabout. 
The common Apple has escaped so freely from 
orchards, to grow, ungrafted, under the protection of 
old walls that it has become quite a tree of the high- 
ways. Though the fruit is bitter, the flowers grow in 
great profusion, and are pinker than those on grafted 
trees. The more slender tree of the truly Wild 
American Crab Apple is a decided landscape flower 
of roadside tangles and light wood edges. The 
blossoms of this Crab are deep pink, the buds be- 
ing often tipped with carmine. The exquisite per- 
fume has a distinctly wild quality, a fragrance that 
is shared by the small yellow apple itself, though 
the fabled Dead Sea fruit could not have been more 
disappointing than the taste of this Wild Crab. I 
have known even Nell, after whinnying to call my 
attention to a shower of the apples lying like yel- 
low leaves inside a fence out of her reach, to drop 
the half -chewed fruit with an impatient puckering 
of the lips and a shake of the head that plainly said 
in horse talk, "How could you play such a stone - 
for-bread trick upon your aged friend?" 

To May and June also belong the Dog- 
woods, Viburnums, and both the Red- and Black- 
berried Elders. In these months, to travel the road 
from the Lilac House past Tree -bridge to the 



280 



WAYFARERS 



Forge Mill Pond, is to pass between open ranks of 
shrubs that rival in beauty anything that the garden 
can produce. Hereabout the Dogwoods belong to 
the latter half of May, when the showy White - 
flowering Cornel by the roadside gives the signal 
for the rest of the family to unfurl. The alter- 
nate-leaved Cornel, with green bark, has flat 
clusters of white flowers, followed by hand- 
some berries, also white. Set upon coral 
red stems, it grows in clumps by 
this road, together with the Silky Cor- 
nel with its purplish twigs, rounder 
bunches of white flowers and lead- 
blue berries that are of 
the whortleberry shape 
and broader than long; 
while in early June the 
brilliant twigs of the Red 
Osier Dogwood, in wet 
spots and runnels, 
bear white flower - 
clusters and white 
berries. All the Dogwoods 
have small flowers that, like 
the composites, are rendered 
conspicuous by massing, while 




WAYFARERS 28 1 

the berries are of varied hues, and as they remain 
throughout the season are an important means of 
identification. 

The two common Spireas, the pink Steeple 
Bush and the white Meadow Sweet, are also way- 
farers, Steeple Bush choosing wet places, while 
Meadow Sweet as often hedges tumble - down 
fences with its fragrant feathery plumes. 

The Red- berried Elder has very graceful, clear-cut 
compound leaves, ending in sharp points. Its flower - 
clusters are long, somewhat like small bunches of 
whitish Lilacs, while those of the Black -berried spe- 
cies are flat. This Red-berried Elder becomes a 
conspicuous wayfarer at the time that unfolding 
Beech leaves hang in velvety limpness and the 
Hobble Bush or Wayfaring Tree of the smooth, 
purplish bark is only beginning to reveal the white 
in the buds that will soon open into flat bunches 
of flowers, with florets resembling those of the gar- 
den Snowball. 

Whenever the road divides shady banks, the 
Maple -leaved Cornel shows its clearly -marked foli- 
age, that wears such lovely shades of pink in the 
late Summer and Autumn as to win for the plant 
a place in the landscape far beyond the deserts of 
either its inconspicuous white flowers or its black 



282 WAYFARERS 

fruit. Of the common Viburnums, the Arrow- 
Wood, with gray branches, white -clustered flowers 
of the Dogwood type, and blue fruit, shading to 
black, and the Sweet Viburnum are the most no- 
ticeable. 

Sweet Viburnum, locally known as Nanny Berry, 
is an extremely handsome shrub, when left undis- 
turbed often growing into a tree of twenty -five or 
thirty feet in height, covered with shining, saw- 
edged leaves, and in late May topped with a pro- 
fusion of flat bunches of fragrant, small, white 
flowers. The growth is very thick and close, the 
twigs being somewhat spiny, so that Black Thorn 
is among its local names. 

This habit of growth has been noticed by the 
thrifty Hungarians who are venturing into Lone- 
town, and I have seen a chicken pen, fenced by 
the straight bushes, set a few inches apart and 
bound together by a couple of strands of copper 
wire, evidently dropped from the outfit of the 
long distance telephone company, in some of its 
wanderings across country. 

The Sweet Viburnum is easily transplanted, and 
succeeds finely if deep, rich soil is given it, being 
not only a shrub of great beauty, but an attraction 
to birds from its edible fruit. In traversing hillside 



WAYFARERS 283 

roads and looking over distant meadows whose 
edges catch the rich wash of cultivated fields, close 
hedges of Sweet Viburnum can be seen, making 
natural fences suggestive of English Hawthorn. 

"I don't see how folks can get out o' takin' 
notice o' posies, even if they never goes off turn- 
pikes, or sets a foot out o' wagons," said Time o' 
Year one day back in June, as he paused to chat 
while he was crossing the Tree -bridge road a lit- 
tle above the old cider mill. His buttonhole held 
that morning a bunch of Wild Rosebuds, the 
long green calyx -points fringing the carmine -pink 
that peeped between, while as he spoke he pressed 
with his foot the loosened soil about the roots of 
a plant of yellow Hop Clover that had been partly 
washed from its position on the roadbank. 

"Take jest common Clovers, now, not growin' 
in fields for a crop, but strayed out by themselves 
here along the road. There 's lots to see in 'em, 
differences o' leaf and blossoms, and it must be 
allowed few plants is so purty and neat and useful 
all to onct. 

"What draws Clover along the edges o' the road 
so? I reckon it 's the wash o' the road dung that 
blows around and settles, and then the leaf ashes 



284 WAYFARERS 

on top o' that. Somebody 's allus firing leaves 
along roads, and Clover 's jest bound ter foller 
ashes. 

"Did yer ever notice now how this Yaller Clover 
has an upward pointin' narrer leaf that 's grassy to 
the feel? The White one's leaf is rounder and 
opens out more, though it feels stiff and crispy, 
too. But Pink Clover 's got soft, downy leaves o' 
several shapes, and the leaf pieces are mostly 
marked out with lighter green as fine as posies. 
Then there 's the little, dry-stalked kind, that 's 
no account for fodder and grows up in the sand 
wash o' top of the hill, that 's got kind o' furry - 
colored flowers soft as Pussy Willers. Yes, there 's 
a sight to be seen even in Clovers !" 

Time o' Year speaks truly; there is much beauty 
both of detail and effect to be found by the way- 
side, that for various reasons is passed over, the 
chief being because it is close at hand. To the 
usual traveller Clovers and grasses are merely 
species of fodder weeds, from their location; but 
every plant that lends color to even the ground- 
work of the landscape should win admiration. 

The dwarf, sand-growing Clover, known as 
Rabbit's Foot, as Time o' Year says, "soft as 
Pussy Willers," is a most unique little specimen 



WAYFARERS 



285 



(I had almost said creature, so like caterpillar wool 
or soft fur is the color and texture of its flower - 
heads), and is largely overlooked, though it blos- 
soms all Summer in 
places where little else is 
found but the un- 
lovely Tick Tre- 
foils and Sand 
Knotweeds. 

"Then take all 
kinds o' thorny and 
bramble flowers 
that grows along 
turnpikes," con- ^3^ 
tinued Time o' 
Year, "and there's 
picters for yer, painted 

out and framed. Jest look at the big High -bush 
Blackberries yonder, the prickles all hid under a 
load o' white bloom, and these Low -bush ones 
climbin' up the bank, not to speak o' Thimble - 
berry canes growin' up between those old millstones 
on the south side. 

"As fer Roses and White Elder blows, come 
three weeks more and no one with eyes can go on 
the forge crossroad and not be struck of a heap. 




286 



WAYFARERS 



There 's prickly low -bushed Roses by the wheel - 
tracks, and goin' up the bank, all dressed out in 
pink that 's e'ena'most red. Then taller bushes 
back along the fence their flowers are lighter, with 
longer stems and less thorns. The White -flowerin' 

Elder backs 'em up, 
and then goes off alone 
across lots where the 
young Locusts grow, jest 
hedgin' the ground in fit 
for gardins. 

"If it 's out o' 
season for Roses 
and such, there 's 
always Wild Carrot 
that 's a plague 
straight through un- 
less yer take conso- 
lation in observin' its 
flower bunches. It has as 
many spokes as an umbrella, 
that move up and down much 
the same, the bunches bein' 
nice and sort o' slope -topped when in full bloom, 
then flattenin' and curlin' up outward as it makes 
seed, for all the world like an umbrella that 's 





WILD BERGAMO T 



WAYFARERS 287 

turned inside out and wrecked. I tell yer, if yer 
want to find some nice posies and good sniffin's by 
the way, jest go up the Glen Road toward George- 
town some day 'long 'n July. There 's Rose- 
flowered Raspberries up there, settin' between the 
rocks, and a strong-smellin' purple flower, that I 
can't name, only to say it 's shaped like Bee Balm, 
a-growin' along the fences the same as if a gar- 
den of it had broke loose; and jest beyant there 's 
a lot of yaller Wild Senna, flowers that look like 
tall Pa'tridge Peas growin' in long bunches." 

Thus admonished, and being in that neighbor- 
hood at the right time, we turned Nell into the 
Glen Road, which, before entering the woods, ran 
for a space between waste fields fenced by tumble- 
down stone walls, with occasional openings guarded 
by moss-grown chestnut or cedar bars, so long 
disused that Wild Grapes and vines of climbing 
Bittersweet or Waxwork were using them as 
trellises. 

The wayside growth was luxuriant, and typical 
of the season, but offered no novelties until the 
eye, following the fence line, was arrested by a 
flowery bank of unusual color, not blue, nor pur- 
ple, exactly, but a pale combination of the two, a 
sort of rosy suffusion blending with it. 



288 WAYFARERS 

A nearer view showed slender green stems two 
feet or so in height, set with pairs of thin, rather 
slender pointed leaves, each stem crowned by a head 
of flowers, in shape resembling the red Bee Balm, 
as Time o' Year had said, but of a color difficult 
to name, as it appeared under the varied play of 
light and shade before the pasture bars where the 
plants had established themselves, with the evident 
intention of some time appropriating the entire field 
within, as the outposts could now be seen here and 
there between the white -flowered Moth Mulleins. 

This flower, in the hand, proved to be Wild 
Bergamot of pungent odor, one of the Mint tribe, 
but in the landscape, set amid varied greens, and 
separated by the background of gray, lichen -cov- 
ered bars from wild fields dyed with the dull red 
of Sheep Sorrel, it made another of the many pic- 
tures whose color can be retained only by the 
memory. 

A few rods farther on, the wayside growths 
changed again, showing the effects of sandy soil 
and a location that had once been wooded, and 
where now fragrant foliage made up for the lack 
of flowers. On each side of the narrowed way, 
Sweet Fern and Bayberry- bushes touched the 
wheels, yielding their wholesome perfume freely. 



WAYFARERS 



289 



Both of these woody shrubs belong to the same 
family, but while the Sweet Fern, with its scal- 
loped leaves, grows only to the height of two or 
three feet, the Bayberry may attain a height of six 
or eight, its clean, smooth -edged leaves looking as 
if they ought to be evergreen, even though they 
are not, wherefore they are of much color value as 
background among lighter and more perishable 
Summer foliage. 

The chief fame of Bayberry, aside from the 




2QO 



WAYFARERS 



excellent keeping quality of its fragrant branches 
when used to fill the great jars in Summer fire- 
places, comes from its adhesive gray berries. From 
these a waxy substance is obtained 
that in Colonial times was much 
prized for candle - making 
and such uses, the plants 
being one of the few shrubs 
of sand dunes, growing 
profusely along the eastern 
seacoast, where it is still 
called Candleberry. 

Presently the roadside 
became shady on the left, 
while on the right a rocky 
ledge dropped abruptly to the river. 
The wooded bank, sloping upward 
to a crest of Hemlocks and Cotton 
Poplars, was green with Ground Pine, 
Laurels, and Christmas Ferns, while 
at the other side was an irregular 
line of low shrubs with downy leaves, 
suggesting both those of the Sugar Maple and 
Wild Grape, among which were panicles of purple - 
pink flowers, having the fringed stamens, shape, and 
quality of small Wild Roses, that named them as 




WAYFARERS 29 I 

Purple - flowering Raspberries, whose use is beauty, 
as the coarse fruit, though edible, is dry and 
tasteless. 

Removed from its surroundings or seen where 
the too bright sunlight fades the peculiar color of 
its petals, this shrub might be passed by as unat- 
tractive, but here, between road and river, growing 
variously in straight ranks that merged into thick 
clumps, or springing from between rocks and 
hanging over in almost vinelike profusion between 
Wild Grape festoons, to be reflected in the water, 
the color harmonized perfectly and gave the finish- 
ing touch to one of the loveliest byway pictures I 
have ever seen. 

Going into the Glen only far enough to let 
Nell drink from the old pot-hole stone, to which 
a spring is led by an open wooden pipe, we turned 
about, Nell lazily retracing her steps, and I absorb- 
ing, as best I might, this picture of the shaded 
road, reversed by the turning and quite different 
from the first view. The bank that was a flower- 
ing rockery was now on the left, and the river mir- 
rored scraps of beauty and drew down the sky until 
it met and blended with them, while at the en- 
trance of the Glen the bright sun rested on masses 
of deep Pink Knotweed that carried the Raspberry 



WAYFARERS 



color in a paler tone into the distance, completing 
the color harmony of the picture. 

Such vistas are to be looked at and remembered, 
but they cannot be counterfeited by the hand of 
man. The Magician only can combine the detail 
and broad effect that makes them what they are. 

In September the purple stalks and odd green 
leaves of the White Wild Lettuce will have replaced 
the Flowering Raspberry in the Glen, and along 
the rocky side of the highway, 
when the Sumacs will become 
prominent as wayfarers. These 
are more or less conspicuous all 
the year, four types being locally 
plentiful the Poison Sumac of 

moist grounds, with the 

--^^. 

white, drooping berries, and 

the Staghorn, Smooth Upland and 
Scarlet Sumacs of light wood 
edges and dry hillsides. 

These three last are also at- 
tractive in early Summer, from 
the brightness of their foliage and 
the feathery yellow -green of the 
flower - spikes ; but when the 
berry -cones redden they seem to step 




WAYFARERS 2Q3 

out from the tangled wild hedges and briar - 
carpeted waste pastures to suddenly become the 
most notable of wayfarers. 

The Upland Sumac has smooth leaves that in 
Autumn appear varnished, and show little wings 
along the midrib that unite the leaflets to the 
central stem. The foliage of this Sumac, besides 
taking deep rich crimson Autumn tints, has a firm 
leathery quality that makes it valuable for decora- 
tive uses, either when freshly gathered or when 
pressed and massed with the berries of the Stag- 
horn variety and branches of Bittersweet. 

The Scarlet is the usual hillside type; the leaves, 
dark green above, are whitish underneath, and its 
flower -clusters are often ragged from a mingling 
of distorted leaves, while the Staghorn Sumac is 
the tallest type of all, growing to a tree of forty 
feet, with long leaves of sometimes thirty - one 
leaflets. The berries of the Staghorn are covered 
with soft crimson hairs, and the stems and twigs 
are velvety, suggesting, with its way of branching, 
a resemblance to immature antlers. 

These four Sumacs may be seen in Autumn 
following the inland highways, the types varying 
according to whether the soil is wet or dry; and 
these Sumacs, together with the trailing Black- 



2Q4 WAYFARERS 

berry vines, the five -fingered Virginia Creeper of 
stone walls, the three -leaved bushy vines of Poison 
Ivy that crown the fence posts, give the key-note 
of Autumn color that starts like a fire among way- 
side leaves, and burns upward and inward, until the 
Summer beauty wastes away and is consumed, and 
even the tallest Oak of the forest is aflame. 




STAGHOR.N SUMAC 



XI 

THE DRAPERY OF VINES 




VINES are terrible cur'ous natured things," 
said Time o' Year, the week after the 
great August storm that had uprooted trees, 
swept away frail bridges, gullied the hillsides, and 
furrowed the fields of standing corn as with a 
Juggernaut car. He was at work outside his 
cabin, trying to replace the drapery of vines that 
concealed the rough chestnut slabs before the 
wind had rudely rent and twisted them; touching 
each prostrate branch and relaxed tendril as gently 
as if it was a sensate thing sorely bruised and 
wounded. 

"All that keeps 'em from standing up and being 
like trees and other plants is weak backbones, 
that makes 'em fall over and hang hold of some- 
295 



296 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

thing else, which, as I 've observed, likewise often 
happens with folks. I reckon there 's reason and 
intention in it, for we could n't get along with- 
out vines ter take the shiftless look out o' old rail 
fences, trim up dead trees, and sort o' pull together 
things that 's all howsome, any more 'n we could 
do without the leanin' sort o' folks that 's to be 
found in most families. Outdoors would be mighty 
lonesome if the woods was all made o' straight 
Poplars. 

"Now you'd nat' rally allow leanin' and hangin' 
on was a mighty simple thing to do, but when 
you reckon up the different ways they have o' 
doin' it, 't is n't far to believin' that vines can move 
and think things out somehow, for many on 'em 
acts good-intentioned and others pesky, same as 
folks. 

"Some vines jest lay flat on the ground, and sort 
o' trail along, havin' no ambition to go far, and the 
stem gets covered with dirt so you 'd scarcely know 
it for a vine, like Arbutus and Twin Flowers, Pa'- 
tridge Vine and Ground Pine. Others sends up 
long branches that grow quick and seem to sort o' 
feel round uneasy until they touch something to lay 
hold on. Then they 're up and off sky-high, twist- 
ing themselves round and round, and climbing like 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 



297 



snakes. Great Bindweed goes that way, pullin' 
itself up over the weeds, and mebby two vines '11 
meet and wind around each other, and climb up in 
the air. Waxwork does that too, an' Climbin' 
Hemp. See that lot of it down there by the river, 
the way it 's prettied up that mess o' Sticktights 
by coverin' 'em in ? 

"Then, again, some vines has strong, woody 
stems with little sort o' roots along 'em which 
they use, like caterpillars do feet, to stick and 
walk along by. Three Fingers (Poison Ivy) does 
that, while Five Fingers (Virginia Creeper) has 
climbers all made special to claw wood and stone, 
with little suckers on the end jest like tree -toads' 
toes. Grapes has these climbers too, lackin' the 
suckers, and so is obliged to twist 'em round 
like wires same as Catbrier, which I call pesky, 
along with Tear Thumb, that 's a mean cussed 
thing, havin' stem prickles set backward 

like fish-hook barbs. 

More yet climbs by 





298 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

the twiny end of the leaves like Tares, or loopin' 
and twistin' the whole leaf around like this Bower 
Vine here." 

The Bower Vine toward which Time o' Year 
pointed was a wonderful plant of the Virgin's 
Bower Clematis, which, by means of long canes 
of standard Blackberries, had climbed to the cabin 
eaves and seized upon an overhanging Maple branch 
to continue its career. Then, buffeted by the 
storm, it had fallen back in a mass upon the 
Blackberries in that stage of relaxed perfection 
of bloom that is followed by the gray -feathered 
winged seeds. 

The old man looked quite himself once more, 
except that the hurried speech, which for one of 
his silent nature was akin to garrulous, told of ner- 
vousness. Laying down the hammer, tacks, and 
bits of leather with which he was fastening the 
vines in place, until, as he expressed it, they could 
"feel their fingers again," he went into the cabin 
and brought out two long envelopes tied up in a 
legal manner with red tape. 

"Here be those papers that we spoke about to- 
gether a spell ago, her claims and mine, all wrote 
out, a clear title, and swore to by the town clerk 
over to the Center. He claims and he knows 



TJt 




THE DRAPERY OF VINES 2QQ 

that the Society '11 hev ter keep these, but the 
copies that you 're goin' ter get made in pictures '11 
.be for A-lois all right. Now the old doctor thet 's 
dead, he had fam'ly pride, and his folks was all 
figured out like a tree with roots and branches and 
what not. I saw it once when I fetched hjm up 
some fish -flies. I was thinkin' thet I 'd like these 
here drawn out like two Sugar Maples, such as 
those in front o' the farm up there, standin' side 
by side, and when they 're worked up ter the top, 
ter have the branches touch. That 's me and her, 
and then right over that, work in A-lois' picture, 
kind o' like an Apple, 'cause she 's the last bearin' 
o' both trees, and she 's goin' ter star,t a new 
plantin' all over in fresh ground." 

"But how about using Alois as an Apple on the 
top of a Maple tree ?" I asked, struggling to take 
exact account of his directions, for the guidance of 
Flower Hat in the doing of this curious task for 
which I stood sponsor. 

"I asked the doctor that about his'n, which 
was plainly an Oak tree, and yet ev'ry name was 
writ on an Apple. He laughed and said it was the 
way with fam'ly trees, they took on cur'ous con- 
trary grafts that would kill any other kind, and 
often upset Scripter by bearin' Figs on Thorns and 



300 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 



w/ 



Grapes of Thistles. Also, he 
supposed Apples was a good 
humblin' fruit to use on such 
trees ter keep down fam'ly pride 
and make folks meditate on the 
fall o' man and the worry o' 
knowin' too much." 

When I stowed the papers safely away 
under the seat of the chaise, the delicate 
fragrance of Violets seemed to rise from the 
damp, matted herbage by the river. As I 
raised my head to catch the wind, after the 
fashion of a hunting-dog, a habit soon ac- 
quired by outdoor people on the alert for 
scent and sound, Time o' Year noticed the 
expression of inquiry, and said, 

"No, it ain't Violets. Come and see! 
Ground Nuts," he added, laconically, pointing to 
where a mass of bean -like leaves and twisted vine- 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 3<DI 

stalks mingled with the Elder bushes, now loaded 
with the translucent, wine -colored berries. 

"Hyacinth Beans," I added, lifting the leaves to 
find the clusters of thick -petaled, keeled flowers of 
violet -brown, that yield such an exquisite odor. 
The vine was fairly heavy with its fragrant burden, 
but the flower -clusters, being borne in the leaf- 
axils, are often concealed from the eye, and so first 
tell the nose of their presence. For a space of 
at least twenty yards, the bushes of the low ground 
were bound into a hedge by this vigorous vine, 
which, although too inconspicuous in itself to be 
called a landscape flower, pays its tithe in fra- 
grance, and brings into uniformity much that would 
otherwise be unsightly, straggling growth. 

This Bean has two cousins, one "pesky," to 
use Time o' Year's expression, and the other 
daintily pretty, the Hog Peanut of tangles and 
woodland underbrush, and the Trailing Wild Bean 
of sandy road banks. 

The Hog Peanut is so very "pesky" and destruc- 
tive to delicate ferns and flowers by throwing its 
octopus-like meshes around them and literally 
choking them to death, that every lover of the 
wildwood undergrowth should make a point of up- 
rooting it wherever possible. It is a plant 'easily 



302 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

identified by its hairy, persistent stems that trail 
low, and its three -divided leaf, in form suggesting 
that of Poison Ivy, its cluster of purple -pink flowers 
being less conspicuous than the pea-like pods that 
follow them. 

Many a time have I gone to the haunt of 
Maidenhair, Closed Gentian, or Gerardia, to find 
the plants wholly choked by this Bean, which is 
more mischievous than the Dodder, that winds its 
coils of copper about marsh plants, without having 
its merit of originality. 

The Trailing Wild Bean, on the other hand, 
decorates what would be barren and unsightly banks 
with little clusters of pink, flesh, or lilac -tinted 
blossoms, held well above the handsome leaves on 
straight, stiff stalks, which, from the wholly pros- 
trate habit of the vine, appear like separate plants. 
The long, slender pods, oftenest growing in groups 
of three, are also quite ornamental. These two are 
minor vines, almost ground -dwellers, so to speak, 
akin to Vetches, Beach Peas, Trefoils, Bedstraws, 
Jill -over -the -ground, Bearberry, Cranberry, Pyxie, 
and a score of other trailing vines which, accord- 
ing to the definition that " a vine is any plant 
having a weak stem that reclines on the ground, 
or rises by means of aerial rootlets, or by clasping 



CREEPER -r- "THOW4NO ITS LOVELY 
OVER ROCKS, TREES, OR CRUMBL1 NG RUINS ." 




THE DRAPERY OF VINES 




or twining about a support, 
are so classified, but which are 
commonly re- 
garded merely 
as low -growing 
plants. 

"The Vine" 
in Bible lan- 
guage indi- 
cated the 
Grape, and at 
once suggests the climbing rather than the merely 
prostrate trailing plants. 

The real vines of the landscape are those that 
drape the ungraceful and screen the unsightly, 
swinging their branches in the wind as they climb 
to their tree -top flower-gardens, trailing them in 
the streams which they try to imitate in the un- 
dulous motions of their growth, or following the 
highways to decorate and drape neglected walls and 
fences by their presence. 



304 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

Of the ninety or so vines of the northeastern 
states, twenty comprise all those, exclusive of gar- 
den escapes, that have real landscape value. These 
make themselves felt in different ways and degrees, 
sometimes as a whole, then either by leaf and ten- 
dril, flower or fruit, or by only one of these, so that 
to appreciate vines one must be able to recognize 
them under all conditions, as we know the trees. 

As standard plants may be roughly classified as 
herbs and shrubs, so may landscape vines be grouped 
as herbaceous and woody climbers, the first being 
those that, coming from either perennial roots or 
seed, make a new growth each year, being cut 
down to the ground only or wholly killed by frost; 
the second, the vines of hardy stems, which go on 
increasing in size from year to year, until, as in the 
case of the Poison Ivy, Virginia Creeper, and Wax- 
work or Bittersweet, the stem often attains such 
proportions that it remains standing and treelike 
after the support to which it originally clung has 
fallen away. All of these vines flower during Sum- 
mer, according to locality and situation; in fact, I 
can recall no northern climbing vine that is rep- 
resented among the early Spring flowers, though 
ground Trailing Arbutus, evergreen Ground Pines, 
Club Mosses, Flowering Moss or Pyxie, technically 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 305 

speaking, represent the general class at the coming 
of Spring. 

Of the woody, or, in fact, of all our vines, Vir- 
ginia Creeper stands easily the peer. Clean of 
limb, with leaves of five gracefully -poised parts, 
disc -tipped tendrils, and flower -stems which look 
like leaf framework adapted for the plant's service, 
as in truth they are, it has clusters of small green 
flowers that make its haunts hum like a beehive all 
through July, followed in Autumn by deep blue 
berries with a frosty bloom, set on red stalks which 
often remain in coral -like spikes after the fruit has 
gone to make a meal for hungry birds. As a 
climber its ambition is boundless, for without turn- 
ing from its course this Creeper will often ascend 
fifty feet, at the same time sending out branches at 
right angles, that swing and droop with the most 
perfect grace. In color scheme it rivals the Poison 
Ivy, that handsome but evil plant which for its sins 
is set apart. In Summer even, Virginia Creeper 
often shows pinkish ribs and leaf-veinings, while 
from middle August until frost scatters the leaflets 
all the scintillations of flame belong to it. 

A little way from home there is a crossroad that 
I call the Vine Way, where the rocky bank has 
been allowed to keep its wealth of hedging, and 



306 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

where the plants and trees that have become way- 
farers are protected by the owner of the border 
land. Here is yearly a sort of gallery exhibition of 
these hardy vines hung about and over a thicket 
of tall Red Cedars, Bird Cherries, and Privet 
bushes; and as all the flowers and fruit are held 
high over a stony bank they are as sour grapes 
to the passer-by, and remain undespoiled. In early 
Summer the white flowers of Bird Cherry are con- 
trasted with the coral tubes of Trumpet Honey- 
suckle of smooth, twining stem, whose oblong 
leaves, those underneath the flowers closing around 
the stalk, are almost evergreen even in Connec- 
ticut, after the fashion of its Chinese relatives, 
which, having escaped from a near-by 
garden, cover the opposite wall. 

The Virgin's Bower, rooted in moister 
soil behind the fence, leans over to clasp 
a prim bush of Privet, while Catbrier, set 
like a barbed screen to keep out intrud- 
ers, shows varnished 
green leaves, clusters of 
a dozen or so yellowish 
flowers in June, and all 
the rest of the year 
berries that range from 




THE DRAPERY OF VINES 307 

green to purple -black, hanging on, as impervious 
to cold as leaden bullets, through the fiercest Winter 
.storms. 

The group of Cedars on this bank have been 
chosen by the Waxwork and Virginia Creepers for 
trellises upon which to display all their ambition 
for high climbing and their capabilities for draping, 
looping, and twining, in which they are joined by 
a veteran, shaggy -barked vine of Fox Grape, also 
near kin to the Virginia Creeper, its few clustered 
bunches of amber-purple berries being the ancestors 
of Isabella, Concord, and other garden favorites. 

What an harmonious trio they make ! The 
Grape furnishes fragrance in flower and fruit, the 
Creeper beauty of leaf, and the Waxwork the 
most highly decorative berry of any vine, either 
when the little yellow lemons are intact or after 
they open to display the scarlet seed pulp. Yet, 
in spite of these great berry wreaths that crown 
the pointed Cedars, it is the Virginia Creeper which 
draws the eye by its combined grace and mas- 
siveness, both displayed by different parts of the 
same vine. In fact, this creeper, though not an 
evergreen, is the only American equivalent for the 
transfiguring Old World Ivy, and, like it, survives 
transplanting and continues its hopeful upward 



308 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

course, throwing its lovely draperies equally over 
rocks, trees, or crumbling ruins as if to shield them 
from public gaze during their downward way. 

In spite of the fact that on this bank, at least, 
it has often been uprooted, Poison Ivy still strug- 
gles up a stone heap, endeavoring to display its 
gorgeous colors with the other climbers, showing 
that this vine of fatal touch has at least the two 
good attributes that the charitable old lady accorded 
the devil, perseverance and good taste in reds. 

The other Wild Grapes that hold such an im- 
portant place in the landscape are the Sweet- 
scented Riverside, and Frost varieties. 

The Riverside Grape is the vine whose shining, 
deeply-lobed leaves make green walls of the bushes 
along streams, the blossoms filling the air with 
musky perfume in early Summer, and the fruit with 
spice from July until the last cluster has disap- 
peared in middle Autumn. The Frost, Chicken, 
or 'Possum Grape, with leaves of both the Poplar 
and Maple type, is most conspicuous in Autumn 
when others have lost their fruits, from its thickly 
clustering bunches of small black berries, covered 
with bloom, and more nearly resembling an irregular 
bunch of Bird Cherries than the yield of any of its 
Grape kindred. 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 



309 



There is something in the 
swing and trail of a Grape-vine 
.that gives both breadth and focus 
to a water picture, so much 
so that the Fox Grape seems 
out of place growing in dry 
woods and looping its stout 
stems like swings between 
the trees. 

Vines and rivers al- 
ways seem to me of 
kindred temperament, 
and three at least of our 
loveliest Summer vines are 
hereabout oftenest found 
within sound of water, 
these are Mountain Fringe, 
Balsam Apple, and the Wild 
Yam. 

Mountain Fringe 
also grows on hillsides, 
but I associate it with 
moist woods quite near 
the river, where its deli- 
cate leaves, a cross be- 
tween those of Meadow 




THE DRAPERY OF VINES 



Rue and the deeply cleft foliage of 
its cousin, Dutchman's Breeches, 
fall in relief against a dark back- 
ground and support the violet -white, 
dangling blossoms whose shape faintly 
suggests those of the Bleeding Heart 
of old gardens. 

The Balsam Apple, in a wild state, 
is a true vine of waterways, following 
them as closely as does the River Grape, 
though in cultivation it seems resigned 
to any rather moist, rich soil. 
When in July it puts forth its 
flower-clusters, which are of two 
kinds, the one bearing the seed 
being small and inconspicuous, 
the other a long, feathery wand 
of dull white six -cleft flowers, it 
is decorative in the ex- 
treme and fairly overflows 
herbs and shrubs with a 
foam -topped tidal wave of 
bloom. It also makes 
effective use of its three -fingered tendrils, 
and adds a silvery tint of green to the 
landscape by its somewhat star - shaped 




THE DRAPERY OF VINES $11 

leaves. Balsam Apple is not common hereabout, 
though Time o' Year's River mirrors a few masses 
of it; but all along the lower Bronx in New York 
state it is so abundant as to paint charming pic- 
tures for the passers-by on trains. 

The Wild Yam is a vine of moist seclusion, 
rather than one that follows the wood edge or 
open river. It climbs by its stem for twelve or 
fifteen feet, and its leaves are of the shape of some 
of the Bindweeds and the Wild Convolvulus, except 
that the veins run lengthwise, marking it as akin 
to the Lily tribe, the veining being like that of the 
Carrion Flower, which shows its balls of feathery 
white flowers along June hedges and wood bor- 
ders, to be followed by clusters of sometimes forty 
or fifty bluish berries. 

The Yam has a very fantastic way of progress- 
ing, by going to the end of a straight sapling, then 
bending in a leafy festoon until it reaches another, 
so that a dozen slender trees may be joined and 
draped in this graceful fashion. The small flowers 
are a greenish white, drooping in loose panicles, 
quite inconspicuous in comparison with the bright 
green three -angled seeds which, when mature, are 
almost one inch long, and hang in long bunches 
that are very ornamental. These frequently re- 



312 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

main over Winter, serving as a guide to the home 
of a vine that might be unnoticed in Summer when 
thick leafage covers its retreat in the same woods 
beloved of Climbing Nightshade. 

Three other Summer vines there are, landscape 
factors, and yet veritable wayfarers, appearing to 
follow wayside fences as persistently as the Knights 
of the Road do the railway tracks. These are 
Wild Convolvulus, False Buckwheat, and Wild Hop. 

Wild Convolvulus is the most decorative of the 
Summer wild vines, and its chaliced flowers of 
either pure white or pink with white stripes are 
to be seen mingling with Wild Roses and fragrant 
Elder blossoms in early Summer. To think of one 
plant, in fact, is to call to mind the others. No 
support is too humble for the Convolvulus, a 
bunch of weeds, a ground wire from a telegraph 
pole, or a fence will do; and I have seen dead 
Milkweed and Mullein stalks so completely appro- 
priated by its clinging stem and clean, triangular 
leaves as to deceive the unwary into thinking the 
Convolvulus a standing plant. 

Sunflower Lane is hedged with these lovely 
flowers every June, their places being taken in 
late Summer by festoons of Climbing False Buck- 
wheat, cousin to Tear Thumb, which has a some- 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 




what similar, though 
more heart - shaped 
leaf than the Con- 
volvulus ; and loose 
panicles of yellowish 
green flowers quickly 
followed by the three -angled 
seeds, resembling the hulls of 
Buckwheat. 

I have found the native Hop 
living in Sunflower Lane in a 
way that precludes the idea of its being a garden 
escape. To watch the growth of this vine (for 
the growth is almost visible), its manner of reach- 
ing out for and clasping the support when once 
it is secured, is to agree that, as a mental effort, 
the study of the movements of vines is second 
only to that of the fertilization of Orchids by 
insects. Darwin testifies that a new shoot of Hops 
rises straight from the ground, and after a while 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 




support, 
bends and 
travels as if grop- 
ing around all parts of the compass, 
moving in a circle, like the hands 
on a watch, either until it finds 
a support to contract about, or 
until it becomes stiff from age; 
and he has estimated the aver- 
age time for one revolu- 
tion around the circle to 
be two hours and eight 
minutes. 

"It 's cur'ous that 
vines is about the easiest 
posies to move," said Time 
o' Year, standing by the 
cabin and surveying the 
repaired greenery. "Just 
like lopsy folks. Give 'em 
good feedin' and a support 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 315 

accordin' to their natures and they 're settled in 
no time, people o' set feelin's and trees bein' 
different. But I '11 say this for the vines you 
must cut 'em back to the root and let 'em spring 
up fresh and take their own hold o' things. Each 
one has its own way o' twistin', and won't go 
back -handed. One that by nature goes left -wise 
'11 lie flat on the ground 'fore it '11 twist to the 
right, even if there 's good stuff to hang to 
near-by showin' plenty o' spunk where it don't 
seem of no account, jest like leanin' folks. 

"All that tackin' and tyin' up I 've done won't 
amount to anything only to keep the vines from 
breakin' down till they feel their own fingers again. 
. i . Be you in a hurry? No? Then I '11 
fetch chairs, for I 've some 'at more to lay before 
you. 

"The lease o' my old farm bein' out in October, 
I let 'em know I did n't calkerlate to rent again, 
and quicker 'n greased lightnin' a story got around 
that Eph was married and comin' home ter live, 
and all such like. I felt called to stop talk by 
tellin' the new minister's wife the facts yesterday 
when she was passin' up this road a-blackberryin'. 
Nothin' about Eph's tale-tellin' and A-lois' letter, 
but jest that he was dead and had done well with 



316 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

some funds I sent him, an' that I reckoned to move 
back to the farm to live, at least o' winters, and 
fix it up a bit, if I could see my way clear, and get 
things straightened out right. 

"She seemed mighty pleased and interested and 
come in and set down a spell. She said, 'It '& 
real cozy here. I don't wonder you like it better 
than a big, lonely house.' 

'Yes,' sez I, ' after she died most indoor 
places seemed too big and lonesome. That 's why 
I 've kept mostly outside. Seems somehow to me 
that the meetin' -house was the loneliest place o' 
all. I 'm reconciled to Scripter if 't ain't pressed 
too fer to prove out meanin's that was n't thought 
on when 't was writ; but goin' by that, I don't 
ever suppose we was meant ter set in meetin '- 
houses, anyhow. When I 've tried ter do it sense 
she died, I 've jest felt cooped up in sin, and not 
right safe again until I 'm down the river hill. 
Folks go so far as ter say Natur' 's a heathen god, 
instead o' bein' one o' His hands to work out 
things, as I see it.' 

"Said she, lookin' round kind o' skeered o' her 
own voice, *I often feel that also, and the dear 
Lord himself surely loved and lived out-of-doors, 
and taught on mountains, by the sea, and under 




GREAT BINDWEED, OR WILD CONVOLVULUS 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 317 

wayside trees, choosing just ordinary Field Lilies 
and wild fowl for his texts. Yours is clear sight, 
Time o' Year!' 

"My, but things is changed sence that day 
when in the meetin'- house they preached Eph 
away from home and her out o' the world and me 
inter the woods at one time! 

"By and by, when the minister's wife got 
rested, she looked up, and says, kind o' quick, 'I 
guess you '11 need a housekeeper if you move up 
to the farm.' 

" 'That 's the worst on 't,' sez I. 'It 's over 
long sence I 've had my outgoin's and incomin's 
noticed or was held accountable for the same. In 
trout -time and 'long in Fall when quail and pa'- 
tridge is fair game and 'coons are out, and in be- 
tween times I 'm out early and late, and keep 
no reglar hours, so I 'm af eared no sober-minded 
woman hereabout would want ter put up with 
me, nor, mostlike, I with her.' 

" * Why not try some one from away ?' she said, 
kind o' smilin' and crossin' the cabin ter pick up 
the botany book that the schoolma'am I told ye 
of gave me. 

' 'I 'm not acquainted further 'n the Ridge,' 
sez I. 



3l8 THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

" 'Why not have her?' sez she, pointin' to the 
name on the front page. 

" f l 'd be well satisfied, only I don't know if 
she 's alive, even.' 

"'She is,' said the minister's wife, jumpin' up, 
not able to keep it in longer, 'and she 's got to 
give up teachin' for good and all, on account of the 
close air in the school - house hurting her lungs 
again. She 's poorly off, and looking for a place as 
housekeeper, if only to work for board. We were 
school -girls together, and when I moved here she 
told me all about you and said she hoped she 'd 
see you once again. She would not curb your 
comings and goings, but would be a daughter to 
you. May I write to her?' 

'The Lord be praised! It does beat all,' sez 
I, 'how takin' counsel o' right-minded women 
gives comfort. I 'd lived so long away from 'em 
I 'd near forgot. Scripter is true. No man can 
either live or die to himself, and I 've done the 
one and come pretty near doin' t' other. No, 
so long as man is born o' woman, he 's calkerlated 
to hev some folks around, I reckon; and if he 
don't, things don't work out jest right. 

" So minister's wife, she 's goin' ter write, namin' 
good pay and fix it up, an' by the time the hick- 



THE DRAPERY OF VINES 319 

ory-nuts is ripe, and I 've laid in some, along o' 
walnuts and butternuts, I '11 be livin' partly at the 
farm for her sake and to back up Eph's words all 
I can. But there 's no law nor gospel ter forbid 
me keepin' my cabin here, or from followin' the 
wood path and the river, and hearin' and seein' 
what I can't allers give account of. ... 

"How about my picture you was promisin' ter 
take, ter send out ter A-lois?" he asked, now quite 
alert, with brightened eyes. 

"I 'm ready to-day, if you will put on your old 
soft hat and long boots, and bring your rod down 
to the river where the grapes make a curtain that 
hides the bank, and the water rushes over the 
stones. No, don't fix up; come as you are. I 
want you to look your natural self." 

"Jest as you say. But nateral self ain't what 
nobody 1 've seen pictered ever looked," said Time 
o' Year, really laughing out loud, to my astonish- 
ment, for before that I had only seen him smile 
silently. 

"There is the place," I said, pointing as we 
reached the river. "Now wade along as you do 
when you 're trout -fishing, whipping your line 
until I call, Stop!" 

As he waded through the eddies and swung his 



32O THE DRAPERY OF VINES 

rod before casting, he seemed to undergo a mys- 
terious change. Time o' Year became himself 
again, instead of the anxious old man of the last 
few weeks who had told me of past sorrows and 
present perplexities. 

Whatever else befalls, I thought, Alois shall 
have a picture of her grandfather as he really is, 
the half wild wood spirit in his haunt surrounded 
by a drapery of vines. 



XII 



AFTERMATH 

THE beginning and the end 
of the natural year are alike 
in simplicity of form and 
un draped outlines. The 
foreground and vanishing 
point are sketched by the etch- 
er's tool ; it is only the broader 
middle distance that is dense 
with foliage and sensuous color. 
As at the dawn of Spring, 
the half-tones of Pussy Willow and 
Catkin -tassels lead the way toward 
brilliant flower color, so when the finger 
of frost touches the bright petals, after- 
math, in form of clouds of smoky plant 
down, fantastic seed -pods, nuts and Win- 

\ii ter berries, draws the eye again toward 
| somber tints, black, the absorber of all 
ty colors, and white, its opposite tree shad- 
ows upon the snow. 

Who can predict the date of the coming of 
frost with certainty ? One season the field flowers 
U S^i 




322 AFTERMATH 

are left to die of ripe old age, the delicate wood 
Ferns go through changes of tint, until all color is 
bleached from them before they are cut down in 
late October. Another year perhaps nothing re- 
covers from the September storms that beat and 
make sodden and then draw the cold northwest 
winds after them. Even though frosts be light and 
October a month of slowly deepening red and gold, 
the flowers disappear from their haunts one by one, 
and the Ferns melt or shrivel away according to 
their previous succulence, leaving the rock Poly- 
pody, Ebony Spleenwort, Christmas and Evergreen 
Wood Ferns as the Winter representatives of the 
tribe, so that November is always the month of 
aftermath. Then when we follow the wood path 
and waterways, the eye is content with mere 
gleanings of color, such as the red -berried cap of 
Jack -in -the -Pulpit, the Dogwood and the coral - 
strung Winterberry yield. 

At this time the open fields, uplands, meadows, 
and byways, where distance softens, are more allur- 
ing than the deep woods in which we are brought 
face to face with barrenness. But of all places, the 
marshes bordering Sunflower Lane are the most 
hospitable to both plant and bird. 

The Hazel Bushes along the lane have dropped 



AFTERMATH 323 

their nuts, and many a wise red squirrel has made 
hoard of them. Young Oaks, tenacious of leaf, 
form a wind-break toward the north, so that here 
and there a tuft of Canada Goldenrod is blos- 
soming, with fresh Dandelions at its roots, both 
under shelter of Wild Lettuce, gone to fluffy seed, 
while at intervals, until the lane .becomes merely a 
wheel -track in the meadow, tall bushes of Winter - 
berry flame up like fires of a wayside gypsy camp. 

Down on the Sound's edge the change from 
the growing to the resting season of flower and 
fern is often veiled in the sea mist following the 
cold storm, and when it lifts, Indian Summer pos- 
sesses the meadows, the reprieve that the Ma- 
gician sends to soften the austerity of frost. 

For two weeks we had looked out upon a 
clearly etched landscape of Autumn, ripened, not 
rent, by the shock of frost, where everything was 
seen at a glance and in detail, from the acorns that 
the Jays pilfered from the Oaks, beneath the win- 
dows, to the cornstalks silhouetted against the sky 
on the hill limit of the horizon. The air was so 
rarefied that the oxen plodding solemnly along the 
hill -top appeared gigantic, and like the strange 
winged beasts of the Apocalypse. 



324 



AFTERMATH 



"This is growing monotonous," said Flower 
Hat one afternoon, as the sun went down with a 
piercing, cold yellow glow that promised black 
frost. "I don't like to see everything at once, and 
the same thing all the time. It 's like having one's 
Christmas presents given with the wrappings off, 
just things, with no surprises." 

Before midnight a storm set in. The 
weather changed again the next 
day, and fog wrapped the land- 




AFTERMATH 325 

scape, teaching us to see it anew by doling it out 
in sections. 

At first the mist showed us only the near-by 
White Pines, using itself as a screen to throw out 
the articulation of every twig. Then it retreated 
below the Oaks, and we found the russet hue that 
dyed their tenacious leaves very cheeringly. 

Next, the fog dropped below the old orchard 
toward the river, on the west, and the lowland 
cottages seemed to float on a lake of mist, like 
house -boats. On the south side it rolled back- 
ward across the Sea Gardens to the beach crest, 
and there remained for two days. 

What a protecting cloak against the gunners 
this fog was to the water-fowl, storm-driven to the 
stony bar! You could hear their voices calling and 
signaling along its entire length from the land; and 
the flutter of damp wings made mysterious noises, 
like the snapping of icicles in a Winter storm or 
the dripping of melting snow. 

Ah ! the beauty of the scene the next morning 
when the veil was suddenly lifted from the water, 
and far and near, covering the bay like a fleet of 
white -winged boats in a harbor of refuge, the water- 
fowls floated at the moorings where necessity had 
anchored them ! 



326 AFTERMATH 

It was a staccato day, this second of November. 
Every thing was sparkling, air, sand, water, sky. 
Even the sounds were crisp and clear cut. The 
dry leaves crackled and snapped, the wind played 
over the corn -stacks with the dancing measure of 
castanets, while every remaining stalk of Marsh 
Grass, Wild Rice, and the Old Fog of the sandy 
fields rustled in a different key. The bird notes, 
too, were all staccato. The nuthatch's sharp quank, 
the blue jay's call, the yellow hammer's wick-wick- 
wick, and the cry of the circling red -tailed hawk, 
no, not all, for in the upland stubble field from 
which the buckwheat had been taken, rose a sweet 
legato song, clear, if a trifle thin. Spring-o'-the- 
year, Spring - o'- the - year, called one voice to 
another, and a flock of meadow larks arose and 
flew over us. 

"What deceitful birds!" gasped Flower Hat, as 
she struggled to face the wind and force it to blow 
back the locks of hair that were blinding her, 
turn up the collar of her jacket, and give the soft 
felt headgear she now wore a tilt up behind and 
down in front, all at the same time. 

"Not deceitful, hopeful or reminiscent, either 
you please," I answered. "No more deceitful than 
Indian Summer itself that spreads a golden haze 



AFTERMATH 




over the season's 

raggedness and 

gives to November 

a day like this 

which, save for the 

swift twilight and late 

dawn, might be April. 

The lark notes are the 

music to the final scene of the masque of the 

Season of Blossoms. The Magician has given the 

landscape its last flower, which sometimes does not 

fade before he washes the colors from his palette 

with newly fallen snow." 

Flower Hat, still struggling with her hair, 
stopped, and climbing a rail fence, looked wildly 
about. 

" Last flower landscape ? Where ? Surely you 
don't mean those little wispy bits of Goldenrod, 
and I 'm positive that the frost of a week ago, 



328 AFTERMATH 

though it was very light, has left nothing else in 
this low place. Oh, look at the line of Milk- 
weeds with the pods pointing this way and that! 
The sun and wind are opening them, and you can 
see the silk puff out and sail away with the seeds, 
hanging like cars of a tiny balloon;" and Flower Hat 
picked a stalk and held it up. The brown seeds 
seen through the split pod fitted over one another 
like fish scales, but even as we looked, the opening 
grew wider and the dried scales slipped apart, 
hanging a moment by the silk -like filaments which, 
in another second, feathered out and floated away 
to perpetuate the race. 

"How beautiful!" she added, "and yet it is 
only common Silkweed. And over yonder is a 
Virgin's Bower Vine gone to seed, that, as the 
wind stirs it, looks like a wreath of leaf smoke 
pufHng over the brush; and there are still a few 
leaves and berries on the Virginia Creeper. But I 
do not see your last flower. Where and what is it?" 

"That would be telling a day's pleasure in one 
word," I replied. "I must answer as Time o' 
Year does, 'Come and see!' and then take you 
to this last flower in its haunt." 

Before noon we turned from the Hemlocks into 



AFTERMATH 



329 



the narrow road through the hollow. In 
the dry fields and along the road the 
various Thistles showed belated pom- 
pons, and Climbing Bittersweet or Wax- 
work looped its berry -laden branches over 
the walls, or else, fallen in a heap, chari- 
tably covered a mass of dingy weeds 
with an orange and red mantle. 



In the strip of swamp that held the 
backwater of the river, and from which 
it was divided by a copse of gray -limbed 
Maples, the Cat -tail Flags still held 
their batons, no longer stiff and brown, 
but frayed and limp, above the beds of 
decaying leaves. This is one of the 
marshes where the little peeping frogs 
announce the coming of Spring. Now 
the place was noiseless, the absence of 



330 AFTERMATH 

the myriad sounds from throat and wing and limb 
often being the essential difference between a late 
Autumn and an early Spring day. 

Along the Hemlock road the banks were green 
with Christmas Ferns, and red Partridge Berries 
revealed great mats of the inconspicuous little vines 
that were somewhat overlooked in the flowering 
season, just as the brilliant oval berries of Spice 
Bush are far better known than its early blossoms. 

Now, for a space, the ground on each side of 
the road was low, and then sloped up to drier 
woods. 

"Look at the Willows," cried Flower Hat, al- 
most falling out of the chaise as she pointed. 
"The soft weather has coaxed them to bud, or 
else they misunderstood those delusive meadow 
larks. You sillies ! In a few days, or perhaps 
to-night, you will be nipped in the bud and learn 
by bitter experience, like the rest of us, that, no 
matter how it seems, it is not safe in New England 
to be without your flannels between October and 
May." 

"Not Willows; guess again," I said, guiding Nell 
into the road; for, as usual, she had walked up to 
the nearest fence to be tied the moment Flower 
Hat sprang to her feet. 



AFTERMATH 



331 



The band of peculiar greenish yellow, in pig- 
ments called citrine, now followed the road on both 
sides and washed well up on to the hills. The hue 
suggested both Willows and the flowers of Spice 
Bush, now showing the ripe berries, yet lacked 



the glow 
of Spring 
color, be- 
ing a sort 

of reflection, as moonlight to sunlight, 
though it filled the eye completely 
and drew it from the misty grayness 
of the leafless Swamp Maples. 

As we drove through a narrow 
place where the bushes came to the 
wheel -tracks, the same color suddenly 
appeared within grasp. 

"You have come, seen the flower in 
the landscape, and here it is almost in the hand," 
I said. "Now what is it ?" 

Flower Hat gazed at the mottled branch for 
which she had reached. The nuts of a past sea- 



332 AFTERMATH 

son were ripening side by side with the threadlike 
petals of the newly -opened blossoms that wrote its 
name. 

"Witch Hazel!" she exclaimed. "Who would 
have dreamed that there was miles of it here, or 
that these spidery flowers could light up the whole 
landscape and take the bleakness from it ! I 've 
often had bunches of it sent me, and I liked the 
flowers for their oddity, but out here it is a wholly 
different thing. Why don't people come to see it 
as they go to hunt for Arbutus or Pussy Willows 
in Spring ? It 's quite worth while." 

"Why, indeed?" I echoed in thought. "Be- 
cause, I suppose, the outing mood is too often for- 
saken with other Summer-day occupations, and so 
in Autumn the flower in the hand is better known 
than the flower in the landscape. Very few people 
have any idea of what, if anything, awaits them on 
the border of November woods." 

A half mile of Witch Hazel glow, and then the 
wood road opened on a level turnpike, where the 
matted down of seeded Goldenrods and other com- 
posites blew along the ground in clouds, showing 
that in every way they are a conquering race, to be 
watched and kept well within bounds. 

Then Flower Hat began to laugh at Nell, 







TH FROST TftA.CERlES UPON THE WINDOW 
' CONCEAL THE WIDE OUTDOORS." 



AFTERMATH 



333 




whose shaggy Fall coat had taken up a 
collection of all the stick -tights and seed- 
ing things in the wood road that were pro- 
vided with hooks and claws instead of wings 
to ensure their transportation to new soil. A 
tuft of Burdocks ornamented the end of 
her nose, and she lowered her head to 
show us that one of the mobile ears was fastened 
edge to edge by the same persistent seeds. As we 
stopped to pick them off, our own skirts were soon 
fringed with Beggar's Ticks and the long-hooked 
seeds of Brook Sunflowers that had grown about 
a wayside water -.trough. 

Everything that had not already gone to seed was 
surely beginning its journey that day, and each fresh 
gust from over the fields was laden with flying down, 
sometimes so fine as to appear to be only a quiver 
of the air, such as is made by summer gnats. The 
trees were leafless except those Oaks and Beeches 



which, evidently desiring to 
be evergreens, retain a lit- 
tle foliage until it is fairly 
pushed off by new leaves 
in Spring. The undraped 
tree - forms therefore now 
appealed to one in a new 
way, no longer as painting, 
but as architecture, a sug- 
gestion which is still further 
carried out by the bold rock 
ledges of this region ; in 
the summer transformed to 






AFTERMATH 335 

terraced gardens by the clinging greenery, but now 
standing out in nakedness, like unquarried granite, 
as if awaiting the chisel of creative thought. 

The river, too, assumes a different aspect in 
this aftermath season. If we stand above it and 
look up its course it is revealed as a power, cut- 
ting its way and adjusting its own surroundings, 
while in the growing season it seems a careless 
waterway, to be controlled and held in check by 
its flowery borders, and, unless pushed by the 
sudden, passionate impulse of a flood, too suave 
to break away from them. 

Nuts and the various seed -pods are in them- 
selves a study, as much apart from that of the 
perfect flower as are the catkins of early Spring; 
and all along the way we paused to look at first 
one and then another. The Hop Hornbeam found 
along the Hollow road has graceful, drooping pods 
like Hops pulled out twice their length. Such 
Tulip trees as had not raised their straight shafts 
out of the line of vision bore upright pods, sug- 
gestive of dice -cups when seen from below. The 
crimson pyramids of Sumac berries were in the 
velvet, so to speak, a depth of color that they 
retain, like the sturdy Rose Hips, even when, after 
much frost, they are backgrounded by snow. 



336 



AFTERMATH 



As we reached the middle of the Hollow lane, 
the little waterfall upon the right, lacking the 
muffling barrier of foliage, had an unaccustomed 
weight of , sound, and on the left the beauty of 
the Laurels and Hemlocks that swept above a 
carpet of Ground Pine seemed like a new discovery. 
For, as the flower and the leaf of Summer disap- 
pear from the scene, the evergreen comes forward 
as by magic, the silent, unemotional evergreen, 
companion of rocks, a thing seeming to have 
more concern with the fixity of "the eternal 
hills" than with time and the shifting of the 
seasons. 

Yet though no color change is theirs, 
other than the contrast of the tender 
shoot with weathered twigs, and the 
rosy hue of the flower equivalent with 
the brown cone that follows, these 
evergreens speak in a definite lan- 
guage of their own to those who 
pause to listen, and the varied 
expression of their needle 
leaves is most emphatic. 
Under a fall of soft 
clinging snow how differently 
they adjust themselves. The 




AFTERMATH 337 

Spruce tips curve like the feathered claws of the 
Snow Owl, or bristle beneath like the Winter foot- 
.gear of. the ruffed grouse. The longer, soft, five- 
clustered leaves of White Pine are alternately ruffled 
or matted, like the coat of some deeply furred wood 
animal, while the Hemlock, abandoning all resist- 
ance, bends, and loses itself in drapery. 

At the upper end of the Hollow, the Witch 
Hazels again appeared close to the road edge, 
making a lattice through which shone the deep, 
brown -shadowed water of the double pond, the 
borders now dank and unlovely with decaying 
reeds, weeds, and the general leaf wreckage that 
had drifted to the banks. Soon the scene changed 
swiftly, and there followed along the uphill road- 
way to the Ridge a line of stunted Red Cedars, 
the outer branches set thick with frosted, light 
blue berries rather larger than those the Bayberry 
wears, the outline of the pointed tree -tops against 
the bare steep speeding one in thought far north, 
almost to the "Land of Little Sticks." 

The cross - road on the hilltop was a dreary 
stretch, wind-swept even in Summer. Now it was 
difficult to see how the scanty growth of stunted 
Maples and a few Hazel hedges bound by Catbrier 
had managed to cling to it. Once more below, 

V 



338 AFTERMATH 

and following Time o' Year's river road toward 
Tree -bridge, tree - shrub and undergrowth grew 
rich again, and throughout that well-known way, 
November strung for us, and for the birds' behoof, 
a magic rosary of Winter berries of which, as the 
beads should be told over, week by week, one 
would vanish, then another, until, when not one 
remained, Spring would be here. 

The sound of the ax came from the charcoal 
clearing over the mountain beyond the bridge, but 
the rumble and jar of the clumsy gear of the old 
cider -mill was absent; a year ago its belting had 
been unshipped for the last time. The door of 
Time o' Year's cabin was closed, but there was 
the fresh earth of recent footprints on the step. 
Upon the window-sill cracked corn was scattered, 
a bundle of unthreshed rye leaned against the 
well -curb, and a shock or two of buckwheat was 
propped between the straggling canes of the half- 
wild Blackberry bushes, while a fat ham rind wired 
to the bluebirds' apple tree, showed that, though 
human hands now stretched out to him, this fol- 
lower of the wood path was, as ever, mindful of 
his winged fellows and their Winter poverty, 

A figure appeared a few rods below the cabin, 
carrying some sort of burden that hid the face at 



AFTERMATH 339 

first. It was Time o' Year with his gun, an arm- 
ful of Hemlock, Bittersweet, stalks of Milkweed 
pods and Ground Pine, while a couple of quail 
were hanging round his neck by a string. 

"What have you been doing?" called Flower 
Hat gaily, for since she had designed his twin 
family trees, Alois in the apple and all, the old 
man tolerated her. "Have you been stealing game 
and had it fastened around your neck in penalty, as 
we punished our setter with the chickens he killed?" 

"No," said Time o' Year, "though mebbe Yes 
is the right answer, for now I 'm in the na- 
tur' of a provider, 1 've been for- ^ 
agin', as you can see, but for rea- 
son, and not just destroysome- 
ness. The doctor, he 
allowed a taste o' game 
is about the thing to perk 
up little school-ma'am's ap- 
petite, and these here grow- 
in' things '11 cheer her up 
while the posies she 's 
filled the fore- 
room winders 
with gets into 




34O AFTERMATH 

"She don't want that foreroom kept dark and 
closed like the custom hereabout, and so I 've took 
the shutters clean off and let the sun in full, for 
that 's all Doc says she needs, 'Sun and fresh air 
and some'at to look ahead to,' sez he. 

"I don't half so much mind livin' at the farm 's 
I thought to, now the shutters is off and there 's 
no dark corners. I 've minded that 's what all 
o' us are hankerin' for in this world, though some 
don't sense it. 

"Yes, the vines and berries is nice, and as good 
as you '11 find this time o' year. I 'm satisfied, 
too," he continued, answering the question in my 
eyes, as he smoothed his silvery beard, in which 
some leaves had caught, and looking dreamily up 
across the hillside. "Yes, content, though jest 
only a stalk of wayside Silkweed goin' to seed 
natural in its ha'nts with plenty o' sun and air 
and something to look ahead for that the eye 
can't yet see." 

Then, a rapt expression blending with his far- 
off smile, he continued on his way, the load of 
aftermath falling across his shoulders like a Druid's 
garment. 

November, Indian Summer, Aftermath, all too 



AFTERMATH 



341 



soon vanish in leaf smoke, and with chilled fingers 
we tell the beads of the rosary of Winter berries. 

Outside the window the trellised vine loses its 
last leaf and seems merely a part of its support, 
and soon one twilight comes when the frost tra- 
ceries upon the window-panes behind the flower- 
pots in the foreroom conceal the wide outdoors, 
and all the Summer left to us is of the heart. 
Then the Magician bestows his final woodland gift 
the fire -logs and from them springs the hearth - 
flower called Love-of-Home, not to be lightly 
gathered, but cherished in its haunt. 




INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

THE English, popular, or "common" names of plants 
in this book are largely those given in Britton 
and Brown's " Flora of the Northern United 
States and Canada." When a flower has several of such 
titles, either the most characteristic or the most familiar 
has been used. 

As botanical nomenclature and spelling are undergoing 
a transition period, the Latin equivalents are given accord- 
ing to the code of Britton and Brown, together with 
the variations of the Cyclopedia of American Horticulture, 
edited by L. H. Bailey. The Cyclopedia will be the 
standard for nomenclature in garden plants, but since the 
present book deals primarily with wild plants, the Britton 
and Brown system is used as the main reliance. 

When two botanical names are given, the second 
one, in italic, is the Cyclopedic variation, and this is 
usually, also, in agreement with the last revisions of Gray's 
Manual and Gray's Field, Forest and Garden Botany. 

The figures in parentheses refer to illustrations. 

Page 
Adder's-Tongue, Yellow .... Erythronium Americanum . (4) . 

9, 29, 100, 107, 180, 276 
Alder, Black. See Winterberry. 
Alder, White. See Sweet Pepper-bush. 

Amanita, Fly Amanita muscaria . . (160) 174; 172 

American Centaury. See Sea Pink. 

Anemone, Rue Syndesmon thalictroides . 27, 107, 134 

(343) 



344 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Page 
Anemone, Wood; Wind Flower . Anemone quinquefolia . . . . 13, 27 

Angelica, Purple-stemmed . . . Angelica atropurpurea 

144, 149, 171, 176, 195 

Arbutus, Trailing Epigaea repens (14) . 

14; 6, 8, 19, 32, 98, 100, 117, 296, 304, 332 

Arethusa . . . ^ Arethusa bulbosa 140 

Arrowhead, Broad-leaved .... Sagittaria latifolia .... (48) 47, 89 

Arrow -wood, Common Viburnum dentatum .282 

Arrow- wood, Maple-leaved . . . Viburnum acerifolium . . . 101, 282 

Artichoke, Jerusalem Helianthus tuberosus .... (83) 90 

Arum, Water Calla palustris 42 

Ash. Prickly Xanthoxylum Americanum ... 82 

Aster, Blue Wood Aster cordifolius 255 

Aster, Early Purple Aster puniceus (256) 255 

Aster, Flat-topped . f Doellingeria umbellata ) _ 

(Aster umbellatus \ 

Aster, Late Purple Aster patens 256 

Aster, New England Aster Novae-Angliae . . . (264) 268 

Aster, Pine Starwort, or Stiff Aster . lonactis linariifolius 270 

Aster, Purple or Violet Wood . . Aster ianthinus 256 

Aster, White Heath Aster ericoides (257) 256 

Aster, White Wood Aster divaricatus (266) 269 

Aster, White Wreath Aster multiflorus (270) 270 

Azalea, Flame Azalea lutea , 27 

Azalea, Pink, Wild Azalea nudiflora 26, 44, 100 

Azalea, White Swamp, Clammy . Azalea viscosa . . .44, 51, 107, no 

Bachelor's Buttons Centaurea Cyanus 89 

Balsam Apple, Wild . (Micrampelis lobata | _ 

(Echinocystis lobata ) 

Baneberry, White Actaea alba 24, 102 

Bayberry Myrica Carolinensis . . . (289) . 

289; 5> 9> 90 

Beach Pea . . Lathyrus maritimus 302 

Bean, Trailing Wild Strophostyles helvola . . . (303) 301 

Bearberry Arctostaphylos Uva-Ursi .... 302 

Bee Balm, American Monarda didyma 73 

Beech Drops, False Hypopitys Hypopitys . . . (112) 113 

Beggar's Ticks, Stick-tight . . . Bidens frondosa 333 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 345 

Page 

Bellwort, Large-flowered .... Uvularia grandiflora .... 16, 100 

Bergamot, Wild ....... Monarda fistulosa . . (287) 288; 73 

Betony, Wood ..... . . . . Pedicularis Canadensis . . . .25,76 

Bilberry ... ......... Vaccinium uliginosum ..... 100 

Bindweed, Hedge. See Convolvulus. 

Birch, Black .......... Betula lenta .......... 31 

Bitter Buttons. See Tansy. 

Bittersweet, Shrubby Climbing . . Celastrus scandens .... (329) . 

304; 177, 287, 293, 297, 329 



Blackberry, High Bush . . . villosus j .285,338 

(Rubus nigrobaccus \ 
Blackberry, Low Bush ..... Rubus trivialis ....... 50, 285 

Black-eyed Susan ....... Rudbeckia hirta . . . (251) 243, 248 

Blazing Star . . . J L ^naria squarrosa ) ( } ^ 

(Ltatrts squarrosa ) 
Bloodroot ........... Sanguinaria Canadensis . . (28) . 

13. l6 > J 34 
Blue Bells of Scotland ..... Campanula rotundifolia ..... 72 

Blueberry, Tall ........ Vaccinium virgatum .... 100, 119 

Bluets ............. Houstonia coerulea ....... 27 

Blue-eyed Grass ........ Sisyrinchium graminoides .... 226 

Blueweed, or Viper's Bugloss . . Echium vulgare ......... 83 

Boneset .......... . Eupatorium perfoliatum . . (245) 243 

Bouncing Betsy ........ Saponaria officinalis . . . (69) 73, 75 

Buckwheat, Climbing False . . . Polygonum scandens . . . (314) 312 
Bunch-berry .......... Cornus Canadensis ....... 101 

Bur Reed, Broad-fruited . . . . Sparganium eurycarpum . . 43, 116 

Bush Ash. See Poison Sumac. 

Butterfly-weed ......... Asclepias tuberosa .... (236) 234 

Butter-and-Eggs. See Toad Flax. 

Button Bush . ......... Cephalanthus occidentalis . (40) . 

40, 51, no 
Calamint ........... Clinopodium Calamintha .... 74 

Calfkill. See Branch Ivy. 

Calop o n f Limodorum tuberosum ) (142, 145) 

\Calopogonpulchellus \ 142,145,155 
Calypso ............ Calypso bulbosa ...... 127, 140 

Campion, Starry ....... Silene stellata ......... 116 



346 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Page 
Candleberry Aleurites triloba 290 

Caraway Carum Carui ....... 75, 102 

Cardinal Flower ........ Lobelia cardinalis . . . . 54; 25, 89 

Carrion Flower Smilax herbacea ..... (313) 311 

Carrot, Wild . Daucus Carota .(286) 144, 175,286 

Catbrier Smilax rotundifolia . . . (339) . 

306; ii, 297, 337, 339 

Catnip, Catmint Nepeta Cataria (75) 75 ; 70 

Cat-tail, Broad-leaved Typha latifolia . . . (256, 325) . 

591 43, 25 329 

Cedar, Red Juniperus Virginiana . (336) 306, 337 

Celandine Chelidonium majus .... 22, 223 

Chamomile, Mayweed Anthemis Cotula 69, 245 

Checkerberry. See Wintergreen. 

Cherry, Bird Prunus Pennsylvanica 306 

Cherry, Black, Wild . . < . . . Prunus serotina . . .(183) 183,278 

Cherry, Choke Prunus Virginiana . . (278) 180, 277 

Clear-eye Salvia Sclarea 74 

Clematis. See Virgin's Bower. 
Clethra. See Sweet Pepper-bush. 

Clover, Pink Trifolium pratense 284 

Clover, Rabbit's Foot Trifolium arvense . . (285) 272, 284 

Clover, White Sweet, Shamrock . Trofolium repens 284 

Clover, Yellow Hop Trifolium agrarium 283 

Cohosh, Black Cimicifuga racemosa . . (116) 116 

Colic-root, Star Grass Aletris farinosa . . . (191) 144, 195 

Columbine, Red Aquilegia Canadensis.(25) 24; 17,26 

Coneflower, Green-headed .... Rudbeckia laciniata . . . (251) 248 

Coneflower. See Black-eyed Susan. 

Convolvulus, Wild Convolvulus sepium . (295,316) . 

177, 220, 312 

Corncockle ( Agrostemma Githago j ig(j 

{Lychnis Githago ) 

Cornel, Alternate- leaved .... Cornus alternifolia 280 

Cornel, Dwarf. See Bunch-berry. 

Cornel, Silky Cornus Amomum 280 

Cornel, White-flowering. See Flowering Dogwood. 

Coronilla, Pink Coronilla varia (81) So 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 347 

Crab Apple, American . . . . f Malus coronaria | >( } ^j 

(Pyrus coronana ) 

Cranbeny, American jOxycoccus macrocarpus |_ _ 

\Vaccinium macrocarpon) 
Creeping Sailor. See Kenilworth Ivy. 

Daisy, Ox-eye Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum . 

245; 69, 221, 223, 248 

, ,. (Taraxacum Taraxacum 1245; n, 69, 

Dandelion J . V 4 

(Taraxacum officinale j 221, 243 

Dangleberry Gaylussacia frondosa 100 

Death Cup Amanita phalloides .... 172, 174 

Devil's Paint Brush. See Hawkweed. 
Dockmackie. See Arrow-wood, Maple-leaved. 

Dodder, Love Vine Cuscuta Gronovii . . . .45,55,302 

Dogwood Family Cornaceae 98 

Dogwood, Flowering Cornus florida .... (94, 324) . 

99, 101, 106, 213, 280, 322 

Dogwood, Panicled . Cornus candidissima . . . (324) 322 

Dogwood, Red Osier Cornus stolonifera 280 

Dutchman's Breeches fBicuculla Cucullaria ) ( g) 

[Dicentra Cucullaria ) 
Elder, Black-berried, White-flow- 
ered Sambucus Canadensis . . (279) . 

286; 144, 279, 301 

Elder, Red-berried .... Sambucus pubens . . (282) 279, 281 
Elecampane Inula Helenium .... (76) 79; 69 

T, . ~ . (Onagra biennis ) , 

Evening Primrose J . > 226 

((Enotnera biennis ) 

Everlasting, Early, Plantain Leaf . Antennaria plantaginifolia . . . 245 
Everlasting, Fragrant Life .... Gnaphalium obtusifolium . . 243, 270 

(Fceniculum Fceniculum 

\Fceniculum vulgar ~e 
Five Fingers. See Virginia Creeper. 

Flag, Large Blue Iris versicolor (37) 37, 223 

Flag, Slender Blue Iris prismatica (219) 226 

Flag, Sweet Acorus Calamus 116 

Fleabane, Salt Marsh Pluchea camphorata 59, 271 

Forget-me-not Myosotis palustris 10 






348 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Page 

Foxglove, Smooth False . . . . (Dasystoma Virginica ) ( } 

( Gerardia quercifoha ) 
Fumitory, Climbing, or Moun- f Adlumia fungosa | , x 

tain Fringe \Adlumia cirrhosa ) 

Gentian, Blue Fringed Gentiana crinita . .(153,242). 

241; 10, 140, 152, 302 

Gentian, Closed Gentiana Andrewsii . . (53) 55, 302 

Geranium, Wild Geranium maculatum . (32) . 

25 ; 26, 223 

Gerardia, Large Purple . . . . Gerardia purpurea . . (241) 120,240 
Gerardia, Oak-leaved. See Foxglove, Smooth False. 

Gerardia, Seaside Gerardia maritima (59) 58 

Ghost Flower. See Indian Pipe. 

Ginger, Wild Asarum reflexum .... (12) 16,22 

Ginseng Panax quinquefolium 117 

Ginseng, Dwarf Panax trifolium 24 

Glasswort, Slender. See Samphire, Marsh. 

Golden Club Orontium aquaticum 42 

Goldenrod, Anise-scented .... Solidago odora 251 

Goldenrod, Blue-stemmed .... Solidago csesia (249) 250 

Goldenrod, Bush Euthamia graminifolia 251 

Goldenrod, Canada, or Swamp . . Solidago Canadensis . (256) 253, 323 

Goldenrod, Cut- leaved Solidago arguta 251 

Goldenrod, Elm-leaved Solidago ulmifolia 251 

Goldenrod, Seaside Solidago sempervirens . . . (269) 270 

Goldenrod, Showy Solidago speciosa 251 

Goldenrod, Slender Fragrant . . Euthamia Caroliniana . .(251) 251 
Goldenrod, Stout Ragged .... Solidago squarrosa .... (269) 269 

Goose Grass Puccinellia maritima 55 

Grape, Frost or Chicken .... Vitis cordifolia (305) 308 

Grape, Northern Fox Vitis Labrusca 307, 309 

Grape, Riverside Vitis vulpina 308, 310 

Grass of Parnassus Parnassia Caroliniana . . . . 10, 241 

Grass Pink. See Calopogon. 

Great Bindweed. See Convolvulus, Wild. 

Ground Nut. See Hyacinth Bean. 

Hawkweed, Orange Hieracium aurantiacum . (68) 68, 84 

Hawthorn Crataegus Oxyacantha . .86, 277, 283 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 349 

Page 
Heartsease Viola tricolor 70 

Heath Family Ericaceae . . . 98, 100, 107, 113, 182 

Heather, Beach or False Hudsonia tomentosa 272 

Hellebore, False, or American 

White Veratrum viride . . . (4) 9, 100, 180 

Hemlock, Poison Conium maculatum (157) 104, 174, 176 

Hemlock, Water Cicuta maculata 172, 225 

, ,-,,. ,. ( Willughbaea scandens ) / \ 

Hempweed, Climbing vIL. j r ' ( 2 97) 297 

(.Mikama scandens J 

Hepatica, or Liverleaf . . f Hepatica Hepaticaj . . . (vii) . 

{Hepatica tnloba J . . 12; 8, 98, 107 
Hobble Bush . ... { Vi burnum alnifoliurn j joi> ^ 

{Viburnum lantanoiaes) 

( Falcata comosa 1 

Hog Peanut \ . r - 55> 3 OX 

{Amp hi carp tea monotca ) 



Hollyhock Althea rosea 80 

Honeysuckle, Chinese or Japanese. Lonicera Japonica 81 

Honeysuckle, Italian Lonicera Caprifolium 81 

Honeysuckle, Trumpet Lonicera sempervirens . . . (306) 306 

Honeysuckle, Wild. See Azalea, Pink. 

Hop Humulus Lupulus 312 

Hop Hornbeam Ostrya Virginiana 335 

Huckleberry Gaylussacia resinosa 100 

Hyacinth Bean, Ground Nut . . J Apios Apios I ... (300) I2 o, 301 

[Apios tuber osa ) 

Indian Cucumber Root Medeola Virginiana 24, 102 

Indian Fig . . { P untia P untia I 22 g 

( Opuntia vulgaris ) 

Indian Pipe . . Monotropa uniflora .(108) 113595,97 

Indigo, Wild False Baptisia tinctoria 149, 169 

Iris. See Flag. 

Ironweed Vernonia Noveboracensis . .221, 243 

Ivy, Branch Leucothoe Catesbsei 183 

Ivy, Poison (Rhus radicans | (,62,163) . 

(Rhus Toxicodendron) 
162; 5, 158, 165, 294, 302, 304, 308, 321 

Jack-in-the-Pulpit Arisaema triphyllum . (12) 118; 16,22 

Jamestown Lily, "White Man's Plant." See Jimson Weed. 



350 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Page 
Jewel Weed .......... Impatiens biflora ........ 42 

Jill-over-the-Ground , . { Glecoma hederacea | 

\Nepeta Glee homo. ) 

Jimson (Jamestown) Weed . . . Datura Stramonium . . (176) 172, 176 
Joe Pye Weed . ........ Eupatorium purpureum . (245) . 

243; 64, 249 
Johnny-jump-up. See Heartsease. 

Kenilworth Ivy ........ J Cymbalaria Cymbalaria ) ( } ' 

( Linana Cymbalaria j 

Knotweed, Pink ........ Polygonum Pennsylvanicum (292) . 

291 ; 90, 271 

Ladies' Slipper. See Moccasin Flower. 

Ladies' Tresses, Slender .... Gyrostachys gracilis . . . (153) . 

151; n, 125, 128, 200, 241 

Ladies' Tresses, Nodding .... Gyrostachys cernua ....... 152 

Lambkill. See Laurel, Sheep. 

Larkspur, Blue Wild ...... Delphinium Menziesii ..... 181 

Larkspur, Dwarf ........ Delphinium tricorne ...... 181 

Larkspur, Wyoming ...... Delphinium Geyeri ..... .181 

Laurel, Mountain ........ Kalmia latifolia ..... (101) . 

104-106; 26, 39, 119, 159, 182, 219, 290, 336 

Laurel, Sheep or Small-leaved . . Kalmia angustifolia .... 106, 183 

Leek, Wild .......... Allium tricoccum ........ 100 

. {Nabalus albus 
{Prenanthes alba 

Lilac ............. Syringa vulgaris ........ 66 

Lily, Blackberry ....... jGemmingia Chinensisj . . (78) . 

{Belemcanda Chtnensis) . . 85 ; 79, 87 

Lily, Canada, or Meadow .... Lilium Canadense . . (229, 233) , 

230; 220 

Lily Family .......... Liliaceae .......... 98, 127 

Lily-of-the-valley, Wild. See Shinleaf. 

Lily, Red Day ......... Hemerocallis fulva . . . (82) 79, 82 

Lily, Red Wood ........ Lilium Philadelphicum . . (231) . 

231, 271 

Lily, Tiger .......... Lilium tigrinum . . .85; 78, 84, 86 

Lily, Turk's Cap ........ Lilium superbum ..... (232) 232 

Lily, Yellow Pond. See Pond Lily, Yellow. 



Lettuce, White, Wild . . ) 

) 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 351 

Page 
Live-forever Sedum Telephium . . . (71) 72, 90 

Lizard's Tail . . . ... .... Saururus cernuus . . . (48) 45, no 

Lobelia, Great Blue Lobelia syphilitica 240 

Loco .Weed, Stemless Spiesia Lamberti 182 

Loco Weed, Woolly . . . . . . Astragalus mollissimus Torr . . 182 

Loosestrife, Swamp ...... . Decodon verticillatus . . (49, 50) 49 

Loosestrife, Yellow ....... Lysimachia vulgaris 234 

Lotus, American Nelumbo lutea .,.,-..... 45 

Maianthemum. See Solomon's Seal, Two-leaved. 

Mallow, Rose Hibiscus Moscheutos . . . (60) . 

59, 120, 143, 271 
Mandrake. See May Apple. 

Marjoram Origanum vulgare 74, 84 

Marsh Marigold Caltha palustris (n) 

n, 28, 37, 119, 136, 276 

Matrimony Vine, or Box Thorn . Lycium vulgare 84 

May Apple Podophyllum peltatum . (22) 23, 208 

Meadow Beauty Rhexia Virginica 240 

Meadow Rue, Tall Late .... Thalictrum polygamum.(229) 230, 309 
Meadow Sweet Spiraea salicifolia . (229, 280) 229, 281 

Milkweed, Common, or Silkweed { Ascle P. ia9 S y riaca l < 2 4> 35) 

(Asclepias cornuti ) 235, 253, 312, 328 

Milkweed, Four- leaved Asclepias quadrifolia . . . (109) 108 

Milkweed, Purple Asclepias purpurascens ..... 235 

Milkweed, Swamp Asclepias incarnata 235 

Milkwort, Purple ........ Polygala viridescens 144 

Mint, Wild Mentha rotundifolia 74 

Mitrewort, False Tiarella cordifolia . 24 

Moccasin Flower, Pink Cypripedium acaule . . . (132) . 

132; 97, 123, 126 

Moccasin Flower, Showy . . . {Cypripedium reginae ) ( } 

(Cypripedium spectabile ) 

Moccasin Flower, Yellow . . . f Cypripedium hirsutum ) ( } 

{Cypripedium pubescens) 

Moneywort Lysimachia Nummularia .... 71 

Monkey Flower, Square-stemmed . Mimulus ringens 42 

Moonwort Botrychium Lunaria n 

Morning- Glory, Wild. See Convolvulus. 



352 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Moss Pink .... Phlox subulata m 

Mountain Fringe. See Climbing Fumitory. 

Mullein, Common Verbascum Thapsus . . . .233,312 

Mullein, Moth Verbascum Blattaria 288 

Mushroom, Meadow Agaricus campestris .... 172-174 

Nanny Berry. See Sheepberry. 

Nightshade, Black Solanum nigrum (178) 178 

Nightshade, Climbing Solanum Dulcamara . . . (177) . 

85, 177, 3 J 2 

Oak, Poison, or California Poison 

Sumac Rhus diversiloba 167 

"Old Fog" Grass, Virginia Beard- 
grass Andropogon Virginicus 326 

Orchis, Ragged Habenaria lacera (^s) 149 

Orchis, Showy Orchis spectabilis (134) *34 

Orchis, Yellow Fringed Habenaria ciliaris . . . (150) . 

148; 150, 155 
Orpine. See Live-forever. 
Oswego Tea. See Bee Balm. 

Painted Cup Castilleja coccinea . . . .25, 26, 223 

Parsnip, Cow Heracleum lanatum .... 144, 225 

Partridge Pea . Cassia Chamaecrista .... 234, 287 

Partridge Vine or Berry Mitchella repens (33 1) . 

no; 40, 173, 296, 330 

Peppermint Mentha piperita 84 

Phlox, Garden Phlox paniculata 90 

Phlox, Wild Blue Phlox divaricata (in) in 

Pickerel Weed Pontederia cordata . (44), 34, 45, 89 

Pigeon Berry, or Garget. See Pokeweed. 
Pinxter- flower. See Azalea, Pink. 
Pipsissewa, Spotted, or Spotted 

Wintergreen Chimaphila maculata . (115) 114, 117 

Pipsissewa. See Prince's Pine. 

Pitcher-plant Sarracenia purpurea .... (43) 42 

Plantain, Robin's f Erigeron P^hellus ) 

\Engeron belhdifolius) 

Plantain, Water (Alisma Plantago aquatica j ^ 

\Ahsma Plantago ) 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 353 

Page 
Plum, Beach Prunus maritima 149, 271 

Pogonia, Rose Pogonia ophioglossoides 

125, 140, 142, 152 

Poison Ash,. Dogwood, Elder, Sumac. See Sumac. 
Poison Hemlock. See Hemlock. 
Poison Ivy. See Ivy. 

Pokeweed Phytolacca decandra . . . (179) 179 

Pond Lily, Yellow (Nymphaea advena) 38 

(Nupnar advena j 
Poppy, Mexican Argemone Mexicana 89 

Prickly Pear . . JP untia P ntia I . ( 22 g) 22O , 228 

[Opuntia vulgaris) 

Prince's Feather ..... . . Polygonum orientale 90 

Prince's Pine .......... Chimaphila umbellata .... 117 

Privet Ligustrum vulgare .... 82, 86, 306 

PussyWillow Salix discolor . (i) 276; 6, 16, 321, 332 

Pyrola. See Shinleaf. 

Pyxie Pyxidanthera barbulata . . . 302, 304 

Raspberry, Purple-, or Rose-flow- 
ering Rubus odoratus . . . (290) 287, 291 

Rattlebox Crotalaria sagittalis 182 

Rattlesnake Plantain ..... fPeramium pubescens) ( 154) i 5 5 5 125, 

[ Goodyera pubesc e ns J 140, 150, 188 
Red-bell. See Columbine. 
Red-ink Plant. See Pokeweed. 
Rhododendron, American, or Rose 

Bay Rhododendron maximum .... 

104-106; 26, 159, 183 

Rice Grass, or Wild Rice .... Zizania aquatica 271, 326 

Rose Campion. See Corncockle. 

Rose, Cinnamon Rosea cinnamomea 82 

Sabbatia. See Sea Pink. 

Samphire, Marsh Salicornia herbacea . (51) 59; 50,271 

Sarsaparilla, Wild Aralia nudicaulis . . . (103) 24,102 

Sassafras . . j 8398 ^ Sa ! safra * I I7 g 

[Sassafras offictnale j 

Savory Satureia hortensis 75 

Saxifrage Saxifraga Virginiensis . . . . 13, 16 

W 



354 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Page 
Sea Lavender Limonium Carolinianum .... 121 

Sea Pink ...... . . . . . Sabbatia stellaris ........ 59 

Self- Heal . . . . . . . , . . Prunella vulgaris 76 

Senna, Wild . . . . Cassia Marylandica 287 

Service Berry . -. Amelanchier Canadensis . . . .271 

Shadbush ......*.... Amelanchier Botryapium . (30) . 

30; 15, 19, 275 

Sheepberry, Black Thorn .... Viburnum Lentago 282 

Sheep Sorrel Rumex Acetosella 228 

Shinleaf, or Round-leaved Win- 

tergreen Pyrola rotundifolia (93) in 

Shooting Star, American Cowslip . Dodecatheon Meadia . . . . (95) 95 
Silkweed. See Milkweed, Common. 

Silver Rod . . . . .... . . . Solidago bicolor (251) 250 

Skunk Cabbage Spathyema foetida . . . .(4,8). 

8, 14, 69, 180, 219 
Snake-mouth. See Pogonia. 
Sneezeweed. See Sunflower, Swamp. 
Snow on the Mountain. See Spurge, White-margined. 

Solomon's Seal, False (Vagnera racemosa j (17). 

(Smilacina racemosa j . . 16, 28, 139 

Solomon's Seal, Larger . (P'lygonatum commutatum j l6 

[Polygonatum giganteum ) 

Solomon's Seal, Two-leaved . . {Unifolium Canadense ) . 28, 

\Maianthemum Convallana j 100,139 

Spearmint Mentha spicata 74, 77 

Spice Bush . . ( Benzoin Benzoin \ . . (333) . 

(Benzoin odoriferum j . . n, 69, 330 

Spikenard Aralia racemosa 116 

Spirea, Meadow Sweet. See Meadow Sweet. 

Spring Beauty Claytonia Virginica . (19, 28) 21, 88 

Spurge, Caper Euphorbia Lathyris 170 

Spurge, Cypress Euphorbia Cypam-sias . (71) 71, 170 

Spurge, White-margined .... Euphorbia marginata 170 

Squaw Weed Senecio obovatus 29 

St. John's-wort, Common .... Hypericum perforatum 234 

Staggerbush Pieris Mariana (^i) 183 

Starflower. See Chickweed Wintergreen. 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 355 

Page 

Star Grass, Yellow ....... Hypoxis hirsuta . . . (227) 29, 226 

Star of Bethlehem Ornithogalum umbellatum .... 69 

Steeple Bush Spiraea corymbosa . (286) 42, 230, 281 

Sumac, Dwarf Upland Rhus copallina 292 

Sumac, Poison ..... . . . { Rhus V nix I (' 68 > l68 = >&' 

(Rnus venenata ) 167, 192, 197, 292 

Sumac, Smooth or Scarlet .... Rhus glabra 292 

Sumac, Staghorn . I Rhus hirta 1 . (294) 292 

(Rhus typhtna j 

, f Kneiffia fruticosa ) / f \ f 

Sundrops \ }- . (226) 226, 271 

I (Enothera fruticosa ) 

Sunflower, Brook Bidens laevis . . . (243,260)253; 333 

Sunflower, Common Garden . . Helianthus annuus . (246) 90, 120, 221 

Sunflower, Swamp Helenium autumnale .... 160, 171 

Sunflower, Giant Helianthus giganteus .... 244, 248 

Sweet Cicely, Smooth . . . . . fWashingtonia longistylis ) .103, 176 

(Osmorhtza longistylis ) 
Sweetbrier Rosa rubiginosa 229 

Sweet Fern ( Comptonia peregrina ) 

(Comptonia asplemjolia ) 
Sweet Pepper-bush, White Alder . Clethra alnifolia . (52) 51,107,110,239 

Sweet William, Wild Phlox maculata in 

Tansy, or Bitter Buttons Tanacetum vulgare . . (275) 

248; 69, 274 
Tear-Thumb, Halberd-leaved . . Polygonum arifolium .297; 55,312 

Thistle, Bur Carduus lanceolatus 248 

Thistle Family Composite 244 

Thistle, Scotch Onopordon Acanthium 247 

Thistle, Yellow Carduus spinosissimus . . . 226, 247 

Thornapple, Stinkweed. See Jimson Weed. 

Thorn, Cockspur Crataegus Crus-Galli 276 

Thorn, Scarlet Crataegus coccinea 277 

Thyme, Wild Thymus Serpyllum . . . (75) 70, 75 

Thorn, Yellow-fruited Dwarf . . Crataegus uniflora 276 

Toad Flax, Yellow , . { Linaria Lin f ria . I . ( 2j6 ) 72, 234 

(Linana vulgans ) 

Trientalis. See Chickweed Wintergreen. 



356 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Page 
Trillium, Large White Trillium grandiflorum . . (96) . 

100 ; 99, 192 
Trillium, Red, Ill-scented . . . . Trillium erectum ... (15) 16,134 

Trumpet Creeper Tecoma radicans 79 

Turtlehead . . Chelone glabra . . . .(33) 55,200 

Twayblade, Fen Orchis . . . f Leptorchis Loeselii) 

[Ltparis Lceselii j 
Twayblade, Large Lily-leaved . jLeptorchis liliifolia) . . (138) . 

[ Liparis liliifolia J 138; 137,1 46, 155 

Twin Flower Linnaea borealis 296 

Viburnum, Maple-leaved. See Arrow-wood. 
Viburnum, Sweet. See Sheepberry. 

Violet, Bird's- Foot Viola pedata 22 

Violet, Blue Palmate Viola palmata 21 

Violet, Canada Viola Canadensis 22 

Violet, Dog's Tooth. See Adder's-Tongue. 

Violet, Downy Yellow Viola pubescens .... 22,107,134 

Violet, Lance-leaved Viola lanceolata 22 

Violet, Smooth Yellow Viola scabriuscula . . 22, 107, 134 

Violet, Sweet White (English) . . Viola odorata 22, 70 

Violet, Wild Sweet Viola blanda 22 

Virginia Creeper , . (Parthenocissus quinquefolia 

{Ampelopsis quinquefolia 
(163, 302, 327) 307; 50, 162, 294, 297, 304, 328 

Virgin's Bower Clematis Virginiana . (299) . 

298; 306, 328 
Wake Robin. See Trillium, Red. 

f Castalia odorata | . . . (44) 

,39.45,222 
Waxwork. See Bittersweet. 
Wayfaring Tree. See Hobble Bush. 
White Thorn. See Hawthorn. 
White-weed. See Daisy, Ox-eye. 
Willow, Glaucous. See Pussy Willow. 
Willow Herb. See Loosestrife, Swamp. 
Wind-flower. See Anemone, Wood. 

Winterberry, or Black Alder . . . Ilex verticillata . . (321) 120, 224, 321 
Wintergreen, or Checkerberry . . Gaultheria procumbens . 75; 24,98,219 



Water Lily, Fragrant White . . | Castalia odorata I ( 

(Nympnaa odorata j 38; 34,^ 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 357 

Page 

Wintergreen, Chickweed .... Trientalis Americana .... 24, 103 

Witch Hazel Hamamelis Virginiana . . (334) . 

332; 11,96, 136, 337 
Woodbine. See Virginia Creeper. 

Yam, Wild . . Dioscorea villosa (3 IQ ) 3 11 

Yarrow Achillea Millefolium 269 



FERNS 

Beech Fern, Broad Phegopteris hexagonoptera . (215), 206 

Brake (Pteridium aquilinum 

( Ptens aquilina 
Christmas Fern ....... JDryopteris acrostichoides ) 

{Aspidtum acrostichoid.es ) 

104, 187, 197, 290, 322, 330 

Cinnamon Fern Osmunda cinnamomea . (185,192) . 

193; 18, 30, 123 

Clayton's, or Interrupted Fern . . Osmunda Claytoniana . (185) 192; 123 
Climbing, or Hartford Fern . . . Lygodium palmatum . . . (185) 189 
Common Rock Fern. See Polypody. 

Flowering Fern ........ Osmunda regalis 191 

Grape Fern, Ternate Botrychium ternatum . . . (203) 203 

Grape Fern, Virginia ...... Botrychium Virginicum . . . . 203 

Hay-Scented Fern (Dennstaedtia punctilobula)^) . 

{Dicksonia ptlostuscula ) 53, 207 
Interrupted Fern. See Clayton's Fern. 

Lady Fern Asplenium Filix-fcemina . (199) . 

198; 1 88, 204 

Maidenhair Adiantum pedatum . . . (218) . 

2I 3I 39> x ^9> 2 8 211, 302 

Marsh Shield Fern fDryop.eris Thelyp.erisj ( } 

(Asptdium Tnelyptens ) 

Meadow Fern Comptonia peregrina 152 

New York Fern (Dryopteris Noveboracense ) (aoo)> ^ 

\Aspidium Noveboracense ) 

Polypody, Common Polypodium vulgare . . . (197) . 

195; 104, 187, 322 



358 INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Page 
Royal Fern Osmunda regalis . ( 194) 193; 123,142 

Sensitive Fern Onoclea sensibilis .... (201) 202 

Shield Fern, Crested . .... . f Dryopteris cristata 

(Asptaium cnstatum 

Shield Fern, Spinulose .... pryopteris spinulosa | . ( 204 ) 

[Aspidium sptnulosum j 

Spleenwort, Ebony Asplenium ebeneum . (216) 217, 322 

Spleenwort, Maidenhair Asplenium Trichomanes . (211) . 

209, 217 

Spleenwort, Silver Asplenium Thelypteroides . . . 

(205, 209) 205 
Walking Fern Camptosorus rhizophyllus . (188) 189 

Wood Fern, Evergreen . 



(DryopterismarginalisK^ 
{Aspidtum marginale ) 



CLUB MOSSES, ETC. 

Bog Club Moss ......... Lycopodium inundatum 116 

Creeping Selaginella, or Scale Moss. Selaginella apus 116 

Ground Pine Lycopodium obscurum 

39, 94, 104, 115, 219, 290, 296, 304, 336 

Shining Club Moss Lycopodium lucidulum . . .116, 304 

Trailing Christmas Green . . . . Lycopodium complanatum . . . .115 



Four-Footed Americans and Their Kin 

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT 

Edited by FRANK M. CHAPMAN. Illustrated by ERNEST SETON-THOMPSON 
Cloth Crown, 8vo $1.50 net 

" It deserves commendation for its fascinating style, and for the fund of information which 
it contains regarding the familiar, and many unfamiliar animals of this country. It is an ideal 
book for children and doubtless older folk will find in its pages much of interest." The Dial. 

"Books like this are cups of delight to wide-awake and inquisitive girls and boys. Here is 
a gossipy history of American quadrupeds, bright, entertaining and thoroughly instructive. 
The text, by Mrs. Wright, has all of the fascination that distinguishes her other outdoor 
books. "-The Independent. 



Citizen Bird 

Scenes from Bird- life in plain English for a Beginner 
By MABEL O. WRIGHT and Dr. ELLIOTT COUES 

Profusely illustrated by Louis AGASSIZ FUERTES 
Cloth Crown, 8vo $1.50 net 

"When two writers of marked ability in both literature and natural history write to produce 
a work giving scope to their special talents, the public has reason to expect a masterpiece of 
its kind. In the 'Citizen Bird,' by Mrs. MABEL O. WRIGHT and Dr. ELLIOTT COUES, this 
expectation is realized seldom is the plan of a book so admirably conceived, and in every detail 
so excellently fulfilled." The Dial. 

"There is no other book in existence so well fitted for arousing and directing the interest 
that all children feel toward the birds." Tribune, Chicago. 

Birdcraft 

A Field- Book of Two Hundred Song, Game and Water Birds 
By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT 

With eighty full-page plates by Louis AGASSIZ FUERTES 

"One of the best books that amateurs in the study of ornithology can find . . . direct, 
forcible, plain and pleasing." Chautauquan. 

"Of books on birds there are many, all more or less valuable, but 'Birdcraft,' by MABEL 
O. WRIGHT, has peculiar merits that will endear it to amateur ornithologists. ... A large 
number of excellent illustrations throw light on the text and help to make a book that will 
arouse the delight and win the gratitude of every lover of birds." 

Saturday Evening Gaxette, Boston. 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, 66 Fifth Avenue, New York 



Tommy -Anne and the Three Hearts 

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT 

With many illustrations by ALBERT D. BLASHFIELD 
Cloth Crown, 8vo $1.50 

"This book is calculated to interest children in nature, and grown folks, too, will find them- 
selves catching the author's enthusiasm. As for Tommy-Anne herself, she is bound to make 
friends wherever she is known. .The more of such books as these, the better for the children. 
One Tommy-Anne is worth a whole shelf of the average juvenile literature." The Critic. 

Wabeno, the Magician 

The Sequel to Tommy -Anne and the Three Hearts 
By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT 

Fully illustrated by JOSEPH M. GLEESON 
Cloth Crown, 8vo $1.50 

" Mrs. Wright's book teaches her young readers to use their eyes and ears, but it does more 
in that it cultivates in them a genuine love for nature and for every member of the animal king- 
dom. The best of the book is that it is never dull." "Boston "Budget. 

The Dream Fox Story Book 

By MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT 

With 80 Drawings by OLIVER HERFORD 
Cloth Small quarto $1.50 net 

Mrs. Wright's new book for young people recounts the marvelous adventures of Billy Ben- 
ton, his acquaintance with the Dream Fox and the Night Mare, and what came of it. It differs 
from the author's previous stories, as it is purely imaginative and somewhat similar to "Alice 
in Wonderland." 

There are eight full-page illustrations, showing Billy at moments of greatest interest and 
also seventy drawings scattered throughout the text. These illustrations are by Oliver Herford, 
who has entered thoroughly into the spirit of the text, so that the pictures seeem an integral part 
of the story. 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, 66 Fifth Avenue, New York 



Q.K 



i*. 




