






M if A 






















/ 










I . , 






THE 


MAMMALS OF AUSTRALIA, 


RHYIT/TF? FT 

MISS HARRIETT SCOTT, AND MRS. HELENA EORDE, 

FOR THE 

Council of education 

WITH 



A SIIOET ACCOUNT OF ALL THE SPECIES HITHERTO DESCRIBED. 


GrERARD KREFFT, F.L.S., &c. 

CUEATOE AND SEOEETAEY OF THE AXJ STBALIAN MUSEUM. 



SYDNEJ : 

THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. 


1871. 



PREFACE 


The following plates representing some of our Mammals, for which these brief descriptions have been written, were 
published, in the first instance, by the Council of Education, as Object Lessons, for the use of their Schools. 

Mr. A. W. Scott, M.A., was entrusted with their execution, and his talented Daughters, Miss Scott and 
Mrs. Helena Eorde, lithographed them. Most of the Drawings were taken from life-photographs, and the rest 

from the best mounted specimens that could be procured. Only 16 Animals are represented herein ; but a 

general summary is given of those which are not figured. It is to be hoped that the Council of Education will 

continue this very useful Work to completion. 

The letter- press supplies all the most necessary information, including remarks on the anatomy and the 
geographical distribution of the animals referred to. The price of Mr. Gould’s elaborate Work places it beyond 
the reach of ordinary means, and Mr. Waterhouse’s “Natural History of Mammalia” — the best treatise on the 
Marsupiata ever published — has been long out of print, so that the present Book may be considered the only 

one of its kind now available. 

A general summary of our Vertebrata will be found in that useful publication “ The Industrial Progress 
of New South Wales” — but it is too short to be of much use to the Student, though sufficient to dispel many 
popular errors. Works of this kind deserve more encouragement ; and it may not be out of place to mention here 
that a valuable series of Plates illustrative of our fossil Mammals, drawn by the same artists, together with 
Geological Maps of the Wellington Caves and the surrounding country, by Professor Alexander M. Thomson, 
Dr., Sc., of the Sydney University, are in the hands of the Trustees of the Museum, ready for publication so soon 
as the necessary funds shall have been provided. 

The Council of Education will perhaps allow me this opportunity to appeal to residents in the Country 
Districts for contributions to our national collection. The Echidna and the Ornithorhynchus, shot during August, 
September, and October, but especially their young, being the most desirable donations. Other specimens, such as 
Eossil Remains of all kinds, sun or smoke-dried Skeletons, Skins of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Eishes, and Small 
Animals in brine, Insects and Shells in spirits — will be thankfully received and duly acknowledged by the Trustees. 
A most valuable gift, the young of an Echidna or Spiny Ant-eater (not larger than a Erench bean), was lately 
presented by Mr. Sydney Hill, being the second specimen of so small a size ever obtained, and yet the Echidna 
was discovered nearly a century ago, and described so far back as 1792. It is strange, but true, that not a single 
very young Ornithorhynchus, or Duck-mole, is in one of the Museums in Australia ; the specimens which Dr. 
Bennett captured in 1834 were unfortunately lost, and I am not aware that others have been secured since. 
These facts show sufficiently that the study of Natural History, in which many persons feel interested, is still 
much neglected. No doubt everybody is desirous of finding new or curious objects, but the consequence is that 
the more common specimens are exceedingly 1 rare in collections, and cannot be referred to when required. 

What, for example, is of greater value to the Earmer, the Breeder, or the Veterinary, than a series of 
skeletons of our domestic animals, showing the differences in their bony frame ; or sets of skulls to illustrate the 
changes which the teeth undergo. Certainly there are books on these subjects, but the examination of such 
specimens is more instructive than many pages filled with description. Objects of this kind are easily prepared on 
large Stations, and would form more desirable gifts to the Museum than the malformed animals which are so 
frequently presented in the mistaken belief that they are the most appreciated by the public. But there are better 

reasons why the teeth in particular should be well studied. The sufferings which result from disregard of natural 

laws should be forcibly impressed upon children; and they should frequently be reminded that the second set of 
teeth which they receive from a bountiful Creator is also the last. 

Ready at all times to give information to visitors to the Museum, I specially invite Teachers to come, 
with their school-children, and inspect the Objects of Natural History and Ethnography exhibited. The collection is 
the most complete, as regards Australian specimens, ever brought together either here or elsewhere ; the only great 

want now being the Catalogue, which doubtless will be provided so soon as the Trustees find the means of 

publishing it. 


Australian Museum, 

Sydney, 28 October, 1871. 


GERARD KREEET. 



lammals of Australia. 


TABLE OE CONTENTS. 


a. Animals without a Pouch or Shin-folcl for the protection of their young, forming the Order of 

PLACENTALIA. 

PLATE I. — Flying Fox, and general account of Australian Bats, 

PLATE II. — Dingo, or Australian Native Dog. 

PLATE III. — Seal, and list of Seals inhabiting the Antarctic Ocean. 

PLxhTE IV. — Water B ats, and general list of Australian Eats and Mice. 


h, Animals supplied with a Pouch or Shin fold for the protection of their young, which are 
very small when horn, forming the Order 

MARSUPIALIA. 

PLATE V. — Tasmanian Wombat, with account of other species. 

PLATE VI.— Native Bear. 

PLATE VII. — Ring-tail Phalanger, and account of Phalanger Family 
PLATE VIII.— Vulpine Phalanger. 

PLATE IX. — Tasmanian Phalanger. 

PLATE X.— Kangaroo. A 

PLATE XI. — Kangaroo, and account of the Family; also account of the Bandicoots, 
PLATE XII. — Tasmanian Tiger, and account of the Dasyurkbe or Native Cat Family. 
PLATE XIII. — Native Cats. Short account of common species. 


Animals destitute of teeth, or ichen these are present formed of a horny substance. The female of one 
genus (Echidna) is supplied with two small pouches without nipples, in which the young are carried. 


MONOTREMATA. 


PLATE XIV. — Ant-eater. 

PLATE XV. — Duck-billed Platypus. 









































INTRODUCTION. 


The Patina of Australia is as peculiar as its Plora ; and comparing the Mammals with the inhabitants of other 
Countries, the observer is struck by the total absence of the great groups of Ruminants, Pachyderms, and Placental 
Carnivores, with which the plains and forests of Europe, Africa, and America abound. Australia is pre-eminently 
the land of the Marsupials, or Pouched Animals, the more highly organized Placentals being feebly represented by 
a species of Dog, a few Seals, many species of Bats, and numerous Rodents or Rats. Reviewing these families, 
we cannot hut notice that two groups, namely, the Seals and Bats, have peculiar advantages in their mode of 
locomotion, and may have reached the Great South Country with little difficulty. The Dog has always been 
considered to he introduced by Man, and if so, our race must have visited Australia at an early age, though it 
is more likely that the Dog, the Rats, and the Pouched Animals existed together long before Man made his 
appearance in this part of the World. 

There can he no doubt that the Australian Continent was much larger at one time, and that the 
numerous islands scattered over the Banda and Arafura Sea, such as Aru, Ceram, New Guinea, and, farther east, 
the Solomon’s and New Hebrides Islands, formed, with New Holland proper, a more or less compact mass, in 
which the Marsupial Pauna was predominant. 

The smaller islands are either destitute of Mammals (except Bats), or, if they possess any, they belong 
to the pouched tribe. Prom New Guinea, a Pig (Sus papuensisj has been recorded, also a small Placental 
Insectivore fParadoxurus 'hermaphroditaj ; the Marsupials amount, however, to eight genera and ten species. Besides, 
the interior of New Guinea, with its high tableland, and snowy peaks of over 13,000 feet in height, is still a 
sealed hook to the geographer and the naturalist ; though, with all our scant knowledge, some of the most peculiar 
forms of marsupial life, the Tree-kangaroos, have been discovered in its sombre forests. Who can say how many 
more of the Creator’s wondrous animals may yet he found when this the largest island of the Globe is brought 
under the influence of civilization. There are several Marsupials which New Guinea, the Aru Islands, and 
Northern Australia have in common, so that the supposition of these islands being at one time joined to the 
Australian Continent is more than probable. 

Before we consider the recent Pauna of Australia, it is necessary to go hack to the evidence of fossil 
remains which many caves and alluvial deposits have yielded up. These remains prove clearly that the Country was 
inhabited in former ages by animals often larger than, hut always similar in structure to, our present Kangaroos 
or Phalangers. The first group, the grass-eating Kangaroos, Wallabies, Kangaroo-rats, Phalangers, and Wombats, 
abounded; there is evidence even of the Koala, or Native Bear, and of a small Plying Phalanger not larger 
than a Sugar Squirrel (BelideusJ ; hut there is also clear proof of gigantic creatures roving over our plains, 
or perhaps inhabiting the ancient swamps and rivers, which in size can only be compared to the Rhinoceros 
or the Hippopotamus. The teeth of these large species, in their form, number, and distribution, resemble, with 
some modification, those of the Phalangers ; and the usual formula, which holds good in recent species, varies but 
slightly in the large fossil ones. When we examine the dentition of a Diprotodon, the largest of the tribe, we find 
six incisors above and two below (that is, three and one respectively in each ramus). We also notice one premolar 
and four molars or grinders in each ramus, above and below. The tusks, or first pair of upper, and the two 
incisive lower teeth, are coarse, not very regular, and evidently designed for the cutting of thick, rank herbage, 


2 


such as reeds m twigs, on which these animals probably browsed. When by a change of climate, or horn other 
causes, the bogs, with their rich vegetation, disappeared, the great Dvprotodons must have found it hard to make 
a living, and naturally succumbed to the altered circumstances, and became extinct. The smaller Kangaroos, with 
their admirable dentition and scissor-like lower jaws, nipped the grass if it was ever so scanty; and many of 
these ancient species having successfully fought for existence, . still live on. There must have been many more 
Herbivorous Marsupials than at present, because many of the remains discovered differ much from recent bones and 
teeth. Sometimes portions of skeletons are noticed, however, which clearly indicate animals of the Kangaroo and 
Phalanger tribe, identical with living ones; but all the gigantic species have ceased to exist. We gather from 
the fossil remains that the bulkier kinds stood low on their legs, and that they progressed in the same way as the 
Wombat; in fact, the skeleton of a Diprotodon must have resembled that of a Wombat or “Native Bear” in 
many points. 

The extinct Kangaroo tribe is principally distinguished by having shorter and stronger tarsi than the 
living Kangaroos, and their mode of progress must have been therefore slower. 

Another gigantic animal, the Zygomaturus, first described by the late Mr. W. S. Macleay, M.A., belongs to 
the same group as the Dvprotodon; its incisor teeth are however more feeble, and bear a still closer resemblance 
to those of the Phalangers. Numerous lower jaws in our collections indicate at least fifteen or more large species 
of either Diprotodon or Notothermm, so that we cannot enumerate less than twenty gigantic grass-eating Marsupials 
belonging to our extinct Pauna. If we add to these at least fifty species of Kangaroos, Wallabies, and Kangaroo 
Bats, and twenty species of Wombats, with a few Phalangers, we bring the Herbivorous Marsupials of Post- 
pleiocene Australia in round numbers to eighty-five species. It is generally considered in confor mi ty with the laws 
of the Creator, that the undue increase of prolific animals should be checked by beasts of prey, and this duty 

appears to have been assigned to a few small but very ferocious species, the remains of which occur in large 

quantities at the Wellington Caves. These Carnivores comprise the Thylacinus and Sarcophilus , probably two species 
of each, which are now completely extinct on the Australian mainland but still exist in Tasmania. Besides these 
large Dasyures, several small ones, from the size of a “Tiger Cat” (D. maoulatus) to that of a small Mouse 
(Antechinus) inhabited the country then as they do now. To these species we must add a Dog, fossil remains of 
which have been found in limestone caves, but no formidable Carnivore equal in power to a Dion or Tiger has 
yet been discovered. 

The Thylacoleo carnifex, a Marsupial with very peculiar dentition, and about as large as a common Bear, 
was evidently a true Phalanger, and of course proportionately carnivorous ; it certainly was not the predacious 

Carnivore which checked the undue increase of the Diprotodons. 

The last group of Marsupials, which in dentition resembles the Dasyures, and in the formation of its hind 
feet, the Kangaroos, has also been found in a fossil state — we allude to the Bandicoots. A few fragments of leg 
bones point even to the presence of an Echidna or Ant-eater of the Order Monotremata , as yet peculiar to 

Australia, whilst other not determined specimens may throw additional light on the extinct Eauna of this wonderful 
Country, which continues to startle the World with important discoveries. It will be as well to recapitulate our 
extinct Eauna before noticing the recent one in detail. 

OBDEB PLACENTALIA. 

Eamilt C'ANiDiE ( Dog tribe). 

Bemains of a Dog have been found at Wellington, but not many specimens were obtained. 

DSt 


3 


Family Rodentia (Hat tribe). 

From six to ten species of fossil rodents have been discovered, all of which differ much in their dentition 
from other Rats, but resemble some living' Australian species. 

ORDER MARSUPIALIA. 

Family Phascolomyidie ( Wombat tribe). 

Twenty fossil species, including the four still living- ones. 

Family Piialangistidje (Hhalanger tribe). 

Phalangers, Native Bears, Flying Squirrels, &c., from fifteen to twenty gigantic species, including the 
genera Biprotodon, Nototherium,* Zygoma turns, and Thylacoleo ; all of which are classed with the Phalangers, which 
they resembled in the structure of their limbs and in the position and function of their teeth. 

Family Macuopodiile ( Kangaroo tribe). 

Together about fifty fossil species, some of which are still living. 

All the gigantic Kangaroos, with short and stout tarsal bones, are now extinct. 

Family Pebameliile (Bandicoot tribe). 

About five or six fossil species, which cannot be distinguished from living ones. 

Family Dasyekedab ( Native Gat tribe). 

Four large and as many small species, the latter identical with living ones. Two large Dasyures, the 
Thylacinus and Sarcophilus , still exist in Tasmania, but are extinct on the mainland. 

Section Monothemata (Ant-eater and Buck-bill tribe). 

One or two species of the Echidna probably existed; remains of the Platypus have not yet been found. 


* The two genera Nototherium and Zygomaturus which Professor Owen considers to be identical, differ principally in the form of their molar teeth. The first genus is founded 
upon nothing but lower jaws, the grinders of which resemble in their horizontal section, at the base of the crown, a loop or the figure co , but less contracted in the middle ; 
the last grinder is always the largest. The genus Zygomaturus, founded on a perfect skull, possesses teeth a section of which at their base would form a square, the last hit one 
being the largest tooth of the series. I have classed all the large genera (Diprotodon, Nototherium , and Zygomaturus) with the Phalangers, because like these their teeth are inserted 
by tapering fangs. The Kangaroos and Wallabies have molar teeth — the fangs of which enlarge at the end, and, in aged animals, grow into the substance of the jaw, so that their 
removal is impossible without breaking the bone. The Wombats, again, possess teeth without roots, differing in their shape from both the Phalangers and the Kangaroos, and closely 
resembling the teeth of certain rodents. 

















































•* 

























c 
















\ 


































































*- 














{ 




Helena Forde , del. et lith. 


From a photograph from life by Victor fL. C Front . 


THE FLYING FOX. 


(Pteropus Poliocephaltjs.) 



Sydney, N. S. W. — Thomas Richards, Government Printer. — 1869. 




The Flying 1 Fox. 

(PTEROPUS POLIOCEPBALU S.) 

Twenty-five species of Bats are known to inhabit Australia, five of which are Fruit Bats, or “ Flying Foxes.” The 
last-mentioned animals have not yet been found in any other part, except on the east coast, where they range from 
Cape Howe to Cape York. The figure represents the most common one — the grey-headed Fruit Bat, or “ Flying Fox,” 
which is peculiar to the New' South Wales coast districts. 

The food on which the “Foxes” principally rely, when garden fruit is not in season, consists of honey-bearing 

blossoms, and the small native figs, abounding in the coast-range scrubs. They pass the day suspended from the 

branches of gigantic fig-trees, as shown in our figure, and in this position they feed. The number of these creatures is 

almost incredible : they' swing in clusters and festoons, like swarms of bees, holding on one to the other, and the weight 

of their bodies frequently brings down great limbs, killing many, but not appreciably diminishing them. Thousands may 
be noticed, at dusk, silently winging their way to some orchard, which they invade in spite of the farmers’ guns, and 
destroy' more fruit than they eat. The ground is strewn in the morning with bushels of half-devoured fruit, because they 
are rather dainty, and drop every pear or peach they have tasted, if it is not sufficiently sweet. The “Foxes” appear 
only during certain seasons in the cultivated districts, and after a few weeks’ sojourn retire to the mountain forests. 
During this period they select a regular camping-ground, where the day is spent ; and when such a place is discovered, 
a general battue takes place and they are killed in large numbers. These Bats are found on the east coast only, but 

during very dry seasons they occur as far w r est as the neighbourhood of Melbourne. The vegetation on the plains of 

the interior does not appear to suit them, as they are seldom seen west of the coast range. 

The general colour is a glossy, grizzly black, with the exception of a broad rusty-red collar, covering the back 

of the head, neck, breast, and shoulders ; the face is light grey ; the ears and wing-membrane are black. 

The skull is thin, almost transparent, and very light, as in all animals formed for flight ; it is provided with 
very powerful canine teeth, which are grooved, and differ in this respect from the smooth canines of real carnivorous 
animals. It is highly probable that the Flying Fox is able to subsist on insects as well as on fruit. Too little, however, 
is known of the economy of these animals to prove this ; they are observed only when fruit is plentiful, and how' they 
subsist in the dense mountain forests can only be conjectured. The fruit of the fig-trees, and some sweet blossoms, 
must form their principal food at that time. The dentition consists of incisors — canines — , premolars . molar= — 

3-2 r— X r 2 2 

— 34 teeth. The number of young seldom exceeds one at a birth. 

The name of Vampire Bat has been given to this fruit-eating animal, and many dismal tales of its blood-sucking 

propensities have been rife among the ignorant, but there is of course not a grain of truth in these statements. The 

largest species occurs in the island of Java, where it is knowm by the name of “Kalong,” and is much esteemed as an 
article of food, The flesh of our “Flying Foxes” has been represented to be palatable food; it is necessary', however, 
to steep the males for some hours in vinegar, to take away any unpleasant smell. The following table wall show the 
number of Bats and their habitat in Australia : — 

FAMILY OF BATS. 

Cheir6ptera. 

(a.) Fruit-eating Bats, Kalongs or “ Flying Foxes”: — 

Common Flying Fox. Pteropus poliocephalus. Brushes of New South Wales. 

Spectacled Kalong. Pteropus conspicillatus. North Australia. 

Funeral Kalong. Pteropus funereus. North Australia. 

Cape York Kalong. Pteropus scapulatus. Cape York. 

Dwarf Kalong. Petalia. (?) North-east Coast. (Not larger than a common Bat.) 


2 


(b.) Insectivorous Bats : — 

Australian Molussus. Molossus australis. Victoria. 

Wilcox’s Molussus, Molossus ivilcoxii. East coast of Australia. 

Australian Taphozous. Taphozous australis. Northern Australia. 

Great-eared horse-shoe Bat. Rhinolophus megaphyllus. 

Fawn-coloured horse-shoe Bat. Rhinolophus cervinus. Cape York. 

Orange horse-shoe Bat. Rhinolophus awantius. Coburg Peninsula. 

Geoffroy’s long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus geoffroyi. West Australia. 

Gould’s long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus gouldi. New South Wales. 

Tasmanian long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus unicolor. Tasmania. 

Timor long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus timoriensis. West Australia. 

Australian long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus australis. New South Wales. 

Gould’s short-eared Bat. Scotophilus gouldi. Southern Australia. 

Chocolate-coloured short-eared Bat. Scotophilus morio. Southern and Western Australia. 
Small-toothed short-eared Bat. Scotophilus microdon. Australia. 

Pied short-eared Bat. Scotophilus picatus. South Australia. 

Queensland short-eared Bat. Scotophilus nigrogriseus. Queensland, 

Grey’s short-eared Bat. Scotophilus greyi. Port Essington. 

Small short-eared Bat. Scotophilus pumilus. New South Wales. 

Great-footed Bat, Vesperti/io macropus. South Australia. 

Tasmanian Bat. Vespertilio tosmaniensis. Tasmania. 




■mm 




f 



B. 


8 * 


&« 


d 

§ 

H 

o 

0 

£> 


o 

$ 

6 


3Q 

W 

& 

< 

O 


o 

H 

W 

Eh 



mo 

<» 




Sydney, N. S. W.— Thomas Richards, Government Printer. — 1860 


The Dingo, or Native Dog. 

(CANIS DINGO.) 

There has been much discussion among naturalists with regard to the Australian Native Dog, as to whether the animal 
is indigenous, or has been introduced into the Country. This is certain, however, that a species of dog existed in 
Australia many ages ago. Fossil remains of dogs have been discovered at the Wellington Caves, and in other localities, 
and it must therefore be accepted as a fact that the Dingo is indigenous. 

The subject of the illustration represents the light-yellow or tan-coloured variety ; colour is, however, of little 
importance, as the real wild Dingo is subject to as much variation as any other kind of dog. The most common 
shades are sandy, or tan, with whitish belly, and the inner portions of the legs and feet white ; black and tan varieties 
are rarer. 

In one of the oldest publications on Australia, “ Collins’ Voyage,” the author, speaking of the Dingo, says, — 
“ The dogs of this Country are of the jackall species ; they never bark ; are of two colours, the one red, with some 
white about it, the other black; some of them are very handsome.” Mr. Gilbert, writing from Swan River, states,- — 
“ The Dingo is very common over all parts of this Colony. There are a very great number of varieties, marked from 
reddish brown to black, white, light brown, and black and white.” The general belief is that a thorough-bred native 
dog is of two colours only, that it is rarely spotted, and never barks. Several real Dingos have, however, been seen 
with white and yellow fur, and one, which only howled before, began to bark after being chained up near an excellent 
watch-dog for a short time; the voice of the Dmgo is short and snappish, and can be distinguished at once from that of 
a well-bred domestic dog. Much has been said and written about the Dingo’s cunning, his tenacity of life, and dangerous 
bite ; it is stated that he frequently feigns death, and that he has recovered and escaped after being beaten to such an 
extent that one would imagine every bone in his body had been broken. A single Dingo will cause great damage to 
a flock of sheep, and experience proves that the wounds inflicted by its bite are generally fatal. In a case where a 
number of goats — ten or fifteen — had invaded a garden a tame Dingo was despatched to drive them away; but he ran 

from one to the other, snapping and biting right and left, and every goat bitten by him died within a few days. 

The Dingo is remarkable for power, agility, and grace. A tame one which was being hunted reached his 
kennel long before the hounds, fairly outrunning the whole pack ; and during the chase was seen frequently to clear a 
three-rail fence at a bound; even with a heaVy chain he could jump six feet off the ground. He was very suspicious 

with regard to his food, and would sooner starve than touch a piece of meat hung up on a string, neither would he 

take it if it had the least unusual smell. The aborigines of Australia use the Dingo for hunting purposes, and thoroughly 
tame it ; it is no wonder, however, that they succeed in this, as they think as much of their dogs as they do of their 
children, and treat them as well. A “ lubra ” will not hesitate to rear a Dingo pup with her own offspring. A gentleman 

who succeeded in taming several Dingos, found that in one case only would the dog follow at the call of his master. 

The experiment of taming the Dingo is, however, always hazardous, as the acknowledged master only is respected, and 
everybody else snapped at furiously. The Dingo howls before rain sets in, dislikes music, and cannot bear the sound 
of bells ; he exhibits, in fact, many traits of the domestic dog, with which he freely breeds. The aboriginal name of 
the Australian dog is “ Warrigal ” in most parts of New South Wales, and “Dwer-da” in Western Australia. 

The dental formula is as follows : — Incisors — , canines — premolars — , molars — — 42 teeth. 

3-3 1-1’ r 4-4 3-3 




















J 




/ 


































■ 























































































































■ 














** 








« 



































V- 



Sydney, N. S. TV.— Thomas lliclii'rds. Govqromeut Printer.-- -1S09. 


The Sea Leopard. 

(STENORHYNCHTJS LEPTONYX.) 

Comparatively few Seals inhabit the Southern Ocean, and only two species occur on the Coast of New South 
Wales. The figure represents the largest kind, the well-known Sea Leopard, so named on account of its spotted fur, 
the general colour of which is a silvery grey washed with yellow ; the markings are irregular, sometimes lighter than the 
ground colour, with a darker border, and a few uniform black spots interspersed. Young specimens and females occur 
without them. 

This Seal grows to a considerable size, and one specimen in the Australian Museum measured fully io feet 
in length ; it was taken at Shoalhaven, in the Illawarra Distridl, and the stomach contained a full-grown Platypus, — a 
proof that the animal must have gone far up the River into fresh water. A second (female) specimen, 7 feet in length, was 
obtained in October, 1870, at Double Bay, near Sydney, and kept alive for several days in the Museum grounds, where 
it fed on grass, no other food being at hand. It is not certain that a fish diet is absolutely necessary for the subsistence 
of this animal, and it is to be regretted that no experiments were made to settle this point. Dr. J. E. Gray, F.R.S., 
states, in one of his numerous papers on the Seal tribe, that the stomach of one contained the remains of fishes, a 

quantity of sea-weed, and some feathers of gulls. Our specimen would probably have subsisted on butcher’s meat or fowls; 

but unfortunately before the trial could be made, the taxidermist had killed the creature. This Seal moved rather 

quickly, not unlike a snake, and turned to the right or left in an instant when in fear of attack. Water was 

thrown over her, but she appeared to dislike it, and lay shivering till quite dry again. The same species occurs on the 
coast of Tasmania. The mother produces a single young, which she protects with fin or flapper, and defends against 

the numerous enemies which are always in pursuit of such young creatures. It is stated that the female will not leave 

the spot whence her young has been taken, and grows furious in vainly attempting to save its life. 

The occasional appearance of Seals in rivers or in lagoons, where they may have remained after a flood, has 

probably given rise to the fable of the “ Bunyip.” On one occasion a so-called Bunyip’s skull was presented to the 

Australian Museum, but proved to be that of a malformed foal. At another time some terrified Murray natives pointed 
out their dreaded enemy on the other side of the river. There was certainly a large animal in the water, making a 

curious noise, but the night being dark it could not be seen. After a vain attempt to induce the natives to come 

across in their canoe, a shot was fired, the noise ceased, and a venerable lie-goat was tracked the next morning to 

the scrub, where he had died of his wound. 

It is to be deplored that such really beautiful and intelligent animals as Seals should have been destroyed so 
indiscriminately as they have been on this Coast. Collins, in his “ Yoyage to New South Wales,” published in 1798, 
mentions that the rocks in Bass’ Straits and Other localities were covered with Fur Seals of great beauty, but at the 
present time they are rarely met with in these localities. The total number of species which visit the east and south 
coast does not exceed three or four. The following is a list of the Seals on record as taken in the Antarctic Ocean 

1. The crab-eating Seal. Lobodon carcinophaga. On the packed ice, South Antarctic. 

а. False Sea Leopard. Leptonyx weddellii. Antarctic Ocean. South Orkney. 

3. Ross’s large-eared Seal. Ommatophoca rossi. Antarctic Ocean. 

4. Sea Leopard. Stenorhynchm leptonyx. Coast of New South Wales, Antarctic Ocean, and Port Nicholson, 

New Zealand. 

5. Sea Elephant. Morunga elephantina. Antarctic Ocean. 

б. Hooker’s Seal. Arctocephalus hooheri. Antarctic Ocean. 

7. Cowled Seal. Arctocephalus hiatus. North-west coast of Australia. (Hautman’s Abrolhos.) 

8. Falkland Seal. Arctocephalus falhlandicus. Antarctic Ocean. 

9. Grey Seal. Arctocephalus cinereus. South Coast of Australia, Kangaroo Island, Western Port. 

The teeth of the Seals are generally hollow, more or less lobed (except the incisors and canines), and number 
6 cutting teeth above and 4 below, 4 canines, 1 in each ramus, and from 20 to 24 grinders. The incisors or cutting teeth 
vary considerably in number. 























































‘ 












■ 












* 



































■ Y 

■ 


i 






















- 









Golden-bellied and White-bellied Beaver Bat 


(HYDROMYS CHRYSOGASTER AND HYDROMYS LEUCOGASTER.) 

It is a strange fact that Beaver Rats have not yet been found beyond the Australian region, though they appear well 
adapted to lead an aquatic life, and seem able to cross the narrow straits dividing the mainland from New Guinea and 
the various groups of islands not strictly Australian. Whatever may be the cause, however, they do not inhabit other 
parts of the World, and are as peculiar to our Country as the Kangaroo. 

These rats have their grinders reduced to a pair in each ramus, above and below, and differ therefore from 

all other Rodents. It is difficult to determine how many species there are, and we believe that the four or five which 

naturalists choose to class as distinct, on account of a difference in fur, are in reality mere varieties of one kind. 

We have selected two well-marked species for representation, — the one bright orange, the other dirty white, 
beneath ; the upper parts are much alike, and of a grizzly brown or black colour. The tip of the tail is white in 

all species but one — Macleay’s Beaver Rat (Hydromys lutrilla). 

Trvo kinds are considered particularly doubtful, namely, the Fulvous Beaver Rat ( Hydromys fulvolavatm ), from 
the Murray River, and the Sooty Beaver Rat ( Hydromys fuliginosus) , from West Australia. The western animal is known 
to the aborigines of Perth as Ngoor-joo, whilst those who inhabit the country near King George’s Sound call it 
Ngoio" -ir-ri-gin. A third species was discovered by the late Mr. W. S. MacLeay, in front of his residence at Elizabeth 

Bay. This last rat has a uniformly dark tail, and is smaller than the others; but it is probably only an immature 
Hydromys leucogast.er. The original specimen in the Australian Museum has lost much of the fur, and its characteristics 
cannot be described with that certainty which is desirable when new species are under discussion. 

Beaver Rats are found in almost every part of Australia where there is permanent water; they become rare 

towards the tropics, and occur in large numbers in the southern streams and lagoons ; are shy and nocturnal in 

their habits ; dive well, but are soon drowned when unable to find a resting-place in the water. We have 

frequently tried the experiment in a large tank, and found them succumb in less than an hour. This fact may throw 

some light on the limited distribution of the genus. Their food consists of crustaceans, fish, and water insects, but 

principally of a small bivalve of the genus Cyclcis, which our talented artist, Mrs. Forde, informs us is to be found in 

the rivers of the interior in such large quantities that refuse-heaps of the empty shells always line the banks. The 
number of young is four at a Utter, and the mother provides a burrow' in the river-bank for them. The young ones 

are often feasted upon by snakes, and in one instance a dozen of them were taken from the stomach of a single reptile 

The bone caverns of this Country, w'hich have been most carefully examined, did not yield remains of these 
curious animals, though they have afforded proof that the Terrestrial and Arboreal Rodents lived in large numbers 
at a former age. It is not possible to add descriptions in this paper of the numerous rats and mice that inhabit 
Australia ; but w r e furnish a Ust of all the supposed species, w'hich may be found interesting. When more consideration 

is devoted by describing authors to teeth and structure of skeleton, and less to colour and texture of fur, these 

numerous species will suffer a heavy reduction, because one half of them are, no doubt, immature specimens, or local 
varieties. 

The dentition of the genus Hydromys is as follow's : — Incisors -, molars = 1 2 teeth. All other Australian 

rats and mice have- — -Incisors molars — , = 16 teeth. 

2 3-3 

The Rodents, Gnawers, or Rats, of Australia are conveniently divided into three groups, which we name — 1st, the 
genus Hydromys, comprising the water rats just enumerated; and, the genus Hapalotis , or the slender-eared and long-tailed 

rats; and, 3rd, the genus Mus, comprising the ordinary rats and mice. 

Genus Hapalotis. 

(a.) Tree Rats, representing the Squirrels in Australia; tail long, and generally pencilled at the tip: — 

1. White-footed Tree Rat. Hapalotis aibipes. New South Wales. 

1. White-tipped Tree Rat. Hapalotis apicalis. New South Wales. 

3. Black-tipped Tree Rat. Hapalotis penici/lata. North Australia. 


2 


4- Elsey s Hapalotis, or Tree Rat. Hapalotis hemileucura. North Australia. 

5- Great Hapalotis, or Tree Rat. Hapalotis hirsutus. North Australia. 

6. Spotted-tailed Tree Rat.* Hapalotis (or Mus) macropus. North Australia. 

7. Building Hapalotis. Hapalotis conditor. This curious rat was first discovered by the late Captain Sturt, on 

the Murray and Darling, and the gallant explorer gives the following description of it : — “ The Building Rat 
inhabits the brushes of the Darling, but was not found beyond latitude 30°. It builds a nest of small 
sticks, varying in length from three to eight inches, and in thickness from that of a quill to that of 
the thumb, arranged in a most systematic manner, so as to form a compact cone, like a bee-hive, about 
four feet in diameter and three feet high. Those at the foundation are so disposed as to form a compact 
flooring, and the entire fabric is so firm as almost to defy destruction, except by fire. The animal, which 
is like an ordinary rat, only that it has longer ears, and the hind-feet are disproportioned to the fore-feet, 
lives in communities, and traverses the mounu by means of passages leading into the apartments in the 
centre. One of these nests or mounds had five holes or entrances at the base, nearly equidistant from- each 
other, with passages leading from them to a hole in the ground beneath, in which I am led to conclude 
they had their store. There were two nests of grass in the centre, with passages running up to them 
diagonally from the bottom ; the nests were close together, but in separate compartments, with passages 
communicating from the one to the other.” Many years have passed since the gallant Captain explored 
these regions. Then only fleet-footed Wallabies disturbed the Building Rat; now herds of cattle tramp 
heavily over the country, and the little architect has been obliged to quit his dwelling, which is however 
often reoccupied by another rat the W hite-tipped Hapalotis. \\ e have had an opportunity of examining 
many of the curious structures described above ; but out of at least fifty, only one contained a solitary 
“ Kohl, the aboriginal name for the Building Rat. The nests so examined were not empty, but, as 
already stated, they frequently harboured a family of the W hite-tipped Hapalotis, a smaller and very gentle 
species — so gentle indeed as to be encouraged to share our frugal meals when we have been encamped for 
a few months near their habitations. 

The Building Rat has large slender ears, and not a pencilled tail; it may belong to another section, 
but it is enumerated here for want of a better place at present. 

(b.) Jerboa-like Rats. Two distinct species of jumping mice inhabit Australia; the larger is found on the West Coast, 
and the smaller on the Murray and Darling. These mice or rats progress on their hind legs, like the Kangaroo. 
They form burrows in the sandhills, which the aborigines soon find out and trace to the very end, for the purpose 
of obtaining the inhabitants to roast them, when they cannot procure larger game : — 

8. Long-tailed Jerboa. Hapalotis longkaudata. “Kor-tung” and “ Gool-a-wa ” of the aborigines of Moore’s River, 

Western Australia. 

9. Mitchell’s Jerboa. Hapalotis mitehellii. “ Kahlpere ” of the Murray natives; “ Djir-dow-in ” of the aborigines 

near Perth; “ Mat-tee-getch ” of the Moore’s River tribes. 

Genus Mus. 

The common rats of Australia, that is, species with moderate ears and tails, are numerous, and difficult to classify. 
We enumerate them as follows : — 

Dusky-footed Rat. (Mus fuscipes.) Western Australia, South Australia, Islands of Bass’s Straits, New South 
Wales, and probably Tasmania. 

Tawny Rat. (Mus vel/orosus .) A long-haired species, from South Australia. Only one specimen in existence. 

Long-haired Rat. (Mus longipilis.) Probably identical with the above. A single specimen in the Australian 
Museum, from the Victoria River. 

Buff-footed Rat. (Mus cervinipes) A Queensland and New South Wales species, named “ Corrill ” by the 
aborigines of Stradbrook Island, Moreton Bay, and “ Cunduov ” by the Richmond River natives. 

Allied Rat. (Mus assimilis) “Moor-deet” of the King George’s Sound tribes. 

White-footed Rat. (Mus manicatus .) An allied species, from Port Essington. 

Sordid Rat. (Mus sordidus .) “Dil-pea” of the aborigines of the Darling Downs District, New South Wales. 

Plain Rat. (Mus lineolatus.J ‘War-lie ” of the aborigines of the Darling Downs. 

Gould’s Rat. (Mus goiddi.J “ Kurn-dyne ” of the aborigines of Moore’s River, West Australia. 

Little Rat. (Mus nanus.) “Jib-beetch” — aborigines of Moore’s River, West Australia. 

Greyish-white Mouse. (Mus albocinereus) “Noo-jee” — aborigines of West Australia, Perth District ; “ Jiip-pert” — 

aborigines of Moore’s River, West Australia. 

New Holland Field Mouse. (Mus novar-hollandue.) New South Wales. 

Delicate-coloured Mouse. (Mus delicatulus) “ Mo-lyne-be ” — aborigines of Port Essington. 


* Tliis gigantic Rat lias a more or less spotted tail, which is without a brush at the tip. It is a new discovery, and has been described as JTapaloiis caudimaculaia by Krefft, ail’d 
under another name by Dr. Peters. It grows as large as the common Bandicoot — Perameles nasuta. 




; mBrnm 

§11 






: sSv 


iBaSWiM KMMai^ 

iliMw 

■ ■ ,: ■. '• ‘ '■ ; ."■ - 







The Tasmanian Wombat 


(PHASCOLOMYS WOMBAT.) 

Our figure represents the Tasmanian Wombat, which is rather smaller than the New South Wales species, but closely 
resembles it in the skeleton. The specimen which served as a model was a remarkably tame one. General colour 
dusky-grey or brown, more or less mottled with light hairs, so that the fur appears grizzly; lower part of the body 
greyish. 

All Wombats have 2,4 teeth, arranged as follows : — Incisors j, premolars molars These teeth are 

without fangs, are more or less curved, and resemble the teeth of the common Hare. The food of the Wombat consists 

of grass, herbs, roots, young twigs, and other vegetable products, so that their flesh is palatable. 

All the different species form extensive burrows, in which they pass the day, coming out to feed after dark. 
The female produces only one young at a birth. The feet are constructed like those of the Phalangers or Opossums, 
to which family the Wombats are closely allied ; the fore-feet have five toes, and the hind ones the same number, the 

inner or first toe being a small nailless thumb. 

The pouch is directed upwards, as in the other marsupials that progress on all-fours, and contains four mamma?. 
Our present species is peculiar to Tasmania and the islands of Bass’s Straits. 

The New' South Wales Wombat ( P hascohnnys pfa/yrhinmj is found on the East and South Coast, extending 
even as far as Victoria, where also a brown variety occurs. This eastern Wombat differs little from the Tasmanian one, 

except that it is larger, and grows to over 80 lbs. in weight. Its colouration resembles the Tasmanian animal. 

The third species inhabits the western parts of Victoria and the eastern border of South Australia. Fur sandy 

or yellowish, the muzzle covered with hair (all other species have this part of the head naked). Professor Owen 
was the first to point out the difference between this and the eastern species, and proposed the name “ Broad- 
faced Wombat” ( Phosjeolmnys kitifronx) for it. 

A fourth variety, having brown or black, soft and silky fur, inhabits the neighbourhood of Port Lincoln, 

in South Australia; and for this animal the name of “Black Wombat” ( Phascolomijs niger) has been proposed. A very 
fine specimen of this new' species is in the Museum collection ; and, having examined the skull, and compared it with 

that of the other Wombats, we have arrived at the conclusion that it is distinct. One very decided feature of the 

Black Wombat’s skull is the great contraction between the orbits. 

Wombats were much more numerous in olden times than they are at present, and varieties existed that were 

twice the size of our living species. We do not know how far these animals range to the north ; the temperate 
regions of Australia appear to be their head quarters. They have not yet been observed on the West Coast. 


3 r J /7 



































> 



































































































■ 































«** 






















I 






\ 






















if y#A f! A4 . , ^ ^ ; 

WmSM l«SiSli A i, '-,^^®S€tlliSsliil-;5S 




^K' 

Si ywMBMMMBil 

'"' : : ... ':'■' . 


S:|§g 

■ 




: v 

i is® 
& . Ii) 


. 


From a photograph hy Viator jl. QProai. 


Harriet Scott , del. et lith. 


mm 


THE NATIVE BEAR. 


(Phascolauctos Cinereits.) 


Sydney, N. S. W.— Thomas Richards, Government Printer. — 1869. 


The Koala, or Native Bear. 


(PHASCOLARCTOS CINEREUS.) 

The animal figured in the accompanying plate, in the position of carrying a young one upon its back, is so well known 
to Australians that a short description will suffice. The total length is about two feet ; the fur short and woolly, of an 
ashy-grey colour, more or less spotted with white near the haunches. The taxi is so very small as to appear altogether 
absent, but in the skeleton ten flatfish caudal vertebras are observed. 

The Koala, often misnamed “ Native Bear,” has no relation whatever with the Bear tribe, but belongs to the 

marsupial or pouched section of the animal kingdom, and is closely related to the common Phalangers. 

Comparing the general form of this animal with other members of the same group, we experience at first some 
difficulty' in its proper classification ; but having examined the hind feet, we notice a powerful prehensile inner toe 
or thumb, and observe that the next pair of toes, which are smaller than the others, are to a certain extent joined 

together by- the skin. This construction of the hind feet determines the question, for it is peculiar to members of the 

Phalanger family- — the Monkeys of the Marsupial Order, as they are often termed. 

It must be remembered that the Phalanger tribe comprises all the animals which we usually designate 

“ Opossums” ; but as the true Opossum, of the family Didelphidw , is peculiar to the Ameiican Continent, the term 
“Phalanger,” sometimes applied to these animals, should always be used when speaking of “Australian Opossums.” It 
is necessary for the purpose of classification to examine the teeth carefully, and not to trust to the colour, texture, or 
length of fur only'. Some authors lay great stress on difference in colour ; but this is not a good characteristic, 
because animals vary constantly in consequence of climate, food, or locality. We all know, for instance, that the fur 
of the Native Bear, or Koala, is a light ashy-grey, in most parts of New South Wales; but those from colder regions, 
such as the south-eastern portion of Victoria, have a much darker fur. The result is that such .specimens are often 
described as new, while in reality they are only local varieties. The fur changes in length, thickness, or colour, 

under certain conditions ; but the structure of the skeleton is so little affected by local or climatic influences that, 
for our part, we can only- accept a decided difference in the bony frame or the teeth as decisive. 

We noticed that • the Koala belongs to the Phalanger tribe, on account of the structure of the hind feet. 

Let us now examine skull and teeth. In the upper jaw there are six front teeth, termed incisors ; next to these is 
a slightly curved one — the canine ; then comes a somewhat compressed and rather elongate premolar ; and after that 
four teeth all equal in size, with their crowns divided into four parts — these are the molars or grinders.* The form 
of the molars indicates that the animal is herbivorous, though the presence of canines shows that its food may be 
varied by insects, eggs, or even flesh. As far as our experience goes, the Koala will not touch meat in captivity : 

and if its proper food — fresh young gum-leaves- — is not provided, the creature soon pines away and dies. The Koala 
is nocturnal, and arboreal (or tree-living), and passes the day either sitting down with the head in its lap, or lying 

flat upon a branch, which is embraced by the powerful anus, or in some other easy position, dozing away till the 

approach of darkness calls it to fresh activity. The difficulty- of discerning the grey- animal on a similar-coloured limb 

up a high tree is great indeed; and were it not for the protection thus given to if by the all-wise Creator, tins harmless 

creature would soon be exterminated by its numerous enemies. The eye of the Koala is very small, of a light amber 

colour, and provided with a vertical pupil, which dilates after dark ; the ears are large, anil covered with bushy hair : 

the tail, as before stated, is apparently absent. The Koala is a powerful climber, and seldom comes to the ground. 


* 'We would add, that the small 2nd and 3rd upper incisors are frequently lost, so that students might think the dentition given to be incorrect. If they should find 
skulls with only two or four incisor teeth above, they may rest assured that they have to do with those of aged specimens, as the proper number of cutting teeth is six 
in the upper and two in the lower jaw. 


2 


except indeed for the purpose of ascending another tree ; its activity is, however, limited, and several specimens observed 

when in captivity were seen to sit down for a rest after every few steps. Old bushmen state that if a Koala is taken 

for a mile or two from its usual haunt, placed in captivity, and then liberated, it will run to the nearest tree, and 
remain there in preference to seeking refuge in a tree more remote or in the neighbouring forest, if there be one. 

Experiments have been made to test this, and the liberated “ Bear ” has been invariably found in the tree standing 

nearest to its late place of confinement. 

The south-eastern part of Australia is the stronghold of these animals, the mountainous districts of Victoria and 
New South Wales are their most favourite localities; they are also found in Queensland to within the very tropics, but 
always keep to the mountain ranges, and never visit the plains of the interior. ■ They have a peculiarly harsh and shrill 
voice when angry, but are generally silent at other times, and very harmless. 

The female seldom carries more than a single young one, which is born very small — about the size of a French 
bean. The young, like those of other marsupials, do not suck at first, but the mother is provided with certain peculiar 
muscles which enable her to pump the milk into her helpless progeny. The question as to the mode of birth of 

marsupials has been much debated. They are believed by some to grow on to the teat. This is not the case, 

however, as they have frequently been found in the uterus. How they are conveyed thence to the teat will probably 
remain a secret for a long time to come. 

The flesh of the Koala is not very palatable, owing to the nature of the animal’s food. The skin makes excellent 
leather, and good serviceable foot-mats. 

The animal described as a Marsupial or Pouched Lion (Thylacoleo carnifex ) , and of which we know only a 

few fossil remains, is in reality allied to the genus Cuxcux. Many other remains, in particular portions of the lower 

jaw, indicate clearly that a whole group of gigantic creatures has become extinct, and that nearly all of these — the Great 
Diprotodons, the Short-headed Zvgomaturus, and the different species of the genus Nototherium— resembled the Koala 
or Native Bear more (in the structure of their limbs, the formation of the jaw, and the mode in which the teeth, 
are constructed and implanted) than any other Australian marsupial now living. 




wSSBBk 

■■ : ; . j 


;.u... \v 




fj HBB Bj i 

■■■Hi ■ 

WaMMgi 

■Pilh -.■': . 


Harriet Scott , del, et lith 


Fi'om a photograph from life by Victor ft. (Pro\< 


THE RENT G-TAILED OPOSSUM 

(Phalangista Cooki.) 


Sydney, N. S. W — Thomas Richards, Government Printer.— 1809. 



Ring-tail Phalanger. 

(PITALANGISTA COOKII. Desm.) 


Fuk dense, and moderately soft; upper parts of body grey, more or less suffused with red; flanks and outer surface of 
limbs bright rust colour, beneath whitish ; ears short, hairy, sometimes with a white spot at the base ; tail rusty at the 
upper part, which colour darkens to within a third of the total length, and ends in a white tip. The white portion 
of the tail varies considerably in different individuals, and is sometimes altogether absent. 


The rusty-coloured Phalanger inhabits the east coast of Australia, and may be considered peculiar to New South 
Wales and the southern portions of Queensland. 

A darker variety is found in Tasmania, and in other parts of Australia, extending as far as tire Swan River 
Colony. The specimens observed in New South Wales, west of the coast range, are generally much paler than the 
animals found in the dense scrub near the sea-boarcl ; there can be no doubt, however, that ail the Ring-tailed 
Phalangers, of whatever colour, are varieties of one and the same species. 


These remarks are based upon a careful examination of many skeletons and skulls from the localities before 

mentioned, and they must be considered far better characteristics than the colour of the fur or the length of the ears, 
which appear so important to superficial writers. 

The Ring-tailed Phalangers are closely allied to the Petaurista. or Great Flying Squirrel (or better Phalanger), 
much more so than may at first appear. The dentition of these two groups, in shape, number, and arrangement, is 

almost identical ; but both differ considerably from the smaller Flying Phalangers — the well-known “ Sugar Squirrels.” 

North Australia produces several species of Phalangers, which have a wide geographical range beyond New 

Holland; they belong to the genus Caucus, and are distinguished by their remarkably short ears and partly nude tail. 
The best known Cuscim is a large grey species, more or less spotted, the fur in texture and colour bearing a close 

resemblance to the fur of the Koala or Native Bear. 


Returning to the southern Phalangers, it is pleasing to notice that the original “ Phalanger of Cook ” was one 
of the rufous-grey specimens of New South Wales, or what was then considered New South Wales, before the parent 
Colony had given birth to the prosperous divisions of Victoria and Queensland. The animal was discovered by Sir 
Joseph Banks on the Endeavour River, during Cook’s first voyage, and the second specimen which came to hand was 
obtained during the great navigator’s last expedition, at Adventure Bay, in Van Diemen’s Land. Years passed on, and 
more Phalangers, from other parts, had been brought to England, but all were considered to be one and the same 
species by the naturalists of the day, till Mr. Waterhouse, the most able writer on our Fauna, declared both animals to 
be specifically identical. It is necessary to enlarge upon this subject, because less painstaking authors than Waterhouse 
are constantly dividing “ Cook’s Opossum ” again and again, when they observe a new variation in the colouring ; the 
last and most brilliant species being the “ Victorian Ring-tailed Phalanger,” but in truth only the dark variety of honest 
Captain Cook’s own “ Ring-tail.” It is time for naturalists to take broader views, and to cease confusing the many 
eager students who are only too willing to learn, but are constantly disheartened by empty discussions about dark and 
light hair and long or short ears, among the great Professors. 

It is well known that all Phalangers are nocturnal in their habits, and Mr. Gould informs us that this particular 
species of Cook spends its days in the spouts and holes of the larger trees. Mr. Gould is not quite correct in this 
instance, as the animal much more frequently constructs a most beautiful covered nest among the slender branches of 
high trees, probably on account of the marauding propensities of the “ Tiger Cats,” it being no match for these 
ferocious brutes. 


The female is provided with a well-formed pouch, containing four mamma?, and the number of young seldom 
exceeds two. Mr. Masters took four young from the pouch of a specimen on one occasion; so large a number is, however, 
an exception. We will now give a general review of the group, as it comprises many species which are not figured 
in this work. 


2 


FAMILY PHALANGISTID^E— (THE PHALANGERS.) 

The animals forming this group differ considerably in their general habit and dentition. The normal number 
is -Incisors -, canines — , premolars — or — , molars = 32 — 36 teeth. The canines and first premolar are often 
wanting. In the genus Phascolarctos the series is permanent, but reduced to 30 teeth, there being no lower canines, 
and but one premolar in each ramus. The pouch is present, well developed and downwards, the number of teats four, 
and the young produced at a birth generally one ; but in the Ringtail Phalanger litters of four have been noticed. 
The toes are five on the fore-feet, and five, including a nailless thumb, behind ; the two inner toes are joined by a 
membrane, as in the Wombat or Kangaroo tribe. The Phalangers are found in almost every part of Australia, except 
the Koala or Native Bear, which is restricted to the east and south-east coast ; and the members of the genus Cuscus , 
which inhabit only the tropics. The tail, generally so conspicuous and important, is absent in one species — the Koala , 
but in all others it is well developed and of great utility, on account of its being prehensile. We arrange the genera 
as follows : — - 

Genus Phascolarctos. — Phascolarctos drier eus. Native Bear, or Koala. Teeth : — Incisors -, canines — , premolars 
— , molars — 30. Habitat- — South-east and east coast. 

i-i j 4.-4’ J 

Genus Cuscas . — Teeth : — -Incisors, canines, premolars, molars, as given above = 32 to 36. 

Tail with the basal portion only covered with hair ; ears short, almost hidden by the fur of the head ; 
eyes with a vertical, or nearly vertical pupil, 

1. Guscus maculata. Spotted Phalanger. Habitat— North Australia, Amboyna, Waigiou, Banda, and New 
Guinea. 

2. Cuscus brevicaudatus. Short-tailed Phalanger. Habitat — North Australia, Port Albany, 

Genus Phalangista .- — Tail completely covered with hair above. Ears of moderate length. Teeth from 32 to 
36 in number. 

1. Phalangista coohii. Cook’s Phalanger. Ngd-ra - — aborigines of Perth, West Australia. Ngorh — aborigines 
of King George’s Sound. Plabitat — The Phalanger of Cook (the first ever discovered in Australia) 
is restricted to the east and north-east, and does not occur in West Australia, as implied by the 
above aboriginal names. Mr. Gould, or rather Mr. Gilbert, probably refers to the Viverrine Phalanger, 
which is found on the West Coast. 

2. Phalangista viverrina. Ring-tail Phalanger. Habitat— New South Wales (east of the coast range), 

Victoria, South and West Australia, Tasmania. The fur in this species is not red, as in Cook’s Phalanger, 

but either grey or almost black. In young animals from West Australia the tip of the tail is red instead 

of white. 

3. Phalangista laniginosa. Woolly Phalanger. Habitat — New South Wales, the Upper Hunter. This 

species from the Hunter is rare in collections, and may probably turn out to be a variety of Phalan- 
gista coohii. The fur is certainly more wo oil}', but without the examination of the skull no decision can 
be arrived at. 

Genus Petaurista. 

This genus is represented by a single species— the Petaurista taguanoides, or Great Flying Phalanger. 

Teeth : — Incisors -, canines — , premolars — , molars — , — 40 teeth. The skull and teeth of this species 
closely resemble the Viverrine and Cook’s Phalanger, so much so that it is difficult even for an experienced 
anatomist to distinguish between the two when he has nothing but the teeth to go by. The skull of the 

Petaurista is, however, slightly shorter and more flattened. Only one species is known, which varies much, 

from creamy-white to spotted black and white and perfect black ; beneath, the fur is always white. 

Plabitat — New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland. This animal does not occur on the plains of the 
interior, and is restricted to the hilly country near the coast. 

Genus Belideus. 

There are a few characteristics by which the two genera of Petaurus and Belideus can at once be 
distinguished, and these are, more than anything else, the skull and teeth, so often overlooked even by what 
are considered standard authors. The skull of the Belideus flaviv enter, which must be accepted as the type of 
the genus, is rounded, with large brain-case. (The skull of the Petaurista is flat, and contracted between the 
orbits.) The teeth (molars) are much smaller, not ridged, and they diminish from the first to the last ; the 
lower incisors are of a totally different structure, considerably curved, and not scooped out as the teeth of 
Petaurista, which animals move their mandibles like the Kangaroos. The teeth are : — Incisors -, canines 
— , premolars — , molars — 40. The genus comprises the following four species (a fifth, enumerated by 
some authors as Belideus notatus is a simple B. breviceps, which often occurs with a white tip to the tail) : — 

1. Belideus Jlaviventer. Yellow-bellied Flying Phalanger. General colour greyish-brown; beneath, white or 
yellow-white, sometimes even bright yellow. Habitat — New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland, — 
in particular the coast districts. 


3 




2, Belideus sciurus. Squirrel Flying Phalanger. Fur very soft ; general colour delicate ashy-grey ; a black 
dorsal stripe from nose to tail ; beneath, white ; tail very long, and bushy. Habitat — the north-east coast 
of New South Wales and the Queensland coast districts. Of the three smaller Flying Phalangers this 
species is the largest in size. 

3, Belideus breviceps. Short-headed Flying Phalanger. Colouration delicate ashy-grey, as in the preceding 

species; beneath, white; a dorsal stripe on the back, and a smaller and more cylindrical tail than Belideus 

sciurus. The present species inhabits New South Wales, Victoria, and probably South Australia. It 
prefers the mountain districts, and is not found on the plains of the interior. 

4, Belideus arid. Ariel Flying Phalanger. Wor-gi — aborigines of Port Essington. General colour as the 

two preceding species ; beneath, rather more yellow ; tip of tail black. This is probably only a 

variety of Belideus breviceps. Habitat — North Australia, Port Essington. 

Genus Dactylopsila. Tail elongate, slender, densely clothed with fur, with the exception of the under-side, near 
the tip ; ears elongate, rounded, bald, except the outer side of the base ; fore-feet elongate ; toes very slender, 
compressed, very unequal in length, quite free ; the hind feet slender, toes compressed, the two inner toes 
united — in fact, the feet of a Phalanger. The skull resembles that of Belideus flaciv enter, but the palate is 
narrower, and the orbital portion more contracted ; the sagittal crest, which in Belideus is absent, is distinctly, 
but not much developed in the present genus ; the zygomatic arch is weak in both animals, though much 
curved, and wide apart ; the incisors above and below are strong, the lower ones bent upwards, very powerful 
at the base, and as broad again as those of Belideus, but the grinders are smaller. The correct formula is 
exactly as in Belideus . flaviventer . Incisors canines — , premolars molars j, = 40. 

Dactylopsila trivirgata. Striped Phalanger. General colour white, with three broad black stripes. The middle 
one runs from the head to the tip of the tail, which is black ; the two outer ones enclose the eye, and 
send a branch down each leg ; there is also a branch-stripe down the side of the neck. The habitat of 
this species is given as Aru Islands by Wallace. A specimen in the Australian Museum was obtained by 
Mr. J. A. Thorpe, at Cape Fork. 

Genus ylcrobat.es. The present genus comprises a single species, which is one of the smallest of the whole tribe 
The most important generic characters are the strongly developed canine teeth, the otherwise altered dentition, 
and the feathered tail. 

Acrobates pygmcea. Pigmy Acrobates, or Flying Mouse. Teeth ; — Incisors — , canines — j, premolars — , 

molars = 36 teeth. General mouse-colour above, white below ; tail flat and feathered, not very 

prehensile ; molar teeth as above, that is, two less in the upper and lower jaw than the other Flying 
Phalangers possess. Habitat — New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland. 

Genus Dromicia. The small Phalangers composing this genus have been likened to the Dormice amongst 

Rodents ; they are, however, nothing more than small species of the Ring-tail Phalanger tribe, with the teeth 

arranged as in the last subject. Incisors -, canines — , premolars — , molars — — , 36. The ears are of 

moderate size, nearly naked, and generally carried folded down ; the toe-nails are small, and the tail long, 
prehensile, and naked beneath. The upper canines and all the premolars are strongly developed, so that, with 
other characteristics, such as the habit of folding the ears, there is some approach to the small Dasyiiridce of 
the genus Phascogale, of which we shall have to speak hereafter. The genus comprises three or four species, 
which resemble each other considerably, though they are found in localities far apart. 

Dromici gliriformis. The Thick-tailed Dromicia. The fur is of a mouse-colour, and whitish beneath. This 
specimen has been figured very fat, with incrassated tail; but being taken from a pair of captives, it may 
be as well to state that when at large they are never in such excellent condition. We examined 

several specimens from Tasmania, which appear to be identical with our own continental Dromicia 
unicolor. The King George’s Sound Dromicia ( Dromicia concinna) is probably distinct ; it appears a 

more delicate specimen, with a clean white fur beneath ; the upper surface is also of a mouse-colour, tinted 
or washed with brown. The Dromicias are found in New South Wales, Victoria, and West Australia; 
they occur, no doubt, in South Australia and Queensland as well, but being so very small are seldom 
captured. 

Genus Tarsipes. Head elongate and slender ; muffle naked ; mouth-opening small ; tongue long, slender, with a 
brush at the tip; skull with the bones very thin and semi-transparent; lower jaw consisting of two slender 
rami without coronoid process, bearing a pair of horizontally-inserted incisors, with three tubercular teeth 
behind ; in the upper jaw the canine is the largest. The dental formula is given by Waterhouse as 

follows : — Incisors canines molars or more. There can be no doubt that, through the 

Tarsipes and Myrmecobius, the Marsupialia are linked with the Monotremata, and in particular with 

the Echidna or Spiny Ant-eater (Echidnaliystriv J. 

Tarsipes rostratus. Long-nosed Tarsipes. Fur short, adpressed, and rather harsh ; general tint grey, 

more or less suffused with rust colour; sides of body distinctly tinted with rust colour, beneath rusty 
white ; back, with longitudinal black lines ; tail, dusky above, greyish beneath, prehensile. Female with 
distinct pouch, four teats, and generally two young, of such small dimensions when born that they 

would pass through the eye of a large darning-needle. Habitat — King George’s Sound, West Australia. 



























\ 
























(Phaxangista Vu-lfina.) 


Sydney, N. S, W. — Thomas Richards, Government Printer. — 1869. 


Vulpine Phalanger. 

(PHALANG ISTA VULPINA.) 

The subject of our present illustration is the most common and widely-distributed of Australian animals. It is classed 
with the Phalanger family, hating the peculiar attributes of the tribe, namely, hind feet with a prehensile thumb, and 
two small inner toes, united by a membrane. The fore-feet are provided with the usual five strongly-clawed toes. 

The teeth differ constantly — the small ones at least between incisors and molars. The permanent set consists of three 
incisors, a canine, two premolars, and four molars, in the upper jaw; and one incisor, a very small tubercular canine, 
a premolar, and four molars, in the lower. In describing the dentition, the incisors, front, or cutting teeth of both 
sides are enumerated together; while the other teeth in each ramus are given separately. The usual way of expressing 
the dental formula in this case would be — Incisors canines premolars — , molars — = 34. We stated that 

the teeth differ considerably in various specimens ; because some retain the small premolars, and others shed or 

absorb them ; their proper number would be — above and below. In the majority of animals the dentition is, 

however, as above ; two premolars in each ramus of the upper, and one premolar in each ramus of the lower jaw. 

In order to test the correctness of our supposition that the number of premolars in each ramus really amounted to 

three, we obtained more than 100 skulls, but amongst them only two were found with perfect dentition. 

The colouration of the Vulpine Phalanger is as follows: — Fur long and woolly; ashy-grey, under-parts of body 
yellowish ; muzzle and chin blackish ; ears nearly naked on the inner side, -well cov ered externally, except at the tip ; 
a black patch at the base of the ear; feet yellowish, more or less suffused with brown. Old males have a rusty- 

coloured neck and breast ; tail bushy, black towards the apex, prehensile ; and one-third of it naked beneath ; eyes 

rather large, brown, with rounded pupil. Female with a well-developed pouch, four teats, seldom bearing more than one 
or two young at a time. 

Numerous varieties of the common Phalanger exist in every part of Australia, from the far north to the 

islands of Bass’s Straits and Tasmania ; the black variety, with long ears, is peculiar to this island. In New Holland, 

or Australia proper, we find a Phalanger of a grey or black colour, and with shorter ears — in particular in the Clarence 

District — which has been described as a distinct species, under the name of Phaldngista canina. A third variety occurs 

near the sea-coast, in thick stunted scrub about Port Hacking principally ; the colour is sandy, and the tail less hairy 

than that of the species under review. This animal is said to inhabit the scrub only, and not to ascend trees.* It is 

captured by hunting with dogs, w'hich drive it from the shelter of the thick brushwood where it passes the day, and 

it is thus secured without difficulty. 

How far northward this variety is to be found we are unable to say. A few specimens in the Museum 
came from the neighbourhood of Port Denison, and were caught in localities similar to those which the animal frequents 
at Port Hacking. It is possible also that the Phalangers that inhabit the Mallee-scrub are different from those which 
frequent high trees ; the aborigines appear to think so, but in the absence of specimens we are unable to decide the 
question. 

Settlers complain a great deal of the ravages of the Phalangers, and the increase is accounted for because their 
greatest enemies — the aboriginal natives — die off. Their food is varied; it consists of leaves, fruit, grass, and flesh. We 
have frequently observed them gnawing bones ; and when they can get a small bird, or a nestful of eggs, they are 
not slow to take advantage thereof. 

The day is generally passed in a hollow branch ; only the Ring-tailed Phalanger constructs a sort of covered 
nest for its habitation. 

Our figure, which represents the animal w'ell in a natural position, is taken from a very tame half-grown 
specimen in the possession of the Hon. Henry Parkes, M.L.A. 


* For a very good reason — because there are none. 





















































From a photograph from life by Viator fi. (Prout. 


THE SOOTY OPOSSUM. 


(Phalangista Fuliginosa.) 


Sydney, N. S. W.— Thomas Richards, Government Printer.— 1859. 




The Sooty Phalanger. 


(PHALANGISTA PULlGlNOSA.) 

This large Phalanger, a variety of the common mainland species, is peculiar to Tasmania, and either of the same 
colour as the Phalangista vmpina or deep sooty-brown, and occasionally almost black. The fur, however, is thicker and 
longer, and the darker skins are much valued for the manufacture of the famous Black Opossum rugs, which form a 
considerable item of Tasmanian exports. The dark variety is peculiar to the island, and not even found in Southern 
Victoria, where the colder climate would probably be congenial to its habit and economy, which are the same as those 
of the grey variety — the Vulpine Phalanger, better known as the common or “ Brush-tail Opossum.” 

General colour brown-black, darker on the back ; muzzle, chin, feet, and ears externally, black ; throat, chest, 

and abdomen, of a fulvous brown colour — the last-mentioned part of a deeper hue than the chest, &c. The ears are 

naked internally, or nearly so ; externally they are well clothed with fur, excepting near the point and along the 

anterior margin, which parts are covered with small adpressed hairs. About six inches of the apical portion of the tail 

is naked beneath. 

Mr. Waterhouse, than whom a better authority on our Mammalia does not exist, gives it as his opinion 
“that as the almost black specimens are sent from Tasmania, accompanied with others which are of very deep rufous- 
brown tint, much suffused with black on the back, — by others which are of a rich rufous-grey, — by others again which 
are grey, — and, lastly, by individuals which are of a cream colour, — and as all these specimens agree very closely in 
size and proportions, — we can but conclude that they form one and the same variable species. Upon comparing the 
skins, or stuffed specimens, of this Tasmanian Phalanger, with those of the Phalangista vulpina of New South Wales, 

the only tolerably constant difference which could be perceived was that the island animal was larger than that of the 

mainland, and two skulls of Tasmanian specimens presented a corresponding difference of size when compared with the 

crania of the common P. vulpina." Our own investigations corroborate Mr. Waterhouse’s opinion. There is a difference 
in size, and some slight alteration in the position of the teeth, but these characteristics may only belong to certain 
individuals, and probably occur in mainland specimens also. It would be interesting to secure a series of young of the dark 
variety, and compare them with the young of the light-coloured species. If really different, these dark-coloured animals 

would show indications of it even before the hair has appeared; and we shall prove hereafter, when speaking of the 

Kangaroo tribe, that certain places which, in the adult animal, are covered with black hair, are marked accordingly in 

the naked young. 

The aborigines of Tasmania are now extinct, and the Phalangers have no other enemy except the Tiger 
Cat, or Tasmanian Dasyure, and civilized man; but with all the scientific weapons at their command the hunters 
cannot perceptibly diminish them. On the mainland these animals have become a perfect pest in some districts. Their 
nocturnal and arboreal habits, their food and number of young, are well known, and are the same as those of New 

Holland. 



3 or 4- 71 








V 










































\ 





























I 

























































<5 









V 














J 



















THE KANGAROO. 

(Macrofus Major.) 


Sy.iney, N. S. W.— Thomas Richards, Government Printer.— 1868 e 




Great Kangaroo. 


(MACROPITS MAJOR. Young Male.) 

It is just a century since Captain Cook discovered the Common or Great Kangaroo in the neighbourhood of Port 
Jackson, and notwithstanding all the persecution by man and dog these large Marsupials still hold their ground.* 
From the vicinity of the City they have certainly disappeared, but in the Port Hacking District, on the south side of 
Botany Bay, a few may yet be found. The nearest spot where good sport can be obtained is Jervis Bay, to which 

locality regular hunting parties proceed, and generally return with good “ bags'’ or rather “ cart-loads” of game. 

The distribution of the Great Kangaroo appears to be confined to Tasmania and the southern portions of the 
mainland; the animal does not occur on the West Coast, where another allied species ( Macropus ocydromus ) takes its 
place, nor do we remember that the Common Kangaroo has been observed very far north. 

In some districts the settlers are obliged to have regular battues to keep the Kangaroos within bounds, because 
they feed voraciously and multiply so quickly that sheep or cattle would soon be outnumbered by them. The main 
cause of this prolific increase is no doubt the destruction of the Native Dog and the absence of the aboriginal 

hunting parties. The fur of the Kangaroo is rather short and woolly, the prevailing colour a brownish grey, the 
under side of the body, inner parts of legs and the arms being lighter ; the tarsi and toes are black. The male 
exceeds the female in size, but there is no difference in the colour of the sexes. 

When a herd of Kangaroos is disturbed, the old males keep in the rear, the fleeter females and young going 
off first ; and it is astonishing to see the large space of ground they cover at a single bound when hotly pursued. 
Few -artists have however attempted to illustrate the precise way in which these animals progress ; even our best 
authors represent them as running like greyhounds (See Gould’s “ Mammals of Australia,” plate 34), but if really they 
attempted to do so they could not avoid going “ head over heels.” 

The whole tribe progresses by a succession of jumps, using the hind legs only, and the tail to balance the 
body ; the arms are pressed close to the chest ; the heavy tail forms a gentle curve, but never touches the ground ; 
and the two elastic tarsi come down together at regular intervals with a heavy thud. When feeding on short herbage 

the arms and hands rest on the ground, and the tail with the hind legs form a sort of tripod. In this fashion 

the Kangaroo moves by raising the tarsi (the body resting on the tail and fore-legs) and pushing them forward. 

Few animals are more graceful when running than those of the Kangaroo tribe ; but, as we mentioned before, 

artists will not take the trouble to observe them, and the consequence is that, when a sketch is attempted, a 
caricature is the result. We appeal to the rising generation to study nature, and trust they will learn to draw a 

Kangaroo as carefully as they learn to draw a Horse or a Dog, and that they will discontinue to accept as correct 

the ludicrous representation of the animals which have hitherto supported the Australian Shield under the names of 

Kangaroo and Emu. 


* We caution students against placing implicit belief in the statements of foreign writers about Australia, let the name of the author be ever so much respected. Mrs. 
Somerville, in her famous book, u Physical Geography,” in the fourth revised edition to boot, tells us that the pouched tribe (p. 472) vary from the size of a large dog to a 
mouse ; that the Banded Kangaroo is found only in the islands in Shark’s Bay, on the West Coast oj New South Wales ; that there are only fifty-three species of terrestrial Mammalia 
in Australia altogether ; that the rodents are all aquatic, and very peculiar ; and that the Phalangers burrow in the sand. We are also informed that the Kangaroos have become 
scarce near the British Colonies, and that the whole of the native animals are likely to be soon extirpated. (With Wallaby skins by the thousand, at 3d. each.) We conclude with an 
extract from page 269 : — “ The Macquarie is called the Fish River between Bathurst and Sydney 
/.d v/y 





















* f - 















.0 r -Uhr " mu . jo t , 























/ t 













































4 










































\\ 





















\ 








































Great Kangaroo. 


(MAOROPUS MAJOR. Female, with young.) 

The animal here represented is the female of the common or Great Kangaroo, which has been already described, and 
we take this opportunity to review the whole family, comprising the following natural groups or genera : — 

Great Kangaroos (Macropus) ; weight of animal up to 200 lbs. 

Wallabies or Brush-kangaroos (Halmaturus ) ; weight from 10 to 50 lbs. 

Rock-wallabies or Rock-kangaroos ( Petro galea ) ; weight up to 30 lbs. 

Tree-wallabies or Tree-kangaroos ( Dendrolagus ) ; weight up to 30 lbs. 

Silky-haired or Nail-tail Kangaroos ( Onychogalea) ; weight from 8 to 10 lbs. 

Hare-kangaroos (Lagorchestes) ; weight from 6 to 8 lbs. 

Bettongs or Jerboa Kangaroos (Bettongia) ; weight from 4 to 3 lbs. 

Hypsiprymni or Rat-kangaroos (Hypsiprymnus ) ; weight from 2 to 5 lbs. 

THE GREAT KANGAROOS— (GENUS MACROPUS.) 

First and second upper incisors rather feeble, third very broad, with two slight vertical folds.* Permanent premolar 
small, and soon lost ; molars pushed gradually out, so that the normal number of molar teeth — is never found perfect 
in aged animals. The teeth are always irregular, and are frequently retained longer in one ramus than in the other. When 
the last molar has come into position, the dentition may be considered complete, and would stand in this way : — 

incisors premolars — , molars = 28 teeth. The skull is rather broad between the orbits, rounded above the 

anterior portion of the zygoma, and the space between the grinders and the incisors rather longer than in the smaller 

Kangaroos. The arms are strong, but appear small from the elbow to the wrist, on account of their being covered 

with short adpressed hair. The tail is long, very powerful, and forms a strong support to the body. 

It is difficult to say how far the common Kangaroo ranges northward, — probably not much beyond the tropics. 
The West Australian Kangaroo is a distinct species. 

Western Kangaroo ( Macropus ocydromus). 

This animal, which at first sight appears identical with the common Kangaroo, is of a smaller size ; its limbs 
are finer, and the fur shorter but more woolly. The colour is slightly darker, and the legs white, or nearly so. It is 
peculiar to West Australia. 

Sooty Kangaroo (Macropus JMiginosus) . 

Little is known of this species, which Was first discovered by French voyagers on Kangaroo Island, where it 
is not now to be found. The fur is longer, more yellowish, and has a more woolly texture than the fur of the Great 
Kangaroo. 

Red Kangaroo (Mctcropus rvfus j.'f- 

The male is rich orange-red, with the legs and abdomen of a light yellowish-white ; throat and chest delicate 
pink. This colour is very deep during the rutting season, and appears to be a sort of pigment excreted from the body. 
We have often examined old males a short time after death, and have also kept others in an enclosure, and in every 
one of these animals the colouring matter of the neck and breast marked the fingers when these parts were touched. 
When some of the tame animals were driven about and had exerted themselves violently, the colouring became more 
apparent, and a peculiar odour, not unpleasant however, was also noticed. 

The teeth are slightly different from those of Macropus major ; the stronger premolar is not pushed out ; but 
having examined only a few skulls of adults we cannot say whether these characteristics are constant. 

The Red Kangaroo inhabits the interior of New South Wales, Queensland, and South Australia. The female is 
bluish-grey; legs and abdomen white. Weight of male about 200 lbs. 


* These folds or grooves become obliterated with age. 

t Those authors who are fond of making genera without giving proper reasons for so doing, arrange the Red Kangaroo with the genus Osphranter , — we believe on the strength 
of its “hairy nose.” If a division is desirable, let those animals be comprised under the genus Osphranter of which the sexes differ in colour. 

(5 x mf/) 


Red Wallaroo (Macropus antilopinus ) . 

Male.— Fur short, the hairs stiff, and closely applied to the body; limbs and abdomen pale rusty-yellow; toes 

black; height, about 4 feet. Female.— Considerably smaller; -fur longer, less harsh, and less closely applied to the 

body than m the male. General tint brown, under-parts and limbs rusty white: fore-feet brown, with black hairs 

near the claws** 

Mr. Waterhouse states that the skull of Macropus antilopinus is about equal in size to that of M. major, 

but shorter in proportion to its width ; and the most striking difference is in the form of the muzzle, which, instead 

of becoming gradually narrower towards the apex, is quite as broad near the end as at the base, and is broadest 

rather m front of the middle; the nasal bones are shorter than in M. major . The frontal bones are deeply concave 

above between the orbits, and are much contracted immediately behind them; the temporal ridgrs meet to form a 

well-marked sagittal crest. The foremost incisor is but little broader than the second; the third is about double the 

width of the second, has a strong oblique external groove, rather in front of the middle of the tooth, and there is 

a second gioove in front of this ; but this latter, which represents the foremost of the two grooves observed in 
Macropus major, is much less distinct than in that animal. In an adult, or rather aged individual, Mr. Waterhouse 

obsened only 13 molar teeth in both jaws, — a proof that this animal has been correctly arranged with the Kangaroos 
proper, in which the teeth are variable, and are pushed from behind forward and out. 

The habitat of this species is given as Port Essington, where it was discovered by the late Mr. Gilbert. 

Weight of male from 150 to 2,00 lbs. 


black. 


Black Wallaroo (Macropus robvslus). 

Male. — Fore and hind legs rather short, but powerful. General colour deep slaty-grey ; legs and toes black. 

Female. — Much smaller than the male. General colour silvery-grey ; beneath and legs whitish ; toes brownish- 
Weight of male, 150 lbs. 

Flabitat. — The mountain ranges of the Coast of New South Wales. 


Animals from 10 to 50 lbs. weight. 

BRUSH-KANGAROOS— (GENUS HALMATURUS.) 

Kangaroos of moderate size, with slender, sometimes very short arms, and rather elongate tail. Skull compara- 
tivefy shorter than that of the Great Kangaroos. The teeth the same as in Macropus. The principal distinguishing 
characteristics are the third upper incisor and the permanent large premolar. The third incisor is more elong.m, with 
rather a narrow crown and a deep groove ; the corresponding tooth of a Mcicropus has a broad crown, and the groove is 
often obliterated by the time the adult state is reached ; in young animals it is always better developed. The premolar 
is permanent, and seldom lost except perhaps in extreme old age. The molar series wears down instead of being pushed 
forward, so that the dental formula is constant. Incisors -, canines — , premolars — molars — == 28. All Wallabies 
or smaller Kangaroos (with very few exceptions) have a bridle-mark behind the shoulder and a horizontal stripe across 
the haunch. There is not much difference in colour and size between male and female, and their habits are more 
or less nocturnal. The largest species live in Tasmania; the smallest are found in New South Wales and in West 
Australia. 


Parry’s Wallaby (Halmaturus parryij. 

This is one of the fleetest and most slender-footed of the whole tribe ; its tail is very T thin and long, the 

arms are rather powerful, and the general colour is silvery-grey above and white beneath; there is the usual black mark 

from the eye to the muzzle, bridle and haunch marks are indistinct ; the toes are black. 

The habitat of this species is New South Wales and Queensland ; it first occurs in the Clarence River 

District, and is common at Wide Bay and on the Burnett and Dawson. 




























































































/ 









cq 

*4 

P 

H 1 

< 

{Z? 

0 

oa 

o 

w 


m 

P 

P 

P 

QQ 

P 

P 

P 


f* 

pq 

«i 

p 

p 


P 


— ^ 
fl 3 

m 
P 

Pfl 


OQ 

§ 

p 

H 

<1 

a 

p 

-3 

W 


H 

fi 

& 

M 

o 

<1 

H 

PQ 

a 

M 

EH 





, 


■ 


l- t : 'i '-\£ 

|)W nmrffjnrr 


3 


Black Wallaby (Halmaturus ualahatus). 

Fur of moderate length, rather harsh and glossy ; general colour deep brown, suffused with readisb on the 
hinder parts of the body; feet and tail very dark, almost black. Abdomen and breast rusty yellowish. the .black 
Wallaby, or Black-tailed Wallaby as Mr. Waterhouse designates this species, inhabits the eastern parts of New South 
Wales, principally the Coast Range, extending northward as far as the Clarence and Richmond, perhaps farther. An 
allied species to which the name of Halmaturus Mastersii has been given, occurs in some of the Queensland Districts 
at the Burnett and other rivers. This variety is lighter in colour, but sufficient specimens have not yet come to hand 

which would prove that the light colouration is constant.* In the neighbourhood of Sydney no other but the Black 

Wallaby is found. The structure of the skull resembles H. nificollis; the third or inner upper incisor is very large, 

with a deep groove and rounded outer margin ; the premolars are thick and very permanent ; that is, not easily lost or 

worn down. The tail is long, not much incrassated at the base, and less stiff than other "W allabies have them ; in fact, 
the form approaches the pliable tail of the Rock Wallaby ( Petrogalea ). 

Black-striped Wallaby ( Halmaturus dorsalis). 

Fur rather short, general colour grey with a wash of brown; neck and shoulders rust colour, beneath white; 
toes black ; a black stripe from the neck to near the tail. The skull is rather elongate, and resembles fl. nificollis. 

The teeth are very irregular, and of eight or ten adult specimens examined not two are alike, so that it would be 

vain to attempt a description. The animal is smaller than H. nificollis, and inhabits the districts of Southern Queensland ; 

it is also found in the north-eastern parts of New South Wales. 

& 

Red-necked Wallaby ( Halmaturus nificollis). 

Fur of moderate length ; general colour rusty-grey, under parts grey-white, slightly suffused with pale rust 

colour ; ears whitish internally, tipped with black ; tail rather long, greyish, with black apex ; toes black. 

It is stated that this Wallaby was first discovered by the French naturalists in King’s Island, Bass’s Straits, 

and that it was found even in the neighbourhood of Sydney. The first statement we doubt very much, and why it 

should not be found near Sydney now is inexplicable. The Black Wallaby is as plentiful as ever, and this is the only 
species which old residents remember to have hunted since they were boys. The fact is,' all these supposed species 

vary so much in colour that it is really out of the question to give a description which will answer to every variety. 
We will just examine the red-necked Wallaby, and record a few facts. 

Mr. Gould gives some good figures of the animal, ■which answer to a variety from the Clarence River. The 

“ Bong Bong” variety, lately discovered by Mr. Masters, is of a more grey colour, no rust-marks are visible on the 

neck. A white stripe on the haunch is present in one specimen, but this is w 'anting in the others. The face-markings 
differ also in the four specimens in our collection. Only one young has the white stripe under the eye as distinct as 

Mr. Gould figures it ; an old male has the whole face blackish, with just a shade to indicate the white mark seen in 

the young. A full-grown female shows a similar shaded stripe and a small light patch on the corner of the mouth, 

so that it is extremely difficult to give more than a general description without creating confusion. Both Mr. Water- 

house and Mr. Gould consider Halmaturus bennettii of Tasmania to be only a variety of the present species. In 

outward appearance both animals differ much, H. bennettii being almost uniform dark-mottled grey, with shorter legs 
and tail; but having compared a series of skulls of both, we come to the conclusion that there is no specific difference, 
as far as head and teeth are concerned. The fact is, all these Wallabies interbreed, in captivity at least. 

Black-gloved Wallaby ( Halmaturus manicatus). 

General colour grey, distinctly pencilled with black and white, under parts pale grey, slightly suffused with 

yellowish. Legs and feet yellow, except the fore-part of the latter, which is black, the two colours being sharply defined. 
Arms short and slender, ears tipped with black, tail long, compressed, not very thick, with a crest of black hair on 
the upper and under surface of the apical half. The bridle-mark is indistinct or absent, but there is a series of black 
stripes across the back and haunches resembling the markings of the Banded Hare-kangaroo. As no author has 
mentioned these marks before, we wish to draw attention to them. 


* Mr. Masters has lately collected a fine series of these Wallabies on the Burnett River, in Queensland ; and though skull and teeth differ little, except in the smaller third upper 
incisor, from those of the Black Wallaby, the reduced size of the fore -limbs proves it a distinct species. The colour is iron-grey, with rusty hairs interspersed, a rusty-coloured belly, and 
a black short bridle-mark behind the shoulder. 


4 


The skull resembles the skull of a Hare-kangaroo ( Lagorchestes ) ; it narrows suddenly in front of the zygoma, 
is deep vertically, furnished with a slender canine, and has the first upper incisor large and strong, exactly as the 
Lagorchestes leporoides. West Australia is the habitat of this Wallaby. 

Agile Kangaroo ( Halmaturus agi/is). 

A Queensland species, of a sandy colour. 

This concludes the list of the larger Brush Kangaroos or Wallabies up to 50 lbs. weight. The following species 
are much smaller. 

BRUSH KANGAROOS— (GENUS HALMATURUS) — up to 30 lbs. weight. 

LI. Greyi. South Australia. 

„ Derbianus. South Australia. 

„ Hautmanni. Hautmann’s Abrolhos, West Australia. 

PADEMELONS, OR SMALL KANGAROOS— (GENUS HALMATURUS)— from 10 to 13 lbs. weight. 

H. parma. East coast of New South Wales. 

„ dama. West Australia. 

„ thetides. Coast districts of New South Wales. 

„ billardieri. South coast districts and Tasmania. 

„ stigmaticus. North-east coast. 

„ brachyurus. West Australia. 

„ wilcoxi. Clarence District and Southern Queensland. 

These animals inhabit the mountain districts near the coast, and are seldom if ever found on the plains of 
the interior. 

ROCK-WALLABIES, OR ROCK-KANGAROOS— (GENUS PETROGALEA) — with long pliable tail not incrassated at the 
base, inhabiting mountain districts on the southern, eastern, and western coast line. ( Weight of animal up to 30 lbs.) 
Petrogalea. penicillata. Eastern parts of New South Wales. 

„ inornata. Eastern parts of New South Wales. 

„ xanthopus. South Australia. 

„ brachyotis. West and north-west coast. 

„ lateralis. West and north-west coast. 

„ concinna. West and north-west coast. 

STRONG-ARMED KANGAROOS, OR TREE-KANGAROOS— (GENUS DENDROLAGUS.) 

D. ursinus. New Guinea. 

„ inustus. New Guinea. 

These animals ascend trees, and are distinguished by their powerful fore-limbs and long pliable tail, which 
resembles that of the Rock-wallabies. A third species (Dorcopsis bruni) also inhabits New Guinea, but is terrestrial, though 
the fore-legs are more strongly developed than is usual in Kangaroos. The weight of these animals we should judge to 
be about 30 lbs. The D. bruni was the first Kangaroo ever discovered — many years before Cook’s voyages. 

SILKY-HAIRED, OR NAIL-TAIL KANGAROOS— (GENUS ONYCHOGALEA.) 

O. unguifer. North-eastern parts of Australia. 

„ fraenata. Plains of the interior of New South Wales and Victoria. 

„ lunata. Plains of the interior of South and West Australia. 

This group comprises the small silky-haired Wallabies or Kangaroos of the interior: they weigh seldom more 
than 8 or 10 lbs., and are about the size of a common hare. Their light-grey fur is of a peculiar softness, and the 
tail has a bare nail-like tip. This genus and the following genera possess more or less developed canine teeth. 

HARE KANGAROOS— (GENUS LAGORCHESTES.) 

L. fasciatus. West Australia. 

„ hirsutus. West Australia. 

„ conspicillatus. West Australia. 

„ leporoides. Plains of New South Wales, South Australia, and Victoria. 

„ leichhardti. North-east coast and Victoria. 


5 


The Hare-kangaroos, so called from their resemblance to that well-known rodent, are the fleetest of the whole 
tribe ; and though they do not exceed a common hare in bulk, they can make clear jumps of eight and ten feet high. 
Their arms are exceedingly short, and when progressing cannot be noticed, because they are pressed close to the body, 
and covered by the long fur; the hind legs are very long and slender, and the tail rather short and stiff, and not 
incrassated at the base ; the canines are well developed. 

BETTONGS, OR JERBOA KANGAROOS— (GENUS BETTONGIA.) 

B. cuniculus. Tasmania. 

„ greyi. New South Wales, South and West Australia. 

,, campestris. South Australia. 

These three species of Bettongs resemble each other very much, and are probably nothing but varieties. The 
western and southern animal, that is B. greyi and B. campestris, form extensive burrows, which the Tasmanian species 
does not: the tail is more or less prehensile, and the weight ranges from 5 to 6 lbs. 

B. penicillata. Interior of New South Wales. 

„ ogilbyi. West Australia. 

These two animals also resemble each other; they are very small, probably not more than 3 or 4 lbs. in 

weight; the tail is prehensile, and they climb well. We have seen one get over a close palisade-fence 8 feet high. 

This group connects the Kangaroo-tribe with the Phalangers. 

RAT-KANGAROOS— (GENUS HYPSIPRYMNUS.) 

H. murinus. New South Wales. 

„ apicalis. Tasmania. 

„ gilberti. West Australia. 

„ platyops. West Australia. 

The true Rat-kangaroos approach the Bandicoot tribe, and some naturalists have classed them as Bandicoots when 
the skull could not be examined ; their limbs are of more equal length ; they progress rather slowly, and the tail is 

short and stiff. The head of tire Rat-kangaroo is elongate, that of H. platyops excepted ; and the canine teeth are 

strongly developed. 

BANDICOOT TRIBE— (PERAMELIDHU) 

( Without illustration.) 

Having closed the Kangaroo family with the Kangaroo Rats proper of the genus Hypsiprymnus, we cannot but 

notice in the Bandicoots a general resemblance to the Rat-kangaroos. The Bandicoot family differs, however, much 

from all the preceding ones in the larger number of teeth. The usual formula, from which the Wombat only deviated, 

of six cutting teeth or incisors above and two below, has disappeared in the present section, and we find the incisors 

increased to ten above and six below. The fore-feet have the outer toes rudimentary, with only three nails, and the 

hind feet (though they retain the Kangaroo characteristic, and still possess the two inner toes joined by an integument) 
begin to produce a yet very rudimentary fifth toe or thumb. The pouch of the female, owing to its peculiar mode 

of progression, reassumes the reverse position to that of the Kangaroo and Phalanger tribe, and again resembles the 

pouch of the Wombat with its opening upwards. The number of mammae is changed, however; we now find eight 

instead of four, though the young never exceed four. The tail of the Bandicoots proper is short, and the fur harsh 

to the touch ; their food comprises bulbous roots, grass, and insects ; they are excellent as destroyers of vermin, and 

we have noticed fifty and more mice killed by one of them in a very short time. 

The family comprises three- genera : — 

Genus Peragalea. 

Head very elongate, canine teeth, powerfully developed grinders conical and almost rootless, with nothing but a 

few tubercles at the lower part of these teeth ; tail large, compressed, with a crest of hair on the upper edge, ending 

in a considerable tuft. 

Rabbit-eared Peragalea or Rabbit-rat ( Peragalea lagotis). 

This animal, which is about the size of a rabbit, has also very long ears, and beautiful silky ashy-grey fur ; 

the skull is much contracted between the orbits, and furnished with curved canine teeth of great strength. The animal 


6 


feeds on bulbous roots principally, and is not so ferocious as these tusks would indicate. The upper end of the tail 
is black, the remaining half covered with long white hair; the under part of the body is whitish. This is the only 
member of the family which burrows in the ground. 

Habitat — New South Wales, Northern Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, and West Australia. 


Genus Chceropus. 

Head very broad, skull much contracted between the orbits, as in the preceding genus ; teeth small, canines 

much reduced, with triangular base, and in form resembling a premolar; fore-limbs slender, with two functional toes, and 
a third one situated very much higher up, which is very rudimentary, and often overlooked ; young animals have this 

third toe well developed ; ears and tail long, like those of the Peragalea ; tail compressed, and with a crest of hair 

running from the base along the upper ridge, and ending in a tuft. 

Pig-footed Bandicoot ( Chceropus castnnotisj . 

Fur long, loose, and rabbit-grey, beneath whitish ; ears long, covered with small rusty hairs ; tail covered with 
short hair, and with longer on the upper edge ; eyes very large. The first specimen of this curious animal was 
discovered by the late Sir T. A. Mitchell, Surveyor General, near the junction of the Murrumbidgee River, on the 
1 6th June, 1836. This first specimen had accidentally lost its tail, and from this Sir Thomas concluded that it was 
a peculiar characteristic ; but all subsequent examples had the caudal appendage, which, in shape and the distribution of 
hair resembles the tail of Peragalea lagotis. The fur in both species is very soft, whilst all the true Bandicoots have 

very harsh fur. 

Genus Peramej.es. 

Feet, tail, and ears rather short ; _ the hind foot with a rudimentary inner toe or thumb. Fur composed of 
hairs of two kinds ; the one forming a soft under-fur, the other hairs coarse, flattened, and longitudinally grooved ; tail 
short, clothed with small adpressed hairs only. Five species are on record, of which three are found in New South Wales. 


Short-eared Peramels or Bandicoot ( Perameles obesulaj. 

Head moderately long ; fur very harsh to the touch, yellowish-brow#, mottled with black above, sandy below ; 
feet pale-yellowish, short, and rather thick ; the ears are very short, and the skull, as in all other Peramdida', is thin 
and delicate ; the teeth, even in young animals, appear always much worn, and the true form of the grinders can only 
be determined upon the examination of immature subjects. The dentition approaches to that of the Dasijinidce in the 
form and position of the molars, but their worn surfaces always enable the student to distinguish them from the sharp 
grinders of the “ Native Cats.” 


The present species has a verj wide distribution, and is found in almost every part of Australia, and in 

Tasmania. In the neighbourhood of Sydney, however, the animal has never been observed. The short-eared Bandicoot, 

when kept about a house, will soon destroy all the mice, though he does not eat many of them, and prefers roots, 
grubs, and insects, to a flesh diet. It has been noticed that when one of these animals was put into a large case 
with a number of mice, he would quickly destroy them in the following manner; — The victims were tumbled about 

with his fore-feet, and their limbs broken ; when the whole were disabled the Bandicoot began to devour a portion of 
each — generally the brain only. 

Long-nosed Bandicoot ( Perameles nasuta). 

Muzzle very elongate ; ears of moderate size ; general colour greyish-brown, beneath white, or yellowish-white. 

Habitat — New South Wales, more particularly the Coast district. The present species is excellent eating, and 

the largest of the tribe. 


Gunn’s Bandicoot (Perameles gunniij. 

Upper parts of body grey, pencilled with yellow and black; under parts white; hinder parts of back blackish, 
with lighter bands ; feet and tail white. This appears to be the next largest species ; it is closely allied to the other 
striped Bandicoots of the mainland, and inhabits Tasmania exclusively. 


Striped Bandicoot ( Perameles fasciataj. 

Fur rather long, and harsh to the touch; the hair composing it is grey at the root, pencilled with yellow, and 
tipped with black ; upon the back it is darker than on the sides ; three black stripes cover the loin. The present 
species, the smallest of the tribe, inhabits the interior of New South Wales, Northern Victoria, and South Australia. 
The West Australian Saddle-backed Bandicoot (Perameles myosurus) is probably a local variety, in which the markings 
are less distinct. The weight of the smallest species does not exceed 2 lbs. 




& 

P 

C 

-ss 

O 

IS 

Ss 


pj 




Ph 

H 

0 

H 

H 


£ 

«! 


£ 

«! 




w 

p 

1-1 

-1 


W 


o 

o 

fc 

KH 

O 



W 

H 


<22 


£ 

$ 


Sydney, N. S. 'W.— Thomas Richards, Government Printer.— 1S09. 





Dog-headed Thylacine, or Tasmanian Tiger. 

( r J 'll 1/ /acinus cy n u ceph al m.) 

I'his animal is the largest and most ferocious of the whole Mammalian Fauna in Australia, and at the present time 
restricted to the island of Tasmania. It inhabits the wild rocky mountain districts, and frequently visits the plain 
country to attack the sheep-folds. The flock-owners try everything in their power to exterminate this dangerous 
creature, and it has consequently become very rare in the more populous districts. The summits of the western 
mountains of Tasmania appear to be their stronghold. These inhospitable regions are about 3,500 feet high, and the 

climate is consequently very cold in winter-time. We have been informed that when the snow is on the ground the 
“Tiger” or “ Hyaena” (as the Tasmanians call this animal) is easily trapped; a very powerful instrument is however necessary 
to retain them, and if they can reach the captured limb they are certain to gnaw it off. Mr. Masters, a careful 

observer, states that he has noticed the tracks of the Tiger after a fresh fall of snow, followed first by the not less 

ferocious Black Dasyure, by ordinary “ Native Cats,” and even by the smaller species such as Antechinus siuainsonii, all 
going one after the other in expectation of joining the feast in their turn. Some of the shepherds state that one 

of these animals will kill hundreds of sheep in a very short time, and instances are on record of men having been 
attacked by them. 

The number of voting brought forth at a time does not exceed four ; they are carried in a pouch, and when 

born are as small as young Kangaroos, but the well known marsupial bones with which all the other pouched animals 
are furnished are not found in the Thylacine. The animal is peculiar to Tasmania ; but, as fossil remains prove, has 
once also existed on the mainland. There are two varieties which the shepherds have distinguished for years — one called 
the Bull-head the other the Grey-hound Tiger. The difference between them is a shorter head and closer packed and 

larger teeth in the first-mentioned species. 

As it is not possible in the present work to illustrate all the members of the family to which the Thylacine 
belongs, we shall give a brief list of all the genera and species hitherto described, which will greatly assist the student 
in his labours. 

DASYURUS FAMILY— (FAMILY DASYURIDAE.) 

Marsupialia having the second and third toes of the hind feet disunited and well developed ; the thumb or 

first toe small or absent; the tail non-prehensile and hairy; the canine teeth well developed, except in the small species 

of the genus Antechinus , and the molar teeth either with trenchant crowns or with the masticating surface presenting 

numerous prickly points. 

The family is subdivided into the following groups or genera: — 

GENUS MYRMECOBllJS. 

General habit and size like a squirrel ; head flat and broad, muzzle slightly elongated, muffle, nose, and ears of 

moderate size and pointed, tongue long and slender, legs short and strong, toes, five in front and four to the hind 

feet, all bearing compressed curved nails, tail long and bushy ; female provided with four mammae but destitute of a 

pouch ; teeth small and detached, incisors — canines — , molars — - , — Z2 teeth. 

3— j r— l’ g-g 1 u 

Banded Myrmf.cobius ( Myrmecobius j'asciatus). 

Fur harsh and adpressed, rusty red of various shades, more or less pencilled with w'hite in front, but much 
darker on the hind part of the body ; beneath dirty white ; from seven to eleven white bands across the back, the 

interspace betw-een them increasing as they approach the tail. A black mark or band runs from near the muzzle to 
the ear, enclosing the eye. The ears are small, narrowy and pointed ; the tail is bushy, and has a flat appearance. There 
are many points in the anatomy of this singular animal wirerein it resembles the Ant-eater ( Kchidna hystrix); these are — the 

long and narrow palate, the rounded brain-case, the strong limbs, elongate tongue, and weak mandible. The teeth are 

small, weak, and do not touch each other; in their number they are not exceeded by any living Mammal, and. 

approach those of the extinct P hascolotherium , — one of the oldest of the Mammalian Fauna known to us. The two first 
iower incisors are curved, and directed upwards, resembling the same teeth of some Phalangers. If there is a tendency 

on one hand to approach rlie form of the Ant-eaters, there is on the other some relationship w<ith the Phalangers, and 

(Anr/G-fA) 


more so with the little Tarsipes : both animals have delicate heads with weak jaws, and the teeth standing far apart; 
both possess a long slender tongue, a harsh fur, and four mammae, like all true Phalangers. We have not been able 

to ascertain whether any marsupial bones are present; if so they are very small, as in a specimen under examination 
they could not be felt. 

Ihe statement made by some authors that the number of mamma; is eight, and that from five to nine 
young are produced in a litter, is erroneous. We have had an opportunity to examine several female specimens, every 
one ol which had only r four teats, generally all drawn, and proving the production of four young only r . 

The Myrmecohim is common on the West Coast and in the interior of New South Wales and South Australia; 
the Murrumbidgee Rner may be taken as its most eastern boundary". The food of this animal is said to consist of 
ants anti then eggs , but it is probably augmented by honey and other vegetable substances, for the extraction of 
which from flowers or the hives of the wild bee it is well adapted. 


i-j 


GENUS PHASCOGALE. 

Dasyundae, with the two foremost incisors of the upper and lower jaw larger than the others; premolars 
ti Lie molars studded with prickly tubercles ; those of the upper jaw with triangular crowns ; the last tooth very 

narrow and transverse. Five toes to each root, the inner toe of the hind foot a nailless thumb. Tail long and bushy, 
mammae eight, pouch absent. 


Brush-tailed Phascogale ( Phascogale penicillata). 

Fur rather long and soft, grey, pencilled with white, beneath white; tail long, black, and bushy towards the 
tip, basal portion covered with short grey hairs. 

Habitat — Australia generally, with the exception of the most southern parts of Tasmania. 

This species was already known to the first settlers, and figured as far back as 1798, by White, in his Journal, 
under the name of Tapoa tafa. It appears however, that this name is frequently applied to other animals, such as 

Native Cats” or Phalangers. The Brush-tailed Phascogale is about the size of a Rat, arboreal and nocturnal in its 
habits, and a harmless creature, though authors (but not observers) differ on this point, and put the animal down as 

most ferocious and a terror to the hen-roost. It is expert in killing mice, but would certainly not attack a fowl. Like 

all other members of this group, it is in the habit of folding down the ears, which are very seldom carried erect. 


Handsome- t a 1 1 1; n Phascogale ( Phascogale caluraj. 

General colour ashy grey with a wash of brown, beneath whitish ; tail covered at the base with short rust- 
coloured hairs, tip forming a brush of black hairs. 

The habitat is given by authors as Western Australia; it occurs how r ever also in New South Wales, near the 
Darling Riser. 

GENUS ANTECHINUS. 

General character of Genus Phascogale : — Tail short, without a brush at the tip ; canines not very prominent, with 
a broad base ; female with a shallow pouch containing from six to ten teats, and with as many young in a litter. 

The greater number of species composing this group of insectivorous marsupials are small, and closely allied to 
each other, so that the classification based upon the colour and length of the fur cannot be depended on. 

Our most prolific author enumerates fourteen species without describing the dentition of one, and after a 
careful examination of animals, the hair of which answered to his description, we have arrived at the conclusion that 
the following number can only be retained as specific examples : — 

Tasmanian Antechinus (Antechinus swainsonii) . 

The largest of the genus, general colour dusky r -brown or almost black. Specimens occur however which are more 
of a rust colour. Beneath more or less greyish white. Total length eleven inches. 

Habitat — Tasmania. 


3 


Freckled Antechinus (Antechinus apiccdisj. 

General colour grey-brown, of a very rich brown hue on the hinder parts of the body ; on the head and 
fore-parts of the body distinctly freckled with black and white ; under-parts dirty yellow-white ; fore-legs of a bright 
rust colour ; hind-legs distinctly tinted externally with the same colour ; tail clothed at the roots with hairs like those 
of the body,' but with the hairs becoming gradually shorter towards the apex, where they are black. Total length, 
9 to io inches. 

Habitat — West Australia. Called “ Dibbler” by the Aborigines of West Australia. 

Yellow-footed Axtechinus (Antechimis JLavipes). 

General colour of upper parts grey, towards behind rusty-tinted ; feet and under-parts of body of the same 
rust colour; tail much darker. Total length, 8^ inches. 

Habitat — Australia generally. 


Stuart’s Antechinus (Antechimis stuartii). 

Rather larger than the previous species, and of a more uniform colour; grey, with a wash of brown, probably 
a variety of A. flavipes. 


Spotted Antechinus ( Antechinus mciculatus). 

This is a small species from New South Wales (Clarence River district); colouration dark blackish-brown above 
and slate-grey below, with a few white spots, and a similar spot on the throat. The following small species is probably 
a variety of it. 


Little Antechinus (Antechinus minutissimus) . 

This is probably the smallest of the group ; above greyish-brown, lighter beneath. Total length, perhaps 
3 inches. We noticed a specimen in the Musuem collection, obtained by Mr. G. Masters, which had six good-sized 
young attached to the nipples. The mother was trailing them along the ground with some difficulty, when he bagged 
the whole family group. Though we have often stated a certain number of mammae to be constant in certain species, 
this cannot be relied upon always. This specimen has six young, six drawn nipples, and an odd one on one side, 
distinct but not in milk. 


The animals which we have had under consideration belong to what we have described in a former paper as 
the broad-footed section, and they number live in all ; they are more or less arboreal in their habits, and their fur is 
only moderately soft. 

We will now enumerate the members of the remaining section, which have been classed under the generic 
name of Podabrus. 


GENUS PODABRUS. 

Comprising the silky-furred and slender-footed species, with more or less terrestrial habits. 

The following animals possess a skin as delicate and soft as a mole, but of longer texture; the tail, often 

incrassated, is covered with short adpressed hair, unlike the Antechini proper, in which the hairs of the tail are always 

of unequal length, and very harsh to the touch. 

White-footed Antechinus (Podabrus albipes). 

Three species appear to be enumerated of the white-footed silky-furred section ; but the other two are no 
doubt identical with the above, though named otherwise and respectively Antechinus leu, copus and fuliginosus. If, after 
careful investigation of their anatomy, we should come to the conclusion that they constituted three distinct species, the 

result will be made known, though it will not alter much our present arrangement. These little animals are by no 

means rare in less settled parts, and are caught in large numbers by the aborigines of the Murray and of King 

George s Sound. In the immediate neighbourhood of Sydney they have been found occasionally under stones during 

the winter-time, but never more than about two in three years by one collector. Their nocturnal habits and small 

size make it difficult for the best observer to obtain specimens. 

The two remaining species, which are distinguished by a tail more or less incrassated, but appear otherwise 
identical with P. albipes, are named Thick-tailed Podabrus (Podabrus crassicaudatusj , and Large-tailed Podabrus (Podabrus 


4 


■mac, mm, J, the first discovered by Mr. Gilbert, in West Australia; the last from the Darling Downs district, obtained 
by the same indefatigable naturalist, to whom Air. Gould is indebted for his choicest specimens. It is necessary to 

state that the figures which we see of these, animals are not quite correct, the tail being always exaggerated. 

Mi tchell’s Podabrus ( Podabrus mitchelliij . 

This species is by far the largest of the small Dasyuridce with thick woolly fur. A single mutilated specimen, 
with a note attached intimating that it was obtained by Sir Thomas Mitchell, was found in the Museum some years 
ago, and may be described as follows; — Fur thick and silky, resembling the fur of Phascogale lanigera of Gould; 
general colour, slate grey with a wash of brown, beneath white ; ears rather long ; feet white ; total length eleven inches : 
the tail being about five and a half inches, and probably furnished with a tuft of hair. The large tarsi and long tibia 

indicate that the animal moved by a succession of jumps; the specimen is, however, too much mutilated to enable 

us to judge about this characteristic with certainty. 

Habitat — The interior of New South Wales. 


GENUS ANTECHINOMYS. 

1 errestrial Dasyuridce , with long Kangaroo-like hind-legs, and four toes, the thumb being absent ; tarsi covered 
with hair, the toes only being naked. Dentition like Podabrus , with canines still less developed 

r ihe genus comprises only one species, — the animal described by Air. Gould as Phascogale lanigera. 

Woolly Antechinomys (Antechvnxmys lanigera). 

Fur long and silky, general colour greyish-brown, beneath white; tail as long as the body, with a tuft of 
moderately' long fine hairs ; progressing by a succession of jumps. The female has no pouch, and is provided with 
eight mammae. 

Habitat— The interior of New South Wales and Victoria. 


GENUS CHyETOCERCUS. 

Head short, broad behind, almost triangular ; auditory bulla very large ; upper canines strong and elongate, not 
so broad at their base as in the genus Phascogale ; incisors long and narrow, resembling those of Dasyurus, first pair 
directed forward, and slightly larger than the others ; pre-molars, three in the upper jaw, the middle one largest, the 
first somewhat smaller, and the third and last very diminutive and tubercular: molars of the usual triangular form, 

with rather blunt tubercles, increasing in size' from the first to the third, the fourth being narrow, transverse, and 

resembling the same tooth in the genus Dasyurus. The lower jaw is short and strong, and the articulating condyle 
is placed still higher comparatively than in any other species of this group; the incisors are three in number, the first 
pair being the largest ; canines smaller than those of the upper jaw, sharp and pointed, and devoid of the broad base- 
common to other small Dasyures. Of pre-molars the lower jaw contains only two, the first larger than the second. 
There are tour molars, the first and last being the smallest, the two middle ones of about equal size; on the first 
the anterior tubercle is scarcely indicated, showing, with the absent third pre-molar, a close approach to the genus 
Dasyurus. Tail thick, with compressed sides, ornamented by a crest of hair on the apical half, similar to the tail of 
the Pig-footed Bandicoot fCkceropus castanolis). 

Crested C.etocekcus ( duetocercus cristicauda) . 

General structure similar to that of Phascogale calura ; limbs strong, furnished with long claws ; five toes to 
the fore and hind feet, the inner toe of the latter a short nailless thumb, the hair covering the fore-feet long and 

shaggy ; colouration rusty-brown, the fur being of a dark leaden-grey at the base. Total length 8 inches, tail 3-J, 
head to base of ear 1, tarsi and toes 1^ inches. 

Habitat— South Australia, probably the neighbourhood of Lake Aiexandrina. 


5 


GENUS DASYURUS. 


Flesh-eating animals, of moderate size, with spotted or striped fur; they resemble the Martins and Polecats of the 
placental order Carnivora , and are best known to the Colonists as Native Cats, or Tiger Cats, — the larger Tasmanian species 
as u Devils,” Tigers, and Hyasnas ; they have, however, no relation to the Cat tribe, and are Marsupial animals, with a 
shallow pouch or skin-fold. The teeth of the Dasyuri resemble those of the smaller Phascogales and Antechini , but the 
pre-molars reduced by one in each ramus. The Thylacinus is, however, an exception, and has three pre-molars in each 
ramus. The dental formula stands therefore (Thylacinus excepted) : — Incisors — , canines pre-molars molars ~ — 
42 teeth. 


Viverrine Dasyurus (Dasyurus viverrinus). 

F ur rather long and soft ; tail bushy ; ears long, generally carried folded down. General colour black spotted 
with white, or yellowish spotted with white; under parts of body lighter. No inner toe or thumb to the hind-foot. 
Female with six mammae, and generally four young at a litter. Total length 23 to 24 inches, of which the tail 
measures 8 or 8-g- inches. 

Habitat — Southern Australia and Tasmania. We do not think that this Dasyure inhabits the West Coast. 


North Australian Dasyure (Dasyurus hallucatusj. 

Fur of moderate length, and rather harsh ; general colour of the upper parts of the body dusky brown, much 

pencilled with yellowish, and having numerous irregular white spots ; under-parts white suffused with yellow ; tail but 
little bushy, cylindrical, the apical half or more, black. 

The above is Mr. Waterhouse’s description of a British Museum specimen, who also states that the animal is 

less in size than either the Common or Geoffroy’s Dasyure. The hind-foot is provided with a thumb. Nothing is 
stated about skull or skeleton, and though we enumerate the species as distinct for the present, it will be seen when the 
description of Dasyurus geoffroyi is compared with it that both animals are identical. The habitat is given as North 

Australia, Port Essington. 

Geoffroy’s Dasyurus (Dasyurus geoffroyi). 

Fur moderate, general colour of the upper parts yellowish pencilled with black, and having numerous irregular 

white spots ; body beneath white ; tail immaculate, black at the apex ; hind-foot with a thumb. 

Habitat — West Australia, South Australia, and New r South Wales. 


The fine series of Dasyures in the Australian Museum enables us to state without doubt that both species, 
Dasyurus hallucatus and Dasyurus geoffroyi, are varieties of each other. The Museum is in possession of specimens which 
answer to both descriptions — specimens in which the yellow and some in which the darker tint predominates. There is 
one example with a very bushy tail and scarcely any black hair at the apex, and there are others with a cylindrical 
tail, which is tipped with black. Colouration is of very little value in the determination of species, and as we have 
compared the skulls of these various coloured animals, we can only state that they differ in nothing material except 
size. The largest specimens occur on the Murray River, those from other parts of South Australia are much smaller 
and darker in colour, but now and then, examples are found which are pale yellowish. 


The name of Dasyurus geoffroyi should therefore be adopted for both animals. On the east coast this Dasyure 
has not yet been noticed. 

Spotted-tailed Dasyurus (Dasyurus maculatus). 

Fur rather harsh and short ; general colour from deep brown to light reddish brown pencilled with yellowish ; 
body beneath sandy-coloured, the whole, including the tail, spotted with white ; a thumb to the hind-foot. 

The present animal differs as much in size and colour as did the last-mentioned species, and its geographical 
distribution is as extensive. Tasmania, Victoria, New South Wales, and South Australia, have accorded it as inhabiting 
these Colonies. We have also seen examples from Queensland. It is peculiar to the Coast Districts, but has not yet 
been observed in the far North or on the West Coast. The spotted-tailed Dasyure grows to a large size, and is provided 
with most formidable teeth. Mr. Waterhouse, the able naturalist, who has written a most valuable work on the 

Marsupialia, mentions a skull as that of an aged individual 3 inches 6-| lines long; but a specimen in the Australian 
Museum measures fully 4^ inches, and the upper canines are 1^- inches in length. Specimens have been observed as 

large as a common Fox; and as these animals are not only very ferocious but also exceedingly stubborn, it frequently 

happens that they make great havoc if they gain admission to the poultry-yard of the settler. 


6 


GENUS SARCOPHILUS. 

Dasyuri with a short and stout body, short and broad head, and powerful compact teeth, which are packed 

so close together that there is not a line of space between them ; legs rather long, tail short and thick. 

Ursine Sarcophilus or Tasmanian Black Dasyure (Sarcophilus ur sinus). 

Fur coarse, of moderate length, and black, here and there with a white spot or two ; these spots occur most 
frequently on the breast or loins. 

Mr. Waterhouse gives the measurement of a skull as 4 inches 6 lines, another in the Australian Museum 
collection measures 6 inches, and is 4f inches wide. The ferocity of these animals is almost beyond belief; they attack 
every living thing, and are most destructive to sheep, though not larger than a common Terrier Dog. 

One of them, and by no means a large one, escaped not long ago, and killed in two nights fifty-four fowls, 

six geese, an albatross,* and a cat. Having been recaptured in what was considered a stout trap, with a door 
constructed of iron bars as thick as a lead-pencil, he made his escape by twisting this solid obstacle aside, almost 
doubling it up with his powerful teeth. To give some idea of the strength of the animal, we mention that the 

blacksmith who repaired the trap could not bend the bars back into their position without proper tools. When caught 
in a fox-trap the black Dasyure often bites off the fastened limb and escapes. A specimen in the Museum Collection, 

the largest ever secured, had only three legs : one of the hind limbs was clean gone, and not even the trace of a 

stump remained visible. The fossil Sarcophilus laniarius of the Wellington Caves was a still more powerful animal. 

Numerous bones and teeth prove the existence of large numbers of these creatures during post-pleiocene times, which 
must have made havoc among the more peaceful animal tribes. There can be no doubt that they were a terror even 

to some of the gigantic creatures, whose young they probably devoured whenever any opportunity offered. 

We have noticed before the total absence of large fossil Carnivores, which were supposed to be necessary to 
check the undue increase of the herbivorous marsupials ; but with such strong and blood-thirsty creatures as this small 

Dasyure , no great Carnivores were required to carry out the designs of the Creator. 

The habitat of this animal is restricted to the island of Tasmania. 

GENUS TtlYLACINUS. 

Dasyuridce, with the outermost incisors exceeding the others in size ; the three foremost of the upper true 
molars with a much-elevated central cusp, an anterior and posterior cusp but little elevated, and an internal lobe ; the 

hindermost of the upper true molars transverse ; the true molars of the lower jaw nearly resembling those of the upper 

jaw, but destitute of internal lobe, and with the central cusp more elevated ; the humerus with the inner condyle 

perforated ; the hind-foot destitute of an inner toe ; a well-developed pouch with four mamma?, but without marsupial 
bones. The pre-molars resemble those of the genus Phascoga/e, and are three in number in each ramus. 

Dog-headed Thylacine, or Tasmanian Tiger (Thylacinus cynocephalm). 

About equal in size to the common Wolf; tail about half the length of the body; fur short, and closely 

applied to the skin ; general colour grey-brown ; the back with about twelve to fourteen transverse black bands, narrow 

and short on the fore-parts of the back, longer and broader on the hinder-parts ; region of the eye pale ; tail with 

short fur, nearly like that of the body, excepting on the under-side of the apical portion and at the tip, where the 

hairs are comparatively long. The Thylacine stands lower on the legs than either Wolf or Dog, and in every respect 

resembles the smaller Dasyures ; like the Sarcophilus it is a most ferocious and formidable animal, which will soon 

overpower even a Cow or Horse if driven by hunger to attack them ; it is also stated that the creature is not afraid 

of man, and will show a formidable front when driven to extremities. 

We know one large fossil species, which was the largest Marsupial Carnivore on record, and inhabited the 

mainland of Australia in former ages ; at the present time the Thylacine is restricted to Tasmania. 

Short-headed Thylacine (Thylacinus brevicem). 

This species has been founded on two skulls obtained by Mr. Masters on the Ouse River in Tasmania. The 

skulls are those of young animals, and show the distinguishing characteristics well. The head is shorter, the pre-molars 


* The albatross was a pet bird, which had lived in the Museum ground for months. 


7 


much closer together, and, like all the other teeth, larger than in the common Thylacine ; this is best seen when we 

compare a full-grown Thylacinus cynocephalus skull, with one of the Thylacinus breviceps , which, as regards size and 

position of the teeth, gives the following result : — 

A large skull of the common Thylacine measures, from the occipital foramen (the opening at the back of 

the head) to the incisor teeth, exactly 9 inches. The width of the palate in front of the last premolar measures 

slightly more than 1 inch. The palatial opening is inches in length, and a little more than -|th of an inch wide, 

and the median line of the palate is imperfectly anchylosed. The last molar but one — the largest of the series — is f 
of an inch wide in its broadest part, and the space between the two first pre-molars measures \ an inch in width. 

A skull of the Short-headed Thylacine measures, as above, 61 inches in length, and is therefore that of a 
much younger animal, and yet the palatial opening is reduced in size, forms two small holes less than 1 inch in 

length, and J of an inch wide, and the median suture is completely closed up. The width of the palate in front of 
the third pre-molars is as large as in the adult T. cynocephalus , and the largest molar exceeds in size by |th of an 
inch that of the greater specimen. The space between the pre-molar teeth is less than -|th of an inch, but in the 

larger one it is double that width, — which shows that the teeth of T. breviceps are much closer packed. Comparing 

the skull of a younger T. cynocephalus with that of T. breviceps , all the differences in the size of the teeth become 

more striking, and other diverging points could be mentioned were further proofs required of the correctness of these 

observations. Professor Owen at once acknowledged the truth of this statement, and accepted the T. breviceps as a 

distinct species, but our Tasmanian friends continue to consider the two animals as varieties only. 

The foregoing discussion will prove the value of Comparative Anatomy when determining species, and also the 
advantage of having many specimens for examination. Kind donors to the Museum must not apprehend that their most 
liberal presents will ever overstock the collection, because the larger the number of skulls or skeletons the better will 

the animals of this Country be understood by future generations. It is exactly with Comparative Anatomy as with the 
science of Meteorology : had the changes in the atmosphere been as carefully noted a hundred years ago as at the 
present time, great results could be deduced therefrom. Let us therefore advise our friends to gather their specimens 

in time, or it may come to pass when the last Thylacine dies, that the scientific men across Bass’s Straits will contest 

as fiercely for its body as they did for that of the last aboriginal man not long ago. A similar want of forethought 

occurred in New Zealand, where a great trade with smoked human heads at one time existed. The British Government 
soon stopped the abominable traffic, and Dr. J. Haast, F.R.S., the well known Geologist, and Director of the Christ 

Church Museum, is_ now offering fabulous exchanges (a complete Moa we believe), for such a trophy whereof not one 
is to be found in New Zealand — the Australian Museum possessing two of them. The products of a new country should 
be secured as early as possible, and every object bearing upon the manners and habits, the arts and manufactures 
of a primitive race, should be gathered and deposited in some public Institution before it is too late. Animals and 
plants are often very local in their habitat, and soon disappear before the steps of civilization ; as an example, we may 
mention the beautiful Nestor-Parrot of Phillip Island, which has long ceased to exist there. The island is a dependency 
of this Colony, but only one very bad specimen of this rare bird remains now in our collection. 






r 


The Native Cat. 


( Dasyunis viverrinux.) 

Having already given a full account of the family of Dcmjurukv elsewhere, there remains nothing but to add a short 

notice of the most common and best known of the tribe, — the black and white, or buff and white-spotted “ Native 
Cat ” proper. 

These little creatures, with their fierce disposition, are familiar to the greater number of Colonists ; they inhabit 
our forests, but prefer to take up their abode with civilized man when they find out that he keeps plenty of meat 
about his habitation, or rears poultry. They are very savage for their size, and five of them kept in a cage without 
sustenance for a day only, had almost reduced themselves to the state of the famous tabbies of Kilkenny. The fact 
is, they devoured each other till only a pair remained, and the savage look and watchfulness of these two animals was 
amazing to behold. 

They are stubborn in the extreme, and appear to care about nothing. We have noticed them to come quite 

unconcerned into a tent at night, and take up a cosy place near the chi nine}-, from which a firestick only could 

dislodge them. Another case was mentioned not many days ago, when one of the Tiger Cats actually faced a half- 
caste man, who was terror-stricken, and ran away. A real aboriginal native, one of the old tribes, would have made 
short work of such an adversary; but these poor people have now almost died out, and the few still lingering behind 
cannot even remember the animals which their ancestors hunted. 

The common Native Cat of this Colony is about the size of a half-grown domestic Cat ; but further south, 

and more particularly in Tasmania, it grows somewhat larger. The colour is black with white spots, or yellowish-grey 
with white spots ; the tail rather bushy, and uniform in colour, whilst that of the larger Tiger Cat is smooth and 
spotted with white. The pouch, or rather skin-fold, with which the female is provided contains six teats, but the 
number of young seldom exceeds four, At a certain age the young are left in the spout-hole or crevice which the 
mother has selected for them whilst she goes out hunting, and on more than one occasion have we obtained voung 

specimens (the size of a half-growm rat) from such lairs during the parent’s absence, They begin to hunt at a very 
early age : probably they are forgotten by the old ones as soon as they are able to move about and catch something 
on their own account. 

The common Native Cat is destitute of the external fifth toe or thumb on the hind-foot ; the bones can be 

distinguished, however, in the skeleton. With regard to their geographical range, we may safely assert that they 

are peculiar to the South and South-east Coast and to Tasmania. The interior of the Colony is occupied by another 

species — Dcvtyuru-i geqffroyii — which appears ro be identical with the northern Native Cat (Day/unts hallucttim) . Not a 
single species has been recorded as inhabiting the West Coast. 

(Z r-.IS /■/ ' 








d 

H 

H 

£ 


w 

O 


Sydney.. N. S. W - — Themas Richards. Government PrinW. — 1869. 






Spiny Ant-eater. 

(ECHIDNA HYSTRIN.) 

A sub-section of the family Marsupialia comprises the Monotremata, with only two known species, one of which, the 
Spiny Ant-eater, we figure. It is, like the Platypus, a strictly Australian animal, and inhabits almost every part of the 

Continent, from Cape Howe to Cape York, but is not found on the salt-bush plains of the interior. The Tasmanian 

species is more hairy, and has been noticed under another name (E. setosa), but both animals are only varieties. 
Dr. Shaw described the Echidna and the Platypus about the close of last century, and great interest was shown by 
anatomists and physiologists in these discoveries, which raised the unsolved question, — whether the two creatures laid eggs! 
The greatest men of science gave their opinion for and against this theory; and when Meckel (a well-known German 
anatomist) had actually discovered the mammary glands, proving thereby that the Echidna gave suck, Geoffroy St.-Hilaire 
(a great French savant) would not believe a word of it. Both naturalists have passed away, and it was left to Professor 

Owen to enlighten us on the manner in which the Spiny Ant-eater treats her young progeny. The condition in 

which the young come to light, covered by a shell or naked, we do not know ; but a specimen forwarded to the 

Professor by Dr. v. Muller, of Melbourne (a full-grown female), contained two small apertures or pouches on the 

under side of the body, and these were occupied by two “ little ones,” then not much larger than a French bean. 

The milk-glands drained into these pouches, and supplied the necessary nourishment, but a teat could not be observed. 

Professsor Owen has written a most elaborate treatise on the subject, to which we must refer our readers* 
The discovery took place a few years ago, so that at least forty years passed before the dispute was settled. 

Even now we are as ignorant as possible about the habits and economy of this well-known animal, and we 
certainly cannot tell what becomes of our spiny friends in summer-time. A keen observer, Mr. Charles Kepert, of 
Soldier’s Point, Port Stephens, who always supplies us with Echidnas in winter, is of opinion that these animals retire 
into the ground, — in fact, hibernate during the hot season. So much is certain — they cannot be obtained so easily in 
summer. 

The Echidna is about 18 inches in length, of stout build ; the upper parts covered with strong spines, under- 
parts, head, and legs, clothed with brownish or blackish coarse hair ; head with the facial portion prolonged into a 

slender and sloping snout, and covered with a naked skin; mouth-opening small; tongue long and flexible, with some 
horny, tooth-like ridges on the hinder part ; legs short and strong, provided with five well-armed toes ; tail short, 
covered with spines. 

The food of the Echidna is said to consist of ants and other small insects, but we have on several occasions 
taken also grass from their stomachs. The jaw is toothless, but the ridges of horny tubercles before mentioned, and 

similar spines on the palate, probably" assist in crushing the food. 

The heel of the male is armed with a spur, which is movable, perforated, and supplied with a gland, and 

muscles capable of injecting the secretion of the gland through the canal of the spur, as in the Duck-mole. According 

to Messrs. Q.uoy and Gaimard the apparatus is not poisonous. We have often handled Echidnas, but never experienced 
any irritation when accidentally" scratched by the spur. 

The Echidna will live for months in captivity without ■ taking food ; and Mr. Kepert’s suggestion that the 

animal feeds in winter only, and hibernates during summer, is by no means improbable. It is difficult to drown one, and 

from eight to ten minutes at least are necessary for the experiment. The animal is also tolerably snake-proof, and a 
specimen frequently bitten by r some of our most venomous reptiles lived for ten hours. The strength of the Echidnas 

is most wonderful, and their digging capabilities will scarcely be credited. The animal often appears to be nailed to 

the ground, and if sheltered in some convenient corner, where the soil is stiff clay, a spade is necessary to dislodge it. 
In soft alluvial soil or sand, an Echidna will disappear before the observer’s eyes without any apparent effort, gradually 
sinking out of sight. 

The best means to secure a runaway is to obtain hold of one of the hind legs, when the animal is unable 
to resist any longer. The flesh is considered excellent. 


* On the Marsupial Pouches, Mammary Glands, and Mammary Kcetus of the Echidna Hystrix* By Professor R. Owen, F.R.S. 

0X-..M-7/J 


Philosophical Transactions, 1865, p. 671. 


















m 



Sydney, ]s. h. W — Thomas Richards, Government Printer. — 1869. 


Duck-bill, or Water-mole. 


(OKNTTHORHYNCHTJS ANATINUS.) 


Our plate represents the most interesting of all the Australian animals, — the Duck-bill, Platypus, or Water-mole, which 
inhabits the quiet rivers, creeks, and lagoons of the greater portion of Tasmania and Australia. Known to everybody, 
and common in many parts, we have added nothing to the account given by Dr. George Bennett, F.L.S., &c., more 

than thirty years ago. Professional naturalists cannot afford the time for investigation, and few settlers with plenty of 

leisure will understand the importance of some of the questions yet to be solved. 

Dr. Bennett informs us that the Water-mole constructs a burrow under creek or river bank, with the entrance 
beneath the water ; in this place the mother brings forth her young, some of which Dr. Bennett captured, and beyond 
this fact we know nothing whatever. Considerable rewards have been offered for young Water-moles from time to 

time, but none have come to hand, and all our appeals for specimens (shot during October and November) in the 
flesh have been made in vain. 


The total length of a full-grown Platypus is about i B inches ; the fur is short, dense, and velvety, that of 
the tail rather crisp ; the general colour a dusky brown above, and somewhat paler below. Young and immature 
animals are bright brown above and whitish below. The few very young specimens obtained were from two to four 
inches in length, with very short beaks, and quite destitute of hair. 

Unlike other mammals, the teeth of the Duck-bill are horny, and two are carried in each ramus above and 
below, giving a total of eight teeth ; four of these, in the form of narrow strips, are situated in the fore part of the 
jaw, one in each ramus ; the other grinder-like teeth are further back. 


In harmony with its reptilian character,* we also find some horny teeth on the tongue, which is of moderate 
length. The eyes are very small, situated rather high up, at the base of the beak. The external orifice of the ear, 
hidden by the fur, is placed at a short distance behind the eye. The legs are strong, and very short; the feet 
provided with five toes. On the heel of the male is a large and sharply-pointed movable spur ; this spur is pierced 

by a minute tube, the outlet of which is near the point ; and, connected with this little tube, is a large gland, which 

is supposed to secrete a poisonous fluid. Mr. G. R. Waterhouse, whom we have frequently quoted in the present 
work, and to whom Australia is indebted for the best Natural History of the Marsupials ever published, doubts the 
poisonous nature of the gland, and states that Dr. Bennett has made frequent experiments upon himself without any 
evil result. It is possible that the spur has some poisonous properties during certain seasons of the year, because we 
remember being cautioned to handle a male Water-mole, by a gentleman who said that he once had been wounded 
in the arm by one, and had suffered severely in consequence. 

It is not our object to go into the anatomy of a species so well described by the able pen of Professor 

Owen. We refer our readers to the Professor’s many papers on the subject, and sincerely hope that country residents 

will continue to collect Water-moles, and observe their habits, for the benefit of science. A solution of strong salt and 
alum is sufficient for the preservation of the bodies, which should be opened, well washed (but not otherwise meddled 
with), and then put into the brine. 

September, October, and November, are the most favourable months for collecting, and females only, which 
are destitute of the spur, should be secured. 

Water-insects, small mollusca, and the ova of frogs and fishes, constitute the principal food of these animals. 




* Waterhouse, Natural History of Mammalia. VoU I, p. 31. 



ADVERTISEMENTS 


[The folloiving Publications may be obtained at the Government Printing Office .] 


Recently Published, by Authority, 


® I) c Industrial l§u%xt %% of Ifeto Males, 


p 


CONTAINING A 


P 


OLOURED 


JA 


AP OF THE 


P 


OLONY. 


showing the localities of the various Mining, Agricultural, and Pastoral Industries ; the Gold Eields, Vine-growing Districts, 
and Coal Deposits ; the Railway and Electric-Telegraph Lines, and Coast Light-houses. 

This is the most complete Map yet issued by the Government. 


ALSO, 



This Work embraces a general view of the progress of the Colony, during its first centenary period, in Arts, Manufactures, 
Agricultural, Pastoral, and Mineral pursuits ; together with a Report of the Intercolonial Exhibition held at Sydney in the 
year 1870, and a Catalogue of the Exhibits, and Judges’ Awards, as well as separate and Original Papers on the Sedimentary 
Eormations of New South Wales, Mineralogy, Indigenous Woods, Orange Cultivation, Natural History, and other equally 
interesting subjects. The Book contains nearly 800 pages, Royal 8vo. Price, in hoards, 5s. ; cloth, 10s. 

Two Views of the Harbour of Port Jackson, on plate paper. One, taken from the North Shore, shows the whole of the 
Harbour, including the City of Sydney, from the Heads to the Lane Cove Paver, price 2s. ; the other, taken from “ Ginahgulla,” 
on the South Shore, shows accurately all the Bays and Points of importance from the City to the Heads, price Is. 


THE PUBLIC STATUTES OF NEW SOUTH WALES, 

FROM 7 GEO. IV TO 25 VICTORIA. 

In 4 vols., cloth-hound. Price £3 ; originally £5 5s. The subsequent Acts, from 26 to 34-5 Victoria inclusive, collected, 

quarter-bound, and lettered on edge to distinguish Sessional Parts. Price £2 6s. 

The Private Acts of New South Wales, from 3 William IV to 26 Victoria, inclusive. Price 15s. ; originally £1 5s. 

The New South Wales Parliamentary Hand-hook, compiled and edited by R. O’Connor, Esq., late Clerk of the Parliaments. 
Price 2s. 6d. 

The Common Law Procedure Acts and Law of Evidence Amendment Act, indexed by H. Cary, Esq., M.A., late District 
Court Judge. Price 5s. 

Crown Land Acts of 1861 and Regulations thereunder (Fifth Edition). Price Is. 6d. 

The Gold Eields Act of 1866 and Regulations of 24th September, 1869, to 25th August, 1871, inclusive. Price Is. 

Letters of Registration of Inventions under 16 Victoria, No. 24. Part I, £2 2s. ; Part II, 10s. ; Part III, £1 10s. 

Report of the Commission appointed to inquire into the Supply of Water to Sydney and Suburbs. Price £1. 

Abstract of Meteorological Observations made in New South Wales, up to the end of 1869, with remarks on the Climate, s. d. 

By H. C. Russell, Esq., B. A., Government Astronomer for New South Wales. ... ... ... ... ... 1 0 

Progress and Present State of Astronomical Science in New South Wales. By John Tebbutt, Esq. ... ... ... 0 6 

New South Wales Coal Eields. By W. Keene, Esq., E.G.S., &c., Government Examiner of Coal Eields ... ... 0 3 

Remarks on the Sedimentary Eormations of New South Wales, illustrated by references to other provinces of Australasia. 

By the Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., F.G.S., E.R.G.S., &c ... 1 0 

Progress of Gold Discovery in Australasia, from 1860 to 1871. By the Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., E.G.S., E.R.G.S., &c. 0 6 

On the Occurrence of the Diamond near Mudgee. By Norman Taylor, Esq., of the late Victorian Geological Survey, 

and Professor A. M. Thomson ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6 

The Woods of New South Wales. By Charles Moore, Esq., E.L.S., &c., Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney ... 1 0 

Introduction, Cultivation, and Economic Uses of the Orange and others of the Citron- tribe in New South Wales. By 

G. Bennett, M.D., E.L.S 10 

Australian Vertebrata — Eossil and Recent. By Gerard Krefft, Esq., E.L.S., Curator and Secretary, Australian Museum 1 0 

The Eisheries of New South Wales. By Alexander Oliver, Esq., M.A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6 

Report on Lunatic Asylums, by E. W. Manning, M.D. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 6 

Report of Capital Punishment Commission, together with Minutes of Evidence and Appendix (cloth) ... ... ... 12 6 

Report on the Common Schools System of the United States and Canada (cloth). By Ptev. J. Eraser ... ... 7 6 

Reports of the Council of Education upon the condition of the Public Schools and of the Certified Denominational 

Schools for 1870... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 6 

Reformatories and Reformatory Treatment in Prance (cloth) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 6 

MAP OE NEW SOUTH WALES (coloured) 2 6 

Cereal Map of New South Wales (coloured) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 6 

THOMAS RICHARDS, Government Printer. 


Tlie Mammals of Australia, 

Illustrated by Miss Harriett Scott and Mrs. Helena Eorde, for the Council of Education. With a short account of 
all the Species hitherto described, by Gerard Krefft, E.L.S. , Curator and Secretary of the Australian 
Museum. Price 12s. 6d. 


Kiel’s Snakes of Australia: 

A descriptive Catalogue of all the known species, with a full account of their habits and Geographical distribution ; 
including hints with regard to the treatment of wounds inflicted by venomous Snakes. Illustrated by 12 

Plates, on which all the known species are represented. Plain, 15s. ; Coloured, 30s. To be had of all 

Booksellers. 


Nearly Ready, 

The Fossil Fauna of Australia, 

By Gerard Krefpt, E.L.S., with 18 Plates of Illustrations, by Miss Harriett Scott and Mrs. Helena Eorde. 






SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIRRARIFS 



3 9088 01347 6536 

















