




iL A Jk bL. jL^h 













f>"V'^ «""». ^'- 



GENE STRATTON- PORTE 




MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 




OUR RAREST MOTH 



C2l 



I o^ 






MOTHS 



OF THE LIMBERLOST 



./ 



JJ^itli IJ'atcr Color and Photographic 
Jllustrations from Life 



BY 



GENE STRATTON-PORTER 




Garden City, N. Y., and Toronto 
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY 

IQ2I 



JUN2 7t987 




Copyright, 1912, by 
DOUBLEDAY, PaGE & CoMPANY 

All rights reserved, including that of 

translation into foreign languages, 

including the Scandinavian 

IV, 




CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. Moths of the Li.mberlost ...... 3 

II. Moths, Eggs, Caterpillars, Winter Quarters . . 33 

III. The Robin Moth 81 

IV. The Yellow Emperor 137 

V. The Lady Bird ......... 155 

VI. Moths of the Moon . . . . . . . 173 

VII. King of the Hollyhocks 191 

VIII. Hera of the Corn "^07 

IX. The Sweetheart and the Bride ..... 2'-27 

X. The Giant Gamin ........ '243 

XI. The Garden Fly 265 

XII. Bloody-nose of Sunshine Hill 287 

XIII. The Modest Moth 303 

XIV. The Pride of the Lilacs 317 

XV. The King of the Poets ... .... 339 

V. 



. hi- 


is 


, 4.- 


H^i;^ 




. ' fr^ 


^^-^-^^Vv ■ 


*^^^K Mk^w ^^ 3v? 




v* 


, ,Tk V 


s^^^SE '^S^^!; 


H ' 


. 


■5^^ 


^KJiw!^-... 


1 


\ 




■i ' ^ 


■1 


^^^^•^^jy-lSsaSi. >^' ■. . 






PfcA^' 


m 




mm^ ■ 


f:-- 




^v 1 


|f^| 






R^pp'^w, ii. 


^T; 1 


■•■5w%4 ?>■:• . i^ , 4' 






t J 


%'-^^ f^w 


1- .-4r^^%i^-'- vi ' 




T 


/^■A '*! 


^-^ ^^xv'^iii y 






"■'■^■'^ 





BOOKS BY 
GENE STRATTOX-PORTER 



Nature 
The Song of the Cardinal 
Homing With the Birds 
Birds of the Bible 
Music of the Wild 
Friends in Feathers 
Moths of the Limberlost 
Mokninc; Face 



Novels 
Freckles 

At the Foot of the Rainbow 
A Girl of the Limberlost 
The Harvester 
Laddie 

Michael O'Halloran 
A Daughter of the Land 




.:t> 




.SWBBMSlWaBWB*"?— 





To 



Ne/t/'e DeGniff Drjubleday 



^^Scientific writings may be divided into three 
groups: technical ivories intended Jor scientific 
men, popular compilations for general use, 
and works which contribute to literature and 
science at the same time. Of the first two 
there is no lack, but our third division is so 
poorly represented as to have led to the say- 
ing that those who can write on scientific 
subjects have no original ideas, while those 
who have ideas cannot icrite. It is even true 
that popular loorks by eminent investigators 
are usually to be described as critical compi- 
lations, taking no high rank as science or 
literature.''' 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Our Rarest Moth Frontispiece 

All Diamonded with Panes of Quaint Device .... 3 

Developing Regalis 3 

At the Edge of the Limberlost 4 

Under No Restraint 10 

A Moth Worth Knowing 1(J 

Study the Ensuing Illustrations 'ii 

Citheronia Regalis Scattering Pearls ...... 33 

Modest and Lovely Modesta S3 

Moth Mullein 38 

Cocoon Inside Hollow Log ........ 44 

Eggs . 5"^ 

Caterpillar at Maturity 58 

Pupa Case of Feeder and Non-feeder 64 

Winter Qltarters 70 

Life-size Pupa Case of Earth 73 

The Robin Moth 81 

My First Cecropia 81 

Slender Cocoons 84 

Baggy Twin Cocoons 88 

Where Philip Found a Girl of the Limberlost .... ihi 

Cecropia Life History Begins with Eggs !)(> 

Cecropia Caterpillar Ready to Spin 100 

Interwoven Twin Cocoons 104 

Twin Cecropia Emerging 108 

Male Out and Female Coming 114 

XL 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Both Out 118 

Expanding and Drying Wings 122 

Ready to Travel 126 

Interior of Winter Quarters 130 

Moths of the Carnival 137 

Facing the Audience 137 

"On the Banks of the Wabash" 1-16 

The Lady' Bird 155 

LiNEATA Moth ... 155 

Works of Art . 158 

Favourite Haunt of the Lady Bird 104 

The Trailed Aristocrat 173 

Luna Moth 173 

A. Luna Courtship 174 

Good Luna Hunting 178 

Luna Caterpillar . , 183 

King of the Hollyhocks , . . . 191 

Celeus Moth „ . , . . 191 

A LiMBERLOST CaBIN 192 

No Other Celeus So Big and Beautiful 198 

Gold Io Seeking a Mate 207 

lo Moth 207 

My Childhood Enemy of the Corn 210 

Io Pupa Case 215 

"One for the Blackbird," etc 216 

The Sweetheart and Bride of Limberlost Cabin . . 227 

Hiding Among the Roses 227 

The Home of the Sweetheart and Bride 230 

Sweethearts and Brides Come to LiciHT 236 

Velvet Robed and Jewel Bedecked 243 

New Polyphemus Cocoon 243 

The Home of my First Giant . 246 

Occupied and Deserted Tenements 250 

Leaving Home 256 

Waiting for Wings 207 

Garden Fly 207 

A Pair of Garden Flies 272 

Where Elnora Found Garden Flies 276 

Bloody-nose of Sunshine Hill 285 

Thysbe Resembles a Big Bumblebee 285 

The Crest of Sunshine Hill 292 

The Modest Moth 301 

Soft Grays and Browns 301 

In the Valley of the Wood Robin 304 

The Pride of the Lilacs 315 

Three Promethea Cocoons 315 

The River Bridge 320 

XII. 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Promethus Bound . . . . , 3'-2G 

King Cithekoxia ;>-'57 

Preliminary Exercise . . 337 

King of the Wild Tiger Lilies 340 

A Royal Couple 344 

The Queen Gives Us Her Jewels . 3.50 

High Piled Treasure 3.j4 

Full-fed and Ready to Transform 3.58 

Changing to Pupa 3(51 

Encased for Winter 30,3 

Leaving Winter Quartep.s 3(jo 

An Hour Later 3UV> 




xnL 



" All diamonded imth panes of quaint device. 
Innumerable of stains, and splendid dyes. 
As are the Tiger MotJis deep damask wings.' 



XIV. 




ALL DIAMONDED WITH PANES OF QUAINT DEVICE' 



Chapter One 
MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 



TO ME 
is a word 
conjure; 
to revel. The 
northeastern In- 
hundred miles 
Michigan line 
the Ohio. In its 
a large area, 
there were miles 
forest, lakes pro 
for navigation. 




the Limberlost 
with which to 
a spot wherein 
swamp lies in 
diana, nearly one 
south of the 
and ten west of 
day it covered 
When I arrived, 
() f u n b r o k e n 
vided with boats 
streams of run- 
ning w^ater, the roads around the edges corduroy, made by 
felling and sinking large trees in the muck. Then the 
Winter Swamp had all the lacy exquisite beauty of such 
locations when snow and frost draped, while from INIay 
until October it was practically tropical jungle. From 
it I have sent to scientists flowers and vines not then 
classified and illustrated in our botanies. 

3 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

It was a piece of forethought to work unceasingly at 
that time, for soon commerce attacked the swamp and 
began its usual process of devastation. Canadian lum- 
bermen came seeking tall straight timber for ship masts 
and tough heavy trees for beams. Grand Rapids fol- 
lowed and stripped the forest of hard wood for fine 
furniture, and through my experience with the lumber- 
men ''Freckles' " story was written. Afterward hoop 
and stave men and local mills took the best of the soft 
wood. Then a ditch, in reality a canal, was dredged 
across the north end through my best territory, and that 
carried the water to the Wabash River until oil men 
could enter the swamp. From that time, the wealth 
they drew to the surface constantly materialized in 
macadamized roads, cosy homes, and big farms of 
unsurpassed richness, suitable for growing onions, celery, 
sugar beets, corn and potatoes, as repeatedly has been 
explained in everything I have written of the place. 
Now, the Limberlost exists only in ragged spots and 
patches, but so rich was it in the beginning that there is 
yet a wealth of work for a lifetime remaining to me in 
these, and river thickets. I ask no better hunting 
grounds for birds, moths, and flowers. The fine roads 
are a convenience, and settled farms a protection to 
be taken into consideration, when bewailing its dis- 
mantling. It is quite true that "One man's meat is 
another's poison." When poor Limber, lost and starv- 

4 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

ing in the fastnesses of the swamp, gave to it a name, 
afterward to be on the Hps of miUions; to him it was 
deadly poison. To me it has been of unspeakable in- 
terest, unceasing work of joyous nature, and meat in 
full measure, with occasional sweetbreads by way of a 
treat. 

Primarily, I w^ent to the swamp to study and repro- 
duce the birds. I never thought they could have a 
rival in my heart. But these fragile night wanderers, 
these moon-flowers of June's darkness, literally "thrust 
themselves upon me." When my cameras were placed 
before the home of a pair of birds, the bushes parted to 
admit light, and clinging to them I found a creature, 
often having the bird's sweep of wing, of colour pale 
green with decorations of lavender and yellow or running 
the gamut from palest tans to darkest browns, with 
markings of pink or dozens of other irresistible combi- 
nations of colour, the feathered folk found a com- 
petitor that often outdistanced them in my affections, 
for I am captivated easily by colour, and beauty of 
form. 

At first, because these moths made studies of exquisite 
beauty, I merely stopped a few^ seconds to reproduce 
them, before proceeding with my work. Soon I found 
myself filling the waiting time, when birds were slow in 
coming before the cameras, when clouds obscured the 
light too much for fast exposures, or on gray days, by 

7 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

searching for moths. Then in collecting abandoned 
nests, cocoons were found on limbs, inside stumps, among 
leaves when gathering nuts, or queer shining pupae- 
cases came to light as I lifted wild flowers in the fall. 
All these were carried to my little conservatory, placed 
in as natural conditions as possible, and studies were 
made from the moths that emerged the following 
spring. I am not sure but that "Moths of Limberlost 
Cabin" would be the most appropriate title for this 
book. 

Sometimes before I had finished with them, they 
paired, mated, and dotted everything with fertile eggs, 
from which tiny caterpillars soon would emerge. It 
became a matter of intense interest to provide their 
natural foods and raise them. That started me to watch- 
ing for caterpillars and eggs out of doors, and friends of 
my work began carrying them to me. Rej^eatedly, I 
have gone through the entire life process, from mating 
newly emerged moths, the egg period, caterpillar life, 
with its complicated moults and changes, the spinning of 
the cocoons, the miraculous winter sleep, to the spring 
appearance; and with my cameras recorded each stage 
of development. Then on platinum paper, printed so 
lightly from these negatives as to give only an exact 
reproduction of forms, and with water colour medium 
I copied each mark, line and colour gradation in most 
cases from the living moth at its prime. Never was the 

8 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

study of birds so interesting. Before I realized it, the 
larger part of the illustration of this book had been 
completed, in connection with bird work, and for no 
purpose save the pleasure it gave to me and the delight 
of my friends. 

Later when I realized that the idea of a moth book 
had taken definite shape in my brain I studied the illus- 
tration I had, most critically, striving to decide if it 
would be possible to jjroduce better and more accurate 
pictures by drawing my specimens. This led to close 
comparison between such photographs as I had made, 
and the drawn illustration of the same species in moth 
books now on the market. Very little investigation 
along this line proved that the worth of a drawing 
amounted exactly to the art of the artist. It was as 
close as he could copy, no more, no less. The work of a 
good camera, rightly operated, was reproduction; the 
living creature placed before you as it was evolved by 
the Almighty — not as it was coj^ied by man. The sur- 
roundings presented as they were, not as they were 
imagined. This meant work, five or six years of exact- 
ing, unceasing work, but it i^roduced the real moth and 
its true environment as close to life as it was possible to 
put it on paper. 

The illustration of every molh book I ever have seen, 
that attempted coloured reproduction, proved by the 
shrivelled bodies and unnatural position of the wings, 

9 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

that it had been painted from subjects mounted from 
weeks to years in private collections or museums. A 
lifeless moth fades rapidly under the most favourable 
conditions. A moth at eight days of age, in the last 
stages of decline, is from four to six distinct shades 
lighter in colour than at six hours from the cocoon, when 
it is dry and ready for flight. As soon as circulation 
stops, and the life juices evaporate from the wings and 
body, the colour grows many shades paler. If exposed 
to light, moths soon fade almost beyond recognition. 
In judging the exactitude of my work as a colourist, 
please remember this fact: in nearly every case the moths 
of these illustrations were photographed before they had 
taken flight, and their colours copied as soon as the 
down was dry and fluffy. Having done my work from 
moths fresh as life, all other attempts at colour repro- 
duction with which I am familiar, appear pale and 
faded to me. Also, I must admit, that to show 
nearly intangible lines, shadings and fluff ings, I pur- 
posely have made all colour as strong as I dared to be 
accurate. 

I make no claim to being an entomologist. I quite 
agree with the "Autocrat of the Breakfast Table," that 
*'the subject is too vast for any single human intelligence 
to grasp." If my life depended upon it I could not give 
the scientific name of every least organ and nerve of a 
moth, and as for wrestling with the thousands of tiny 

10 




f 



M; 






UNDER NO RESTRAINT' 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

species of day and niglit or even attempting all the 
ramifications of — say the alluringly beautiful Catocalse 
family — life is too short, unless devoted to this purpose 
alone. But if I frankly confess my limitations, and 
offer the book to my nature-loving friends merely as an 
introduction to the most exquisite creation of the swamp; 
and the outside history, as it were, of the evolution of 
these creatures from moth to moth again, surely no one 
can feel defrauded. Since the publication of "A Girl 
of the Limberlost, " I have received hundreds of letters 
asking me to write of my experiences with the lepidop- 
tera of the swamp. This l^ook professes to be nothing 
more. 

Because so many enemies prey upon the large night 
moths in all stages, they are nowhere sufficiently numer- 
ous to be pests, or common enough to be given local 
names, as have the birds. I have been compelled to use 
their scientific names to assist in identification, and at 
times I have had to resort to technical terms, because 
there were no other. All these moths were reproduced 
so far as possible to me, in natural and characteristic 
environment. x\t times in order to show exquisite 
markings, by judicious use of a fine brush of long camel's- 
hair, I have coaxed and manipulated the wings to a 
wider sweep than is natural to the moth; but the subject 
was living and under no restraint when this was done. 
Frequently I have written of them under the names by 

13 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

which I knew them in childhood, or that we of Limberlost 
Cabin have bestowed upon them. 

Most of these studies were possible by making them of 
the moths as soon after their emergence from the cocoon 
or pupa case as their wings were fully developed, dry and 
hardened, but before circulation was sufficiently estab- 
lished for them to take flight. At this time they could be 
reproduced at full beauty, not a scale of down displaced, 
their markings the brightest they ever would be, and 
as they climbed naturally with wings lifted, half open or 
widespread. Often the camel's-hair brush had to be 
called into use to fluff down that had dried in tufts, an 
office that the air performs in flight. The difference 
between these perfect living creatures, and the shrivelled, 
pin-pierced subjects of the illustration of any moth book 
I possess, is the difference between abundant life and 
repulsive death. 

To one point I wish to call especial attention. In the 
case of Luna, Modesta or any moth that has much 
white or gray, the colour is changed a faint shade by the 
creamy paper. The whites are not the pure white they 
should be, the grays take on a brownish cast. With a 
moth having any shade of yellow or of the numerous 
tans, browns, reds or black, the work of the engraver 
comes out with a mellow velvet softness added from 
having been printed on this paper. In summing up the 
entire illustration I found four moths slightly changed 

14 



MOTHS OF THE LI:MBERL0ST 

in white and gray sliades by the paper, while twenty 
were immensely helped by it and to the half-tones it 
gave a background of tempting richness. So the major- 
ity of "points" was overwhelmingly in favour of clay 
coated paper, and knowing how long and patiently I 
had worked over the material, the powers that control 
the destiny of this book graciously left it to me to decide 
questions concerning its manufacture. I have loved the 
work above anything I ever have done, a fact you will not 
be slow to recognize as you read and examine the illus- 
tration. 

There is a wide gulf between a Naturalist and a Nature 
Lover. A Naturalist devotes his life to delving into 
stiff scientific problems concerning everything in nature 
from her greatest to her most minute forms. A Nature 
Lover works at any occupation and finds recreation in 
being out of doors and appreciating the common things 
of life as they appeal to his senses. 

The Naturalist always begins at the beginning and 
traces family, sub-family, genus and species. He deals 
in Latin and Greek terms of resounding and dishearten- 
ing combinations. At his hands anatomy and markings 
become lost in a scientific jargon of patagia, jugum, 
discocellulars, phagocytes, and so on to the end of the 
volume. For one who would be a Naturalist, a rare 
specimen indeed, there are many volumes on tlie market. 
The list of pioneer lepidopterists begins authoritatively 

15 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

with Linnseiis and since his time you can make your 
selection from the works of Druce, Grote, Strecker, 
Boisduval, Robinson, Smith, Butler, Fernald, Beuten- 
muUer, Hicks, Rothscliild, Hampson, Stretch, Lyman, 
or any of a dozen others. Possessing such an imposing 
array of names tliere should be no necessity to add to 
them. These men have impaled moths and dissected, 
magnified and located brain, heart and nerves. See 
Packard's "Guide to the Study of Insects," page thirty- 
five, figure forty-four. After finishing the interior they 
have given to the most minute exterior organ from two 
to three inches of Latin name. From them we learn 
that it requires a coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia, tarsus, 
ungues, puhdllus, and anterior, medial and posterior 
spurs to pro\dde a leg for a moth. I dislike to weaken 
my argument tliat more work along these lines is not 
required, by recording that after all this, no one seems 
to have located the ears definitely. Some believe 
hearing lies in the antennae. Hicks has made an 
especial study of a fluid filled cavity closed by a mem- 
brane that he thinks he has demonstrated to be the seat 
of hearing. Leydig, Gerstaecker, and others believe 
this same organ to be olfactory. Perhaps after all, there 
is room for only one more doctor of science who will 
permanently settle this and a few other vexing questions 
for us. 

But what of the millions of Nature Lovers who each 

16 




A MOTH WORTH KNOVVLNG 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

year snatch only a brief time afield, for rest and recrea- 
tion? What of the masses of men and women whose 
daily application to the work of life makes vacation 
study a burden, or whose business has so broken the 
habit of study that concentration is distasteful if not 
impossible? These people number in the ratio of a 
million to one Naturalist. They would be delighted 
to learn the simplest name i30ssible for the creatures 
they or their friends find afield, and the markings, 
habits, and characteristics by which they can be iden- 
tified. They do not care in the least for species and 
minute detail concerning anatomy, couched in re- 
sounding Latin and Greek terms they cannot possibly 
remember. 

The more enthusiastic buy a w^ork on moths and at 
sight of the colourless pinned specimens used for most 
illustration, and the scientific impossibility of the text, 
for their purpose, they abandon it at the first chapter. 
They want a book that will teach them how to identify 
the moths they find, explain whether they are creatures 
of light or darkness, whether they feed or accomplish 
their mission without nourishment, where it is probable 
they can be found, what their habits are, how to identify 
their eggs and caterpillars, whether to look for their 
winter quarters in a cocoon on a twig or outbuilding, under 
the bark of a tree, among the leaves of earth, or in a 
case in a hole in the ground; that will give to them a 

19 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

name there is some possibility of remembering, and 
coloured illustrations to guide in identification. This 
is offered as the book of the Nature Lover and is designed 
solely to fill this purpose. 

I never have seen or heard of any person who, on being 
shown any one of ten of cur most beautiful moths, did 
not consider and promptly pronounce it the most ex- 
quisite creation he ever had seen, and evince a lively 
interest in its history. But when he found it necessary 
to purchase a text-book, devoid of all human interest 
or literary possibility, and wade through pages of scientific 
dissertation, all the time having the feeling that perhaps 
through his lack of experience his identification was 
not right, he usually preferred to remain in ignorance. 
It is in the belief that all Nature Lovers, afield for enter- 
tainment or instruction, will be thankful for a simpli- 
fication of any method now existing for becoming ac- 
quainted with moths, that this book is written and il- 
lustrated. 

In gathering the material used I think it is quite true 
that I have lost as many good subjects as I have secured, 
in my efforts to follow the teachings of scientific writers. 
My complaint against them is that they neglect essen- 
tial detail and are not always rightly informed. They 
confuse one with a flood of scientific terms describ- 
ing minute anatomical parts and fail to explain the 
simple yet absolutely essential points over which an 

20 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

amateur has trouble, when often only a few words would 
suffice. 

For example, any one of half a dozen writers tells us 
that when a caterpillar finishes eating and is ready to go 
into winter quarters it crawls rapidly around for a time, 
empties the intestines, and transformation takes place. 
Why do not some of them explain further that a 
caterj^illarof, say,six inches in length will shrink to tkree^ 
its skin become loosened, the horns drop limp, and the 
creature appear dead and disintegrating.'^ Because 
no one mentioned these things, I concluded that 
the first caterpillar I found in this state was lost to me 
and threw it away. A few words would have saved 
the complete history of a beautiful moth, to secure 
which no second opportunity was presented for five 
years. 

Several works I consulted united in the simple state- 
ment that certain caterpillars pupate in the ground. 

In Packard's "Guide," on page ninety-seven you will 
find this, — "Lepidopterous pupae should be . . . kept 
moist in mould until the image appears." I followed 
this direction, even taking the precaution to bake the 
earth used, because I was very anxious about some rare 
moths. When they failed to emerge in season I dug 
them out, only to find that those not moulded had been 
held fast by the damp, packed earth, and all were 
ruined. I learned by investigation that pupation takes 

21 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

place in a lioh worked out by the caterpillar, so earth 
must touch these cases only as they lie upon it. The 
one word "hole" w^ould have saved all those moths for 
me. 

One writer stated that the tongue cases of some pupse 
turn over and fasten on the back between the wing 
shields, and others w^ere strangely silent on the subject. 
So for ten months I kept some cases lying on their backs 
with the feet up and photographed them in that position. 
I had to discover for myself that caterpillars that pupate 
in the ground change to the moth form with the feet and 
legs folded around the under side of the thorax, the 
wings wrap over them, and the tongue case bends under 
and is fastened between the wings. 

For years I could find nothing on the subject of how 
a moth from a burrowing caterpillar made its appearance. 
In two recent works I find the statement that the 
pupa cases come to the surface before the moths leave 
them, but how the operation is performed is not de- 
scribed or explained. The illustrations of this book will 
show you, if you never have seen pupa cases from earth, 
that they consist of two principal parts ; the blunt head 
and thorax covering, and the ringed abdominal sections. 
With many feeders there is a long, fragile tongue shield. 
The head is rounded and immovable of its own volition. 
The abdominal part is in rings that can be turned and 
twisted; on the tip are two tiny, needle-sharp points, 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and on each of three rings of the abdominal shield there 
are in many cases a pair of tinj^ hooks, very slight pro- 
jections, yet enough to be of use. Some lepidopterists 
think the pupa works head first to the surface, pushing 
with the abdomen. To me this seems impossible. The 
more one forced the blunt head against the earth the 
closer it would pack, and the delicate tongue shield 
surely would break. There is no projection on the head 
that would loosen or lift the earth. 

One prominent lepidopterist I know, believes the moth 
emerges underground, and works its way to the surface 
as it fights to escape a cocoon. I consider this an utter 
impossibility. Remember the earth-encrusted cicada 
cases you have seen clinging to the trunks of trees, 
after the insect has reached the surface and abandoned 
them. Think what would happen to the delicate moth 
head, wings, and downy covering! I am willing to 
wager all I possess, that no lepidopterist, or any ama- 
teur, ever found a freshly emerged moth from an under- 
ground case with the faintest trace of soil on its 
head or feet, or a particle of down missing'; as there un- 
questionably must be, if it forced its way to freedom 
through the damp spring earth with its mouth and 
feet. 

The point was settled for me when, while working 
in my garden, one came through the surface within 
a few inches of my fingers, working with the tij) of 

23 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the abdomen. It turned, twisted, dug away the dirt, 
fastened the abdominal tip, pulled up the head, and 
then bored with the tip again. Later I saw several 
others emerge in the same way, and then made some 
experiments that forever convinced me that this is the 
only manner in which ground pupae possibly could 
emerge. 

One writer I had reason to suppose standard authority 
stated that caterpillars from Citheronia Regalis eggs 
emerged in sixteen days. So I boxed some eggs deposited 
on the eleventh, labelled them due to produce caterpillars 
on the twenty-seventh and put away the box to be 
attended on that date. Having occasion to move it 
on the twenty-fourth, I peeped in and found half my 
caterpillars out and starved, proving that thc^y had been 
hatched at least thirty-six hours or longer; half the others 
so feeble they soon became inactive, and the remainder 
survived and pupated. But if the time specified had 
been allowed to elapse, every caterpillar would have 
starved. 

One of the books I read preparatory to doing this work 
asserts concerning spinners: "Most caterpillars make 
some sort of cocoon or shelter, which may be of pure silk 
neatly wound, or of silk mixed with hair and all manner 
of external things — such as pieces of leaf, bark, moss, 
and lichen, and even grains of earth." 

I have had caterpillars spin by the hundred, in boxes 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

containing most of these things, have gathered outdoor 
cocoons by the peck, and microscopically examined doz- 
ens of them, and with the exception of leaf, twig, bark, 
or some other foundation against which it was spun, I 
never have seen a cocoon with shred, filament, or particle 
of anything used in its composition that was not drawn 
from the spinning tube or internal organism of the cater- 
pillar, with the possible exception of a few hairs from the 
tubercles. I have been told by other workers that they 
have had captive caterpillars use earth and excrement 
in their cocoons. Study the ensuing illustrations closely 
and you cart see for yourself what my experience has 
been. 

This same work, in an article on protective colouration, 
lays emphasis on the statement that among pupa cases 
artificially fastened to different objects out of doors, 
"the elimination was ninety-two per cent, on fences 
where pupae were conspicuous, as against fifty-two per 
cent, among nettles, where they were inconspicuous." 
This statement is elaborated and commented upon as 
making a strong point for colourative protection through 
inconspicuousness. 

Personally, I think the nettles did the work, regardless 
of colour. I have learned in much experience afield 
that a patch of nettles or thistles afford splendid protec- 
tion to any form of life that can survive them. I have 
seen insects and nesting birds find a safety in their 

27 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

shelter, unknown to their kind that home elsewhere. 
The test is not fair enough to be worth consideration. If 
these same pupse had been as conspicuously placed as 
on the fence, on any edible groivth, in the same location 
as the fence, and then left to the mercy of playing 
children, grazing stock, field mice, snakes, bats, birds, 
insects and parasites, the story of what happened to 
them would have been different. I doubt very seriously 
if it would have proved the point those lepidopterists 
started out to make in these conditions, which are the 
only fair ones under which such an experiment could be 
made. 

In this work I became intensely interested in the 
location of the auditory organs and the extent of mouth 
development among moths that do not feed. I asked 
Professor Rowley to send me a list of reliable works that 
discussed moth anatomy, from which I telegraphed my 
book dealer for the three most highly recommended. 
On their prompt arrival I took up an imposing big vol- 
ume, for which I paid five dollars, its contents devoted 
exclusively to moths, and eagerly turned to anatomy. 
There I found this: "The reader who desires to ascertain 
the names and the function of the various organs of the 
body of moths may considt in this connection the cor- 
responding portion of the 'Butterfly Book,' in which the 
principal facts have been fully set forth as to the diurnal 
lepidoptera. " In other words, "Telegraph again and 

28 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

pay five dollars for my 'Butterfly Book' in order to learn 
what you wish to know concerning the anatomy of moths." 
Possibly this is fair, but I cannot seem to realize it. 
So it has gone, times innumerable, until I have come to 
feel safe only when I prove ni}' own salvation l)y find- 
ing out what I desire to know through personal ex- 
perience. 

Many people mentioned in connection with the speci- 
mens they brought me have been more than kind in 
helping to collect the material this volume contains; 
but its publication scarcely would have been possible to 
me had it not been for the enthusiasm of one girl who 
prefers not to be mentioned and the work of a seventeen- 
year-old boy, Raymond Miller. He has been my sole 
helper in many difficult days of field work among the 
birds, and for the moths his interest reached such a pitch 
that he spent many hours afield in search of eggs, cater- 
pillars, cocoons, and moths, when my work confined me 
to the cabin. He has carried to me many of my rarest 
cocoons, and found in their native haunts several moths 
needed to complete the book. It is to be hoped that 
these wonderful days afield have brought their own 
compensation, for kindness such as his I never can 
reward adequately. The book proves my indebtedness 
to the Deacon and to Molly-Cotton. I also owe 
thanks to Bob Burdette Black, the oldest and warmest 
friend of my bird work, for many fine moths and co- 

29 



MOTHS OP THE LIMBERLOST 

coons, and to Professor R. R. Rowley for the laborious 
task of scientifically criticising this book and with un- 
paralleled kindness lending a helping hand where an 
amateur stumbled. 





CITIIERONIA REGALIS SCATTERING PEARLS 




MODEST AND LOVELY MODESTA 



Chapter Tioo 

MOTHS, EGGS, CATERPILLARS, WINTER 
QUARTERS 

IF YOU are too fastidious to read this chapter, it 
will be your permanent loss, for it contains the 
life history, the evolution of one of the most amaz- 
ingly complicated and delicately beautiful creatures in 
existence. There are moths that come into the world, 
accomplish the functions that perpetuate their kind, and 
go out, without having taken any nourishment. There 
are others that feed and live for a season. Some fly in 
the morning, others in the glare of noon, more in the 

33 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

evening, and the most important class of big, exquisitely 
lovely ones only at night. This explains why so many 
people never have seen them, and it is a great pity, for 
the nocturnal non-feeding moths are birdlike in size, 
flowerlike in rare and complicated colouring, and of 
downy, silent wing. 

The moths that fly by day and feed are of the Sphing- 
intje group, Celeus and Carolina, or Choerocampinse, which 
includes the exquisite Deilephila Lineata, and its cousins; 
also Sphingidae, which cover the clear-winged Hemaris 
diffinis and Thysbe. Among those that fly at night only 
and take no food are the members of what is called the 
Attacine group, comprising our largest and commonest 
moth, Cecropia; also its near relative Gloveri, smaller 
than Cecropia and of lovely rosy wine-colour; Anguli- 
fera, the male grayish brown, the female yellowish red; 
Promethea, the male resembling a monster Mourning 
Cloak butterfly and the female bearing exquisite red-wine 
flushings; Cynthia, beautiful in shades of olive green, 
sprinkled with black, crossed by bands of pinkish lilac 
and bearing crescents partly yellow, the remainder 
transparent. There are also the deep yellow lo, pale 
blue-green Luna, and Polyphemus, brown with pink 
bands of the Saturniidse; and light yellow, red-brown and 
gray Regalis, and lavender and yellow Imperialis of the 
Ceratocampidse, and their relatives. Modest and lovely 
Modesta belongs with the Smerinthinse group; and there 

34 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

are others, feeders and non-feeders, forming a list too 
long to incorporate, for I have not mentioned the Cato- 
calse family, the fore-wings of which resemble those of 
several members of the Sphinginte, in colour, and when 
they take flight, the back ones flash out colours that run 
the gamut from palest to deepest reds, yellows, and 
browns, crossed by wide circling bands of black; with 
these, occasionally the black so predominates that it 
appears as if the wing were black and the bands of other 
colour. All of them are so exquisitely beautiful that 
neither the most exacting descriptions, nor photographs 
from life, nor water colours faithfidly copied from living 
subjects can do them justice. They must be seen alive, 
newly emerged, down intact, colours at their most 
brilliant shadings, to be appreciated fully. With the 
exception of feeding or refraining from eating, the life 
processes of all these are very similar. 

Moths are divided into three parts, the head, thorax, 
and abdomen, with the different organs of each. The 
head carries the source of sight, scent, and the mouth 
parts, if the moth feeds, while the location of the ears is 
not yet settled definitely. Some scientists place hearing 
in the antennie, others in a little organ on each side 
the base of the abdomen. Packard writes: "The eyes 
are large and globose and vary in the distance apart in 
different families": but fails to tell what I want to know 
most: the range and sharpness of their vision. Another 

35 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

writer states that the eyes are so incomplete in develop- 
ment that a moth only can distinguish light from darkness 
and cannot discern your approach at over five feet. 

This accords with my experience with Cecropia, 
Polyphemus, Regalis, and Imperialis. Luna either can 
see better, hear acutely, or is naturally of more active 
habit. It is difficult to capture by hand in daytime; 
and Promethea acts as if its vision were even clearer. 
This may be the case, as it flies earlier in the day than 
any of the others named, being almost impossible to 
take by hand unless it is bound to a given spot by sex 
attraction. Unquestionably the day fliers that feed — 
the Sphinginse and Choerocampinse groups — have fairly 
good vision, as also the little "Clear-wings" tribe, for 
they fly straight to the nectar-giving flowers and fruits 
they like best to feed upon, and it is extra good luck if 
you capture one by hand or even with a net. It must 
be remembered that all of them see and go to a bright 
light at night from long distances. 

Holland writes: "The eyes of moths are often greatly 
developed, " but makes no definite statements as to their 
range of vision, until he reaches the Catocalse family, of 
which he records: "The hind wings are, however, most 
brilliantly coloured. In some species they are banded 
with pink, in others with crimson; still others have 
markings of yellow, orange, or snowy white on a back- 
ground of jet black. These colours are distinctive of 

36 



MOTHS OP THE LIMBERLOST 

the species to a greater or less extent. They are only 
displayed at night. The conclusion is irresistibly forced 
upon us that the eyes of these creatures are capable of 
discriminating these colours in the darkness. We cannot 
do it. No human eye in the blackness of the night can 
distinguish red from orange or crimson from yellow. 
The human eye is the greatest of all anatomical marvels, 
and the most wonderful piece of animal mechanism in 
the world, but not all of power is lodged within it. There 
are other allied mechanisms which have the power of 
responding to certain forms of radiant energy to a degree 
which it does not possess. " 

This conclusion is not "irresistibly forced" upon me. 
I do believe, know in fact, that all day-flying, feeding 
moths have keener sight and longer range of vision than 
non-feeders; but I do not believe the diftering branches 
of the Catocalte group, or moths of any family, locate each 
other "in the blackness of night," by seeing markings 
distinctly. I can think of no proof that moths, butter- 
flies or any insects recognize or appreciate colour. ]\Iale 
moths mate with females of their kind distinctly different 
from them in colour, and male butterflies pair with 
albinos of their species, when these differ widely from 
the usual colouring. 

A few moths are also provided with small simple eyes 
called ocelli; these are placed on top of the head and are 
so covered with down they cannot be distinguished save 

37 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

by experts. Mliller believes that these are for the per- 
ception of objects close to a moth while the compound eyes 
see farther, but he does not prove it. 

If the moth does not feed, the mouth parts are scarcely 
developed. If a feeder, it has a long tongue that can be 
coiled in a cleft in the face between the palpi, which 
Packard thinks were originally the feelers. This tongue 
is formed of two grooved parts so fastened together as to 
make a tube through which it takes flower and fruit nectar 
and the juices of decaying animal matter. 

What are thought by some to be small organs of touch 
lie on either side the face, but the exact use of these is 
yet under discussion. It is woefully difficult to learn some 
of these things. 

In my experience the antennae are the most sensitive, 
and therefore the most important organs of the head — 
to me. In the Attacine group these stand out like deli- 
cately cut tiny fern fronds or feathers, always being 
broader and more prominent on the male. Other 
families are very similar and again they differ widely. 
You will find moths having pointed hair-like antennae: 
others heaviest at the tip in club shape, or they may be 
of even proportion but flat, or round, or a feathered 
shaft so fine as to be unnoticed as it lies pressed against 
the face. Some writers say the antennae are the seat of 
scent, touch, and hearing. I had not thought nature 
so impoverished in evolving her forms as to overwork 

38 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

one delicate little organ for three distinct purposes. The 
antennae are situated close where the nose is, in almost 
every form of life, and I would prefer to believe that they 
are the organs of scent and feeling. I know a moth 
suffers most over any injury to them; but one takes flight 
no quicker or more precipitately at a touch on the an- 
tennae than on the head, wing, leg, or abdomen. 

We are safe in laying down a law that antennae are 
homologous organs and used for identical purposes on 
all forms of life carrying them. The short antennae of 
grasshoppers appear to be organs of scent. The long 
hair-fine ones of katydids and crickets may be also, but 
repeatedly I have seen these used to explore the way 
ahead over leaves and limbs, the insect feeling its path 
and stepping where a touch assures it there is safe footing. 
Katj^dids, crickets, and grasshoppers all have antennae, 
and all of these have ears definitely located; hence their 
feelers are not for auricular purposes. According to my 
logic those of the moth cannot be either. I am quite 
sure that primarily they serve the purpose of a nose, as 
they are too short in most cases to be of nuich use as 
"feelers," although that is undoubtedly their secondary 
office. If this be true, it explains the larger organs of 
the male. The female emerges from winter cjuarters so 
weighted with carrying from two to six hundred eggs, 
that she usually remains and develops where she is. 
This throws the business of finding her location on the 

41 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

male. He is compelled to take wing and hunt until he 
discovers her; hence his need of more acute sense of scent 
and touch. The organ that is used most is the one that 
develops in the evolution of any form of life. 

I can well believe that the antennae are most important 
to a moth, for a broken one means a spoiled study for me. 
It starts the moth tremulously shivering, aimlessly beat- 
ing, crazy, in fact, and there is no hope of it posing for a 
picture. Doctor Clemens records that Cecropia could 
neither walk nor fly, but wheeled in a senseless manner 
when deprived of its antennae. This makes me sure 
that they are the seat of highest sensibility, for I have 
known in one or two cases of chloroformed moths reviv- 
ing and without struggle or apparent discomfort, depos- 
iting eggs in a circle around them, while impaled to a 
setting board with a pin thrust through the thorax where 
it of necessity must have passed through or very close 
the nervous cord and heart. 

The moth is covered completely with silken down like 
tiny scales, coloured and marked according to species, 
and so lightly attached that it adheres to the cocoon on 
emergence and clings to the fingers at the lightest touch. 
From the examination of specimens I have taken that 
had disfigured themselves, it appears that a moth rubbed 
bare of down would seem as if covered with thinly cut, 
highly polished horn, fastened together in divisions. 
This is called "chitine" by scientists. 

42 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Tlie tliorax bears four wings, and six legs, each having 
five joints and ending in tiny claws. The wings are 
many-veined membranous sacs, covered with scales that 
are coloured according to sj^ecles and arranged to form 
characteristic family markings. They are a framework 
usually of twelve hollow tubes or veins that are so con- 
nected with the respiratory organs as to be pneumatic. 
These tubes support double membranes covered above 
and below with down. At the bases of the wings lie 
their nerves. The fore-wings each have a heavy rib 
running from the base and gradually decreasing to the 
tip. This is called the costa. Its purpose is to bear the 
brunt of air-pressure in flight. On account of being 
compelled to fly so much more than the females, the back 
wings of the males of many species have developed a 
secondary rib that fits under and supports the front, also 
causing both to work together with the same impulse to 
flight. A stift' bimch of bristles serves the same purpose 
in most females, while some have a lobe extending from 
the fore-wing. As long as the costa remains unbroken 
to preserve balance, a moth that has become entangled 
in bushes or suffered rough treatment from birds can fly 
w^ith badly damaged ^^ ing surfaces. 

In some species, notably the Attacine group and all 
non-feeding, night-flying moths, the legs are short, 
closely covered with long down of the most delicate 
colours of the moth, and sometimes decorated with dif- 

43 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

ferent shades. Luna has beautiful lavender legs, Imperi- 
alis yellow, and Regalis red-brown. The day-flying, 
feeding group have longer, slenderer legs, covered with 
shorter down, and carry more elaborate markings. This 
provision is to enable them to cling firmly to flower or 
twig while feeding, to help them to lift the body higher, 
and walk dextrously in searching for food. It is also 
noticeable that these moths have, for their size, com- 
paratively much longer, slenderer wings than the non- 
feeders, and they can turn them back and fold them 
together in the fly position, thus enabling them to force 
their way into nectar-bearing flowers of trumpet shape. 

The abdomen is velvet soft to the touch, and divided 
into rings called segments, these being so joined that this 
member can be turned and twisted at will. In all cases 
the last ring contains the sex organs. The large abdomen 
of the female carries several hundred embryo eggs, and 
that of the male the seminal fluid. 

Much has been written of moths being able to produce 
odours that attract the sexes, and that are so objection- 
able as to protect them from birds, mice, and bats. 
Some believe there are scent glands in a few species under 
the wing scales. I have critically examined scores of 
wings as to colour markings, but never noticed or smelled 
these. On some, tufts of bristlelike hairs can be thrust 
out, that give a discernible odour; but that this carries 
any distance or is a large factor in attracting the sexes 

44 




COC»><'.\ 1.\>IIM. IKH.I.OW lA)(j, 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

I do not believe so firml}^ after years of practical expe- 
rience, as I did in tlie days when I had most of my moth 
history from books. I have seen this theory confounded 
so often in practice. 

In June of 1911, close six o'clock in the evening, I sat 
on the front veranda of the Cabin, in company with my 
family, and watched three moths sail past us and around 
the corner, before I remembered that on the screen of 
the music-room window^ to the east there was a solitary 
female Promethea moth, that day emerged from a cocoon 
sent me by Professor Rowley. I hurried to the room and 
found five male moths fluttering before the screen or 
clinging to the wild grape and sweetbrier vines covering 
it. I opened the adjoining window and picked up three 
of the handsomest with my fingers, placing them inside 
the screen. Then I returned to the veranda. Moths 
kept coming. We began studying the conditions. 

The female had emerged in the dining room on the west 
side of the cabin. On account of the intense heat of the 
afternoon sun, that side of the building had been tightly 
closed all day. At four o'clock the moth was placed on 
the east window, because it was sheltered with vines. 
How soon the first male found her, I do not know. There 
was quite a stiff evening breeze blowing from the west, 
so that any odour from her would have been carried 
on east. We sat there and watched and counted six 
more moths, every one of which came down wind 

47 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

from the west, flying liigli, above the treetops In fact, 
and from the direction of a Httle tree-filled j^lot called 
Studabaker's woods. Some of them we could distinguish 
almost a block away coming straight toward the Cabin, 
and sailing around the eastern corner with the precision 
of hounds on a liot trail. How they knew, the Almighty 
knows; I do not pretend to; but that there was odour 
distilled by that one female, practically imperceptible to 
us (she merely smelled like a moth), yet of such strength 
as to penetrate screen, vines, and roses and reach her 
kind a block away, against considerable breeze, I never 
shall believe. 

When it comes to the statement that moths have a 
skunklike power of ejecting odours so disagreeable as 
to protect them from mice, birds, and bats, it aj^peals 
to me as amusing. Of course I have taken my punish- 
ment for locating the cows with "grand-daddy-long- 
legs," and had my red raspberries flavoured by the pass- 
ing of the "stink-bug," so I admit the peculiar odour of 
several forms of insects. But when we consider the 
unmentionable matter that a hungry mouse will eat, 
the outbuildings it infests, the drain pipes and sewers 
through which it will travel; when we see some of our 
most exquisite songsters placidly dining from the fresh 
droppings of cattle and horses in the fields; when we 
remember the high-piled excrement and the odour of a 
bat lodge in a hollow tree, where these creatures sleep all 

48 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

day, we are led to wonder what there could be in the 
double distilled odour of Cecropla, the muskiest of all 
moths to me, that would serve to deter mice, birds, and 
bats from attacking it. 

The fact is that moths smell like other moths of the 
same species, and within a reasonable radius they un- 
doubtedly attract each other. In the same manner birds 
carry a birdlike odour, and snakes, frogs, fish, bees, and 
all animals have a scent peculiar to themselves. No dog 
mistakes the odour of a cat for that of another dog. A 
cow does not follow the scent of horses to find other cattle. 
No moth hunts a dragon-fly, a butterfly, or in my ex- 
perience, even a moth of another species in its search for 
a mate. How male moths work the miracles I have seen 
them accomplish in locating females, I cannot explain. 
As the result of acts we see them perform, we credit some 
forms of life with much keener scent than others, and 
many with having the power more highly developed 
than people. The only standard by which we can deter- 
mine the effect that the odour of one insect, bird, or animal 
has upon another is by the effect it has upon us. That a 
male moth can smell a female a block away, against the 
wind, when I can detect only a faint musky odour within 
a foot of her, I do not credit. 

Primarily the business of moths is to meet, mate, and 
deposit eggs that will produce more moths. This is 
all of life with those that do not take food. That they 

49 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

add the completing touch and most beautiful form of 
life to a few exquisite May and June nights is their extra 
good fortune, not any part of the affair of living. With 
moths that feed and live after reproduction, mating 
and egg placing conies first. In all cases the rule is 
much the same. The moths emerge, dry their wings, 
and reach full development the first day. In freedom, 
the females being weighted with eggs seldom attempt to 
fly. They remain where they are, thrust out the egg 
placer from the last ring of the abdomen and wait. By 
ten o'clock the males, in such numbers as to amaze a 
watcher, find them and remain until almost morning. 
Broad antennse, slenderer abdomen, and tlie claspers 
used in holding the female in mating, smaller wings and 
more brilliant markings are the signs by whicli the male 
can be told in most cases. In several of the Attacine 
group, notable Promethea, the male and female differ 
widely in markings and colour. Among the other non- 
feeders the difference is slight. The male Regalis has 
the longest, most gracefully curved abdomen and the 
most prominent claspers of any moth I ever examined; 
but the antennae are so delicate and closely pressed against 
the face most of the time as to be concealed until espec- 
ially examined. I have noticed that among the moths 
bearing large, outstanding antennae, the claspers are 
less prominent than with those having small, inconspicu- 
ous head parts. A fine pair of antenna^, carried for- 

50 



MOTHS OF THE LIIVIBERLOST 

ward as by a big, fully developed Cecropia, are as orna- 
mental to the moth as splendidly branching antlers are 
to the head of a deer. 

The female now begins egg placing. This requires 
time, as one of these big night moths deposits from three 
hundred and fifty to over six hundred eggs. These 
lie in embryonic state in the abdomen of the female. 
At her maturity they ripen rapidly. When they are 
ready to deposit, she is forced to place them whether 
she has mated or not. In case a mate has found her, a 
small pouch near the end of her abdomen is filled with a 
fluid that touches each egg in passing and renders it 
fertile. The eggs differ with species and are placed 
according to family characteristics. They may be pure 
white, pearl-coloured, gray, greenish, or yellow. There 
are round, flat, and oblong eggs. These are placed 
differently in freedom and captivity. A moth in a natural 
location glues her eggs, often one at a time, on the under 
or upper side of leaves. Sometimes she dots several in 
a row, or again makes a number of rows, like a little 
beaded mat. One authority I have consulted states 
that "The eggs are always laid by the female in a state 
of freedom upon the food-plant which is most congenial 
to the larvae." This has not "always" been the case in 
my experience. I have found eggs on stone walls, 
boards, fences, outbuildings, and on the bark of dead 
trees and stumps as well as living, even on the ground. 

51 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

This also has been the case with the women who wrote, 
"Caterpillars and their Moths," the most invaluable 
work on the subject ever compiled. 

A captive moth feels and resents her limitations. I 
cannot force one to mate even in a large box. I must 
free her in the conservatory, in a room, or put her on an 
outside window or door screen. Under these conditions 
one will place her eggs more nearly as in freedom; but 
this makes them difficult to find and preserve. Placed 
in a box and forced by nature to deposit her eggs, as a 
rule, she will remain in one spot and heap them up until 
she is forced to move to make room for more. One big 
female Regalis of the last chapter of this book placed 
them a thimbleful at a time; but the little caterpillars 
came rolling out in all directions when due. In my 
experience, they finish in four or five nights, although I 
have read of moths having lived and placed eggs for ten, 
some species being said to have deposited over a thousand. 
Seven days is usually the limit of life for these big night 
moths with me; they merely grow inactive and sluggish 
until the very last, when almost invariably they are 
seized with a muscular attack, in which they beat them- 
selves to rags and fringes, as if resisting the overcoming 
lethargy. It is because of this that I have been forced 
to resort to the gasoline bottle a few times when I found 
it impossible to paint from the living moth; but I do not 
put one to sleep unless I am compelled. 

52 



EG(iS 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

I never have been able to induce a female to mate 
after confinement had driven her to begin depositing 
lier eggs, not even under the most favourable conditions 
I coidd offer, although others record that they have 
been so fortunate. Repeatedly I have experimented 
^vith males and females of different species, but with no 
success. I have not seen a polygamous moth; but have 
read of experiences with them. 

Sometimes the eggs have a smooth surface, again they 
may be ridged or like hammered brass or silver. The 
shells are very thin and break easily. At one side a 
place can be detected where the fertilizing fluid enters. 
The coming caterpillar begins to develop at once and 
emerges in from six to thirty days, with the exception 
of a few eggs placed in the fall that produce during the 
following spring. The length of the egg period differs 
with species and somewhat with the same moths, accord- 
ing to suitable or unfavourable placing, and climatic 
conditions. Do not accept the experience of any one 
if you have eggs you very much desire to l)e produc- 
tive of the caterpillars of rare moths; after six days 
take a peep every day if you would ])e on the safe 
side. With many species the shells are transparent, 
and for the last few days before emergence the growth 
of the little caterpillars can be watched through them. 

When matured they break or eat a hole in their shells 
and emerge, seeming nuich too large for the space they 

55 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

occupied. Family characteristics show at once. Many 
of them immediately turn and eat their shells as if starv- 
ing; others are more deliberate. Some race around for a 
time as if exercising and then return and eat their shells; 
others walk briskly away and do not dine on shell for the 
first meal. Usually all of them rest close twenty-four 
hours before beginning on leaves. Once they commence 
feeding in favourable conditions they eat enormously 
and grow so rapidly they soon become too large for their 
skins to hold them another instant; so they pause and 
stop eating for a day or two while a new skin forms. 
Then the old is discarded and eaten for a first meal, 
with the exception of the face covering. At the same time 
the outer skin is cast the intestinal lining is thrown oft, 
and practically a new caterpillar, often bearing different 
markings, begins to feed again. 

These moults occur from four to six times in the 
development of the caterpillar; at each it emerges larger, 
brighter, often with other changes of colour, and eats 
more voraciously as it grows. With me, in handling 
caterpillars about which I am anxious, their moulting 
time is critical. I lost many until I learned to clean their 
boxes thoroughly the instant they stopped eating and 
leave them alone until they exhibited hunger signs 
again. They eat greedily of the leaves preferred by each 
species, doing best when the foliage is washed and drops 
of water left for them to drink as they would find dew 

56 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and rain out of doors. Professor Thomson, of the chair 
of Natural History of the University of Aberdeen, makes 
this statement in his "Biology of the Seasons," page fifty- 
four; "Another feature in the life of caterpillars is their 
enormous appetite. Some of them seem never to stop 
eating, and a specie of Polyphemus is said to eat eighty- 
six thousand times its own weight in a day." I notice 
Doctor Thomson does not say that he knows this, but 
uses the convenient phrase, "it is said. " This is an utter 
impossibility. The skin of no living creature will con- 
tain eighty-six thousand times its own weight in a day. 
I have raised enough caterpillars to know that if one 
ate three times its own weight in a day it would have 
performed a skin-stretching feat. Long after writing 
this, but before the manuscript left my hands, I found 
that the origin of this statement lies in a table compiled 
by Trouvelot, in which he estimates that a Polyphemus 
caterpillar ten days old weighs one half grain, or ten 
times its original weiglit; at twenty days three grains, or 
sixty times its first weight; and so on until at fifty-six 
days it weighs two hundred and seven grains, or four 
thousand one hundred and forty times its first weiglit. 
To this he adds one half ounce of water and concludes: 
"So the food taken by a single silkworm in fifty-six days 
equals in weight eighty-six tliousand times the primitive 
weight of the worm." This is a far cry from eating 
eighty-six thousand times its own weight in a day and 

57 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

upholds in part my contention in the first chapter, that 
people attempting to write upon these subjects "are not 
always rightly informed." 

When the feeding period is finished in freedom, the 
caterpillar, if hairless, must be ready to evolve from 
its interior, the principal part of the winter quarters 
characteristic of its species while changing to the moth 
form, and in the case of non-feeders, sustenance for 
the lifetime of tlie moth also. Similar to the moth, the 
caterpillar is made up of three parts, head, thorax, and 
abdomen, with the organs and appendages of each. 
Immediately after moulting the head appears very large, 
and seems much too heavy for the size of the body. At 
the end of a feeding period and just previous to another 
moult the body has grown until the head is almost lost 
from sight, and it now seems small and insignificant; so 
that the appearance of a caterpillar depends on whether 
you examine it before or after moulting. 

The head is made up of rings or segments, the same as 
the body, but they are so closely set that it seems to be a 
flat, round, or pointed formation with discernible rings 
on the face before casting time. The eyes are of so sim- 
ple form that they are supposed only to distinguish light 
from darkness. The complicated mouth is at the lower 
part of the head. It carries a heavy pair of cutters with 
which the caterpillar bites off large pieces of leaf, a first 
pair of grinders with which it macerates the food, and a 

58 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

second pair that join in forming the under Hp. There 
is also the tube that connects with the silk glands and 
ends in the spinneret. Through this tube a fluid is 
forced that by movements of the head the caterpillar 
attaches where it will and draws into fine threads that at 
once harden in silk. This organism is sufficiently devel- 
oped for use in a newly emerged caterpillar, for it can 
spin threads by which to drop from leaf to leaf or to guide 
it back to a starting point. 

The thorax is covered by the first three rings behind 
the head, and on it are six legs, two on each segment. 
The remainder of the caterpillar is abdominal and car- 
ries small pro-legs with which to help it cling to twigs 
and leaves, and the heavy anal props that support the 
vent. By using these and several of the pro-legs immedi- 
ately before them, the caterpillar can cling and erect the 
front part of the body so that it can strike from side to 
side when disturbed. In the case of caterjiillars that 
have a horn, as Celeus,or sets of them as Regalis, in this 
attitude they really appear quite formidable, and often 
I have seen them drive away small birds, while many 
people flee shrieking. 

There are little tubes that carry air to the trachea, 
as caterpillars have no lungs and can live with a very 
small amount of air. 

The skin may be rough, granulated, or soft and fine 
as silk, and in almost every instance of exquisite colour: 

61 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

bluish green, greenish blue, wonderful yellows and from 
pale to deep wine red, many species having oblique 
touches of contrasting colours on the abdominal rings. 
Others are marked with small projections of bright colours 
from which tufts of hair or bristles may grow. In some, 
as lo, these bristles are charged with an irritating acid 
that will sting for an hour after coming in contact with 
the skin, but does no permanent injury. On a few there 
are what seem to be small pockets of acid that can be 
ejected with a jerk, and on some a sort of filament that is 
supposed to distil a disagreeable odour. As the caterpillar 
only uses these when disturbed, it is safe to presume that 
they are placed for defence, but as in the case of moths 
I doubt their efficacy. 

Some lepidopterists have thought the sex of a moth 
could be regulated by the amount of food given the cat- 
erpillar; but with my numerous other doubts I include 
this. It is all of a piece with any attempt at sex 
regulation. I regard it as morally certain that sex goes 
back to the ovary and that the egg produced yields a 
male or female caterpillar in the beginning. I am be- 
coming convinced that caterpillars recognize sex in each 
other, basing the theory on the facts that in half a dozen 
instances I have found cocoons spun only a few inches 
apart. One pair brought to me was interivoven. Two of 
these are shown in the following chapter. In all cases a 
male and female emerged within a few minutes of each 

62 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

other and mated as soon as possible. If a single pair of 
these cocoons ever had produced two of a kind, it would 
give rise to doubts. AYhen all of them proved to be 
male and female that paired, it seems to me to furnish 
conclusive evidence that the caterpillars knew what they 
were doing, and spun in the same place for the purpose 
of appearing together. 

At maturity, usually near five weeks, the full-fed 
caterpillar rests a day, empties the intestines, and races 
around searching for a suitable place to locate winter 
quarters. With burrowing caterpillars that winter in 
pupa cases, soft earth or rotting wood is found and 
entered by working their way with the heads and closing 
it with the hind parts. At the desired depth they push 
in all directions with such force that a hollow larger, 
but shaped as a hen's egg, is worked out; usually this is 
six or more inches below the surface. So compactly is 
the earth forced back, that fall rains, winter's alternate 
freezing and thawing, always a mellowing process, and 
spring downpours do not Ijreak up the big ball, often 
larger than a quart bowl, that surrounds the case of the 
pupa. It has been thought by some and recorded, that 
this ball is held in i)lace by spinning or an acid ejected 
by the caterpillar. I never have heard of any one else 
who has had my luck in lifting these earth balls intact, 
opening, and photographing them and their contents 
I have examined them repeatedly- and carefully. I can 

63 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

find not the slightest trace of spinning or adhesion other 
than by force. 

With one of these balls lifted and divided, we decided 
what happened underground by detaining a caterpillar 
on the surface and forcing it to transform before us, for 
this change is not optional. When the time comes the 
pupa must evolve. So the caterpillar lies on the earth, 
gradually growing shorter, the skin appearing dry and 
the horns drooping. There never is a trace of spinning or 





CAROLINA PUPA CASE OF FEEDER AND NON-FEEDER REGALIS 

acid ejected in the sand buckets. When the change is 
completed there begins a violent twisting and squirming. 
The caterpillar skin opens in a straight line just beliind 
the head on the back, and by working with the pointed 
abdomen the pupa case emerges. The cast skin rapidly 
darkens, and as I never have found a trace of it in an 
opened earth ball in the spring, I suppose it disintegrates 
rapidly, or what is more possible, is eaten by small borers 
that swarm through the top six inches of the earth's crust. 

64 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

The pupa is thickly coated with a sticky substance 
that seems to serve the double purpose of facilitating 
its exit from the caterpillar skin and to dry over it in a 
glossy waterproof coating. At first the pupa is brownish 
green and flattened, but as it dries it rapidly darkens in 
colour and assumes the shape of a perfect specimen. 
Concerning this stage of the evolution of a moth the doc- 
tors disagree. One prominent writer has this to say: 
"Investigations have shown that the organs of the moth 
are not fully developed in the pupa until it is nearly time 
for the moth to emerge, but the development is rapid 
when it once begins." Then follow elaborate descrip- 
tions of how the caterpillar organs break down and those 
required by the moth build up. Holland writes: "The 
pupa case contains within it the moth, as may easily be 
ascertained by careful dissection made ifi the very earliest 
period after the change has occurred, and which becomes 
very evident at a later time when the period of the pupal 
life is drawing to its close." The italics are mine. I 
heartily agree with this. 

Scattered throughout this book there are many photo- 
graphic studies of pupa cases, made almost without 
exception as soon as the case had dried and taken shape. 
Microscopic examination of these will show you, even 
after the loss sustained by any print in reproduction is 
allowed, that at the time the pupa case emerges from 
the caterpillar skin, the exterior of the moth is perfectly 

Q6 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

outlined. The head, thorax, and abdomen are sharply 
defined. You can see the location and exact shape of 
the eyes, the ocelli and hooks on the head, if it is a moth 
of a species having these organs. You can see the 
mouth, and the antennae, so perfectly formed as to dis- 
close the sex of the coming moth by their width. There 
are the legs, developed and laid in rows of three over the 
thorax on each under side. There are the wings folding 
over the legs; each ring of the abdomen is clearly outlined; 
the anal formation shows so distinctly, sex frequently can 
be told by the presence of the claspers, in case the moth 
is a male, on which these organs are very prominent, as 
Regalis. If it is a feeder the long tongue lies enclosed in 
its tube, turning down and fastening on the under part 
of the thorax between the wing shields. 

I cannot name any form of insect, bird, animal, or 
human complete to formation of eye, mouth, tongue, 
shape of body, legs, sex organism even, that is incomplete 
and undeveloped in the interior. It may be the case with 
moths, but it does not seem reasonable. I could settle 
this question for myself by picking a case to pieces and 
dissecting the contents; but being merely a Nature Lover 
I am not much concerned about the inside of a moth. 
Its externals are so exquisite I am deterred from ruin- 
ing one to prove a point that does not trouble me. I 
merely make these observations to put you on your 
guard when it comes to regarding the printed page 

66 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

as infallible. If you are studying this most fragile phase 
of life with which I am acquainted, you need not take 
the word of any one. Find out for yourself, and use 
all the common sense the Almighty has bestowed upon 
you, in arriving at your conclusions. 

The emergence I have watched repeatedly, studied 
photographically, and recorded in the tabulated records 
from which I wrote the following life histories. At time 
to appear I believe the pupa bores its way with the sharp 
point of the abdomen; at least I have seen Celeus, and 
Carolina, Regalis and Imperialis coming through the sur- 
face, abdomen tip first. Once free, they press with the 
feet against the wing shields, burst them away and leave 
the case at the thorax. Each moth I ever have seen 
emerge has been wet and the empty case damp inside. I 
have poured three large drops of pinkish liquid the 
consistency of thin cream from the abdominal rings of a 
Regalis case. Undoubtedly this liquid is ejected by the 
moth to enable it to break loose from and leave the case 
with its delicate down intact. The furry scales of its 
covering are so loosely set that any violent struggle 
with dry down would disfigure the moth. 

i.\mong Cecropia and its Attacine cousins, also Luna, 
Polyphemus, and all other spinners the process is i:)rac- 
tically the same, save that it is much more elaborate; 
most of all with Cecropia, that spins the largest cocoon 
I ever have seen, and it varies its work more than any 

67 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

of the others. Lengthwise of a slender twig it spins a 
long, slim cocoon; on a board or wall, roomier and wider 
at the bottom, and inside hollow trees, and under bridges, 
big baggy quarters of exquisite reddish tan colours that 
do not fade as do those exposed to the weather. The 
typical cocoon of the species is that spun on a fence or 
outbuilding, not the slender work on the alders or the 
elaborate quarters of the bridge. On a board the process 
is to cover the space required with a fine spinning that 
glues firmly to the wood. Then the worker takes a firm 
grip with the anal props and lateral feet and begins 
drawing out long threads that start at the top, reach 
down one side, across the bottom and back to the top 
again, where each thread is cut and another begun. 
As long as the caterpillar can be seen through its work, 
it remains in the same position and throws the head back 
and around to carry the threads. I never thought of 
counting these movements while watching a working 
spinner, but some one w^ho has, estimates that Poly- 
phemus, that spins a cocoon not one fourth the size 
of Cecropia, moves the head a quarter of a million times 
in guiding the silk thread. When a thin webbing is 
spun and securely attached all around the edges it is 
pushed out in the middle and gummed all over the 
inside with a liquid glue that oozes through, coalesces 
and hardens in a Avaterproof covering. Then a big nest 
of crinkly silk threads averaging from three to four inches 

68 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

in length are spun, running from the top down one side, 
up the other, and the cut ends drawn closely together. 
One writer states that this silk has no commercial value; 
while Packard thinks it has. I attach greater weight to 
his opinion. Next comes the inner case. For this the cater- 
pillar loosens its hold and completely surrounds itself with 
a small case of compact work. This in turn is saturated 
with the glue and forms in a thick, tough case, rough on the 
outside, the top not so solidly spun as the other walls; 
inside dark brown and worn so smooth it seems as if 
oiled, from the turning of the caterpillar. In this little 
chamber close the length and circumference of an aver- 
age sized woman's two top joints of the first finger, the 
caterpillar transforms to the pupa stage, crowding its 
cast skin in a wad at the bottom. 

At time for emergence the moth bursts the pupa case, 
which is extremely thin and papery compared with the 
cases of burrowing species. We know by the wet moth 
that liquid is ejected, although we cannot see the wet spot 
on the top of the inner case of Cecropia as we can with 
Polyphemus, that does not spin the loose outer case and 
silk nest. From here on the moths emerge according to 
species. Some work with their mouths and fore feet. 
Some have rough projections on the top of the head, and 
others little sawlike arrangements at the bases of the 
wings. In whatever manner they free themselves, all 
of them are wet when they leave their quarters. Some- 

69 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

times the gathered silk ends comb sufficient down from 
an emerging Cecropia to leave a terra cotta rim around 
the opening from which it came; but I never saw^ one 
lose enough at this time to disfigure it. On very rare 
occasions a deformed moth appears. I had a Cecropia 
with one wing no larger than my thumb nail, and it never 
developed. This is caused by the moth sustaining an 
injury to the wing in emergence. If the membrane is 
slightly punctured the liquid forced into the wing for its 
development escapes and there is no enlargement. 

Also, in rare instances, a moth is unable to escape at 
all and is lost if it is not assisted; but this is precarious 
business and should not be attempted unless you are 
positive the moth will die if you do not interfere. The 
struggle it takes to emerge is a part of the life process of 
the moth and quickens its circulation and develops its 
strength for the affairs of life afterward. If the feet 
have a steady pull to drag forth the body, they will be 
strong enough to bear its weight while the wings dry 
and develop. 

All lepidopterists mention the wet condition of the 
moths when they emerge. Some explain that an acid 
is ejected to soften the pupa case so that the moth can 
cut its way out; others go a step farther and state that 
the acid is from the mouth. I am extremely curious 
about this. I want to know just what this acid is and 
where it comes from. I know of no part of the thorax 

70 




WINTER QUARTERS 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

provided with a receptacle for the amount of Hquid used 
to flood a case, dampen a moth, and leave several drops 
in the shell. Holland writes on page eleven of his 
"Moth Book": "When emergence from a cocoon occurs, 
the insect is provided with the power of ejecting from its 
mouth a fluid, which has the property of dissolving and 
cutting the silken threads." On page twelve we read: 




LIFE SIZE PUPA CASE OF EARTH 



"In other cases, as in the family of the Saturniidse and 
Bombycidse, the proboscis is very feebly developed or 
aborted. In fact, we know that some of these creatures 
are without mouths, and that they do not partake of 
nourishment in the winged state." Now the SaturniidiT^ 
covers the whole Attacine group, and Luna, Polyphemus, 
and lo as well. You will ol)serve that these are some of 

73 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the most important moths herein reproduced and de- 
scribed. If they have no mouths, how can they eject 
all this fluid from them? 

As soon as a moth can find a suitable place to cling 
after it is out, it hangs by the feet and dries the wings 
and down. Long before it is dry if you try to move 
a moth or cause disturbance, it will eject several copious 
jets of a spray from the abdomen that appears, smells 
and tastes precisely like the liquid found in the abandoned 
case. If protected from the lightest touch it w ill do the 
same. It appeals to me that this liquid is abdominal, 
partly thrown off to assist the moth in emergence; some- 
thing very like that bath of birth which accompanies 
and facilitates human entrance into the w^orld. It helps 
the struggling moth in separating from the case, wets 
the down so that it will pass the small opening, reduces 
the large abdomen so that it will escape the exit, and 
softens the case and silk where the moth is working. 
With either male or female the increase in size is so rapid 
that neither coidd be returned to their cases five minutes 
after they have left them. 

It is generally supposed that the spray thrown by a 
developing moth is for the purpose of attracting others 
of its kind. I have my doubts. With moths that have 
been sheltered and not even touched by a breath of 
wind, this spray is thrown very frequently before the 
moth is entirely dry, long before it is able to fly and be- 

74 



MOTHS OF THE LTMBERLOST 

fore the ovipositor is thrust out. According to my 
sense of smell there is very little odour to the spray and 
what there is would be dissipated hours before night and 
time for the moths to fly and seek mates. I do not think 
that the spray thrown so soon after escape from cocoon 
or case is to attract the sexes, any farther than that much 
of it in one place on something that it would saturate 
might leave a general "motliy" odour. Some lepidop- 
terists think this spray a means of defence; if this is true 
I fail to see why it should be thrown when there is 
nothing disturbing the moth. 

Many of the spinning moths use leaves for their outer 
foundation. Some ajjpear as if snugly rolled in a leaf 
and hanging from a twig, but examination will prove 
that the stem is silk covered to hold the case when the 
leaf loosens. This is the rule with all Promethea cocoons 
I ever have seen. Polyphemus selects a cluster of leaves 
very frequently thorn, and w^eaves its cocoon against 
three, drawing them together and spinning a support 
the length of the stems, so that when the leaf is ready to 
fall the cocoon is safely anchored. When the winter 
winds have beaten the edges from the leaves, the cocoon 
appears as if it were browm, having three ribs with veins 
running from them, and of triangular shape. Angulifera 
spins against the leaves but jn-ovides no support and so 
drops to the ground. Luna spins a comparatively thin 
white case, among the leaves under the shelter of logs 

75 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and stumps. lo spins so slightly in confinement that the 
pupa case and cast skin show through. I never have 
found a pupa out of doors, but this is a ground cater- 
pillar. 

Sometimes the caterpillar has been stung and had an 
egg placed in its skin by a parasite, before pupation. In 
such case the pupa is destroyed by the developing fly. 
Throughout one winter I was puzzled by the light weight 
of what appeared to be a good Polyphemus cocoon, and 
at time for emergence amazed by the tearing and scratch- 
ing inside the cocoon, until what I think was an Ophion 
fly appeared. It was honey yellow, had antennae long 
as its extremely long body, the abdomen of which was 
curved and the segments set together so as to appear 
notched. The wings were transparent and the insect 
it seems is especially designed to attack Polyphemus 
caterpillars and help check a progress that otherwise 
might become devastating. (See opposite page.) 

Among the moths that do not feed, the year of their 
evolution is divided into about seven days for the life 
of the moth, from fifteen to thirty for the eggs, from five 
to six weeks for the caterpillar and the remainder of the 
time in the pupa stage. The rule differs with feeding 
moths only in that after mating and egg placing they take 
food and live several months, often until quite heavy 
frosts have fallen. 

One can admire to fullest extent the complicated 

76 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

organism, wondrous colouring, and miraculous life pro- 
cesses in the evolution of a moth, but that is all. Their 
faces express nothing; their attitudes tell no story. There 
is the marvellous instinct through which the males locate 
the opposite sex of their species; but one cannot see 
instinct in the face of any creature; it must develop in 
acts. There is no part of their lives that makes such 
pictures of mother-love as birds and animals afford. 
The male finds a mate and disappears. The female 
places her eggs and goes out before her caterpillars break 
their shells. The caterpillar transforms to the moth 
without its consent, the matter in one upbuilding the 
other. The entire process is utterly devoid of sentiment, 
attachment or volition on the part of the creatures 
involved. They work out a law as inevitable as that 
which swings suns, moons, and planets in their courses. 
They are the most fragile and beautiful result of natural 
law^ with which I am acquainted. 




■^^ Like a rose einhoioered 
In its oum green leaves. 
By warm winds deflowered y 
Till the scent it gives 
Makes faint with too much sweet these 
heavy-winged thieves. 

— Shelley 




THE KOIUN .MDIJI 




MY FIRST CECROPIA 

Chapter Three 
THE ROBIN MOTH 

CECROPIA 

WHEN only a little child, wandering alone among 
the fruits and flowers of our country garden, on 
a dead peach limb beside the fence I found it — 
my first Cecropla. I was the friend of every Ijird, 
flower, and butterfly. I carried crumbs to the warblers 
in the sweetbrier; was lifted for surreptitious peeps at 
the hummingbird nesting in the honeysuckle; sat within 
a few feet of the robin in the catalpa; bugged the currant 
bushes for the phoebe that had built for years under the 

81 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

roof of the corn bin; and fed young blackbirds in the 
hemlock with worms gathered from the cabbages. I 
knew how to insinuate myself into the private life of 
each bird that homed on our farm, and they were many, 
for we valiantly battled for their protection with every 
kind of intruder. There were wrens in the knot holes, 
chippies in the fences, thrushes in the brush heaps, 
bluebirds in the hollow apple trees, cardinals in the 
bushes, tanagers in the saplings, fly-catchers in the trees, 
larks in the wheat, bobolinks in the clover, killdeers 
beside the creeks, swallows in the chimneys, and martins 
under the barn eaves. My love encompassed all feath- 
ered and furred creatures. 

Every day visits were paid flowers I cared for most. I 
had been taught not to break the garden blooms, and if 
a very few of the wild ones were taken, I gathered them 
carefully, and explained to the plants that I wanted them 
for my mother because she was so ill she could not come 
to them any more, and only a few touching her lips or 
lying on her pillow helped her to rest, and made vivid 
the fields and woods when the pain was severe. 

My love for the butterflies took on the form of 
adoration. There was not a delicate, gaudy, winged 
creature of day that did not make so strong an appeal to 
my heart as to be almost painful. It seemed to me that 
the most exquisite thoughts of God for our pleasure were 
materialized in their beauty. My soul always craved 

82 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

colour, and more brilliancy could he found on one butter- 
fly wing than on many flower faces. I liked to slip along 
the bloom-bordered walks of that garden and stand spell- 
bound, watching a black velvet butterfly, with trailed 
wings painted in white, red, and green, as it clambered 
over a clump of sweet-williams, and indeed, the flowers 
appeared plain compared with it! Butterflies have 
changed their habits since then. They fly so high! 
They are all among the treetops now. They used 
to flit around the cinnamon pinks, larkspur, ragged- 
robins and tiger lilies, within easy reach of little fingers, 
every day. I called them "flying flowers," and it 
was a pretty conceit, for they really were more delicate 
in texture and brighter in colouring than the garden 
blooms. 

Having been taught that God created the heavens, 
earth and all things therein, I understood it to mean a 
literal creation of each separate thing and creature, as 
when my father cut down a tree and hewed it into a beam. 
I would spend hours sitting so immovably among the 
flowers of our garden that the butterflies would mistake 
me for a plant and ahglit on my head and hands, while I 
strove to conceive the greatness of a Being who could 
devise and colour all those different butterfly wings. I 
would try to decide whether He created the birds, flowers, 
or butterflies first; ultimately coming to the conclusion 
that He put His most exquisite material into the but- 

83 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

terflies, and then did the best He could with what 
remained, on the birds and flowers. 

In my home there was a cellar window on the south, 
covered with wire screening, that was my individual 
property. Father placed a box beneath it so that I 
could reach the sill easily, and there were very few 
butterflies or insects common to eastern North America 
a specimen of which had not spent some days on that 
screen, feasted on leaves and flowers, drunk from saucers 
of sweetened w ater, been admired and studied in minutest 
detail, and then set free to enjoy life as before. With 
Whitman, "I never was possessed with a mania for 
killing things. " I had no idea of what families they 
were, and I supplied my own names. The Monarch was 
the Brown Velvet; the Viceroy was his Cousin; the 
Argynnis was the Silver Spotted; and the Papilio Ajax 
was the Ribbon butterfly, in my category. There was 
some thought of naming Ajax, Dolly Varden; but 
on close inspection it seemed most to resemble the gayly 
striped ribbons my sisters w^ore. 

I was far afield as to names, but in later years with 
only a glance at any specimen I could say, "Oh, yes! I 
always have known that. It has buff-coloured legs, 
clubbed antennae with buff tips, wings of purplish brown 
velvet with escalloped margins, a deep band of buff 
lightly traced with black bordering them, and a pro- 
nounced point close the apex of the front pair. When it 

84 




THE SLENDKK COCOONS SPCN LENGTHWISE ON TWIGS 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

came to books, all they had to teach me were the names. 
I had captured and studied butterflies, big, little, and 
with every conceivable variety of marking, until it was 
seldom one was found whose least peculiarity was not 
familiar to me as my own face; but what could this be? 

It clung to the rough bark, slowly opening and closing 
large wings of gray velvet down, margined with bands 
made of shades of gray, tan, and black; banded with a 
broad stripe of red terra cotta colour with an inside 
margin of white, widest on the back pair. Both pairs of 
wings were decorated with half-moons of white, outlined 
in black and strongly flushed with terra cotta; the front 
pair near the outer margin had oval markings of blue- 
black, shaded with gray, outlined with half circles of 
white, and secondary circles of black. When the wings 
were raised I could see a face of terra cotta, with small 
eyes, a broad band of white across the forehead, and an 
abdomen of terra cotta banded with snowy white above, 
and spotted with white beneath. Its legs were hairy, 
and the antennae antlered like small branching ferns. 
Of course I thought it was a butterfly, and for a time was 
too filled with wonder to move. Then creeping close, 
the next time the wings were raised above its body, with 
the nerveless touch of a robust child I captured it. 

I was ten miles from home, but I had spent all my life 
until the last year on that farm, and I knew and loved 
every foot of it. To leave it for a city home and the 

87 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

confinement of school almost had broken my heart, but 
it really was time for me to be having some formal 
education. It had been the greatest possible treat to be 
allowed to return to the country for a week, but now my 
one idea was to go home with my treasure. None of my 
people had seen a sight like that. If they had, they 
would have told me. 

Borrowing a two-gallon stone jar from the tenant's 
wife, I searched the garden for flowers sufficiently rare 
for lining. Nothing so pleased me as some gorgeous 
deep red peony blooms. Never having been allowed to 
break the flowers when that was my mother's home, I 
did not think of doing it because she was not there to 
know. I knelt and gathered all the fallen petals that 
were fresh, and then spreading my apron on the ground, 
jarred the plant, not harder than a light wind might, 
and all that fell in this manner it seemed right to take. 
The selection was very pleasing for the yellow glaze of 
the jar; the rich red of the petals, and the gray velvet of 
my prize made a picture over which I stood trembling 
in delight. The moth was promptly christened the 
Half-luna, because my father had taught me that luna 
was the moon, and the half moons on the wings were its 
most prominent markings. 

The tenant's wife wanted me to put it in a pasteboard 
box, but I stubbornly insisted on having the jar, why, I 
do not know, but I suppose it was because my father's 




BAGGY TWIN COCOONS SPUN TWO INCHES APAKT 



MOTHS OF THE LOIBERLOST 

word was gospel to me, and he liad said that the best 
place to keep my specimens was the cellar windo\\', and 
I must have thought the jar the nearest equivalent to 
the cellar. The Half-luna did not mind in the least, but 
went on lazily opening and closing its wings, yet making 
no attempt to fly. If I had known what it was, or any- 
thing of its condition, I would have understood that it 
had emerged from the cocoon that morning, and never 
had flown, but was establishing circulation preparatory 
to taking wing. Being only a small, very ignorant 
girl, the greatest thing I knew for sure was what I 
loved. 

Tying my sunbonnet over the top of the jar, I sta- 
tioned myself on the horse block at the front gate. Every 
passing team was hailed with lifted hand, just as I had 
seen my father do, and in as perfect an imitation of his 
voice as a scared little girl making her first venture 
alone in the big world could muster, I asked, "Which 
way. Friend.^" 

For several long, hot hours people went to every point 
of the compass, but at last a bony young farmer, with a 
fat wife, and a fatter baby, in a big wagon, were going 
to my city, and they said I might ride. With quaking 
heart I handed up my jar, and climbed in, covering all 
those ten miles in the June sunshine, on a board laid 
across the wagon bed, tightly clasping the two-gallon 
jar in my aching arms. The farmer's wife was quite 

91 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

concerned about me. She asked if I had butter, and I 
said; ''Yes, the kind that flies." 

I sHpped the bonnet enough to let them peep. She 
did not seem to think much of it, but the farmer laughed 
until his tanned face was red as an Indian's. His wife 
insisted on me putting down the jar, and offered to set 
her foot on it so that it would not "jounce" much, but 
I did not propose to risk it "jouncing" at all, and clung 
to it persistently. Then she offered to tie her apron over 
the top of the jar if I would put my bonnet on my head, 
but I was afraid to attempt the exchange for fear my 
butterfly would try to escape, and I might crush it, 
a thing I almost never had allowed to happen. 

The farmer's wife stuck her elbow into his ribs, and 
said, "How's that for the queerest spec'men ye ever 
see?" The farmer answered, "I never saw nothin' like 
it before." Then she said, "Aw pshaw! I didn't mean 
in the jar!" Then they both laughed. I thought they 
were amused at me, but I had no intention of risking an 
injury to my Half-luna, for there had been one black 
day on which I had such a terrible experience that it 
entailed a lifetime of caution. 

I had captured what I afterward learned was an 
Asterias, that seemed slightly different from any previous 
specimen, and a yellow swallow-tail, my first Papilio 
Turnus. The yellow one was the largest, most beautiful 
butterfly I ever had seen. I was carrying them, one 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

between eacli tliiinib and forefinger, and running with 
all possible speed to reach the screen before my touch 
could soil the down on their exquisite wings. I stumbled, 
and fell, so suddenly, there was no time to release them. 
The black one sailed away with a ragged wing, and the 
yellow was crushed into a shapeless mass in my hand. 
I was accustomed to falling off fences, from trees, and 
into the creek, and because my mother was an invalid I 
had learned to doctor my own bruises and uncomplain- 
ingly go my way. My reputation was that of a very 
brave little girl; but when I opened my hand and saw 
that broken butterfly, and my down-painted fingers, I 
was never more afraid in my life. I screamed aloud in 
panic, and ran for my mother with all my might. Heart- 
broken, I could not control my voice to explain as I 
threw myself on her couch, and before I knew what they 
were doing, I was surrounded by sisters and the cook 
with hot water, bandages and camphor. 

My mother clasped me in her arms, and rocked me on 
her breast. "There, there, my poor child," she said, 
"I know it hurts dreadfully!" And to the cook she 
commanded, "Pour on camphor quickly! She is half 
killed, or she never would come to me like this." I 
found my voice. "Camphor won't do any good," I 
wailed. "It was the most beautiful butterfly, and I've 
broken it all to pieces. It must have taken God hours 
studying how to make it different from all the others, 

95 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and I know He never will forgive me!" I began sobbing 
worse than ever. The cook on her knees before me 
sat on her heels suddenly. "Great Heavens! She's 
screechin' about breakin' a butterfly, and not her poor 
fut, at all!" Then I looked down and discovered that I 
had stubbed my toe in falling, and had left a bloody 
trail behind me. "Of course I am!" I sobbed indig- 
nantly. "Couldn't I wash off a little blood in the creek, 
and tie up my toe with a dock leaf and some grass? I've 
killed the most beautiful butterfly, and I know I won't 
be forgiven!" 

I opened my tightly clenched hand and showed it to 
prove my words. The sight was so terrible to me that 
I jerked my foot from the cook, and thrust my hand into 
the water, screaming, "Wash it! Wash it! Wash the 
velvet from my hand! Oh! make it white again!" Be- 
fore the cook bathed and bandaged my foot, she washed 
and dried my hand; and my mother whispered, "God 
knows you never meant to do it, and He is sorry as 
mother is. " So my mother and the cook comforted me. 
The remainder scattered suddenly. It was years before 
I knew why, and I w^as a Shakespearean student 
before I caught the point to their frequently calling 
me "Little Lady Macbeth!" After such an experience, 
it was not probable that I would risk crushing a but- 
terfly to tie a bonnet on my head. It probably would 
be down my back half the time anyway. It usually was. 

96 




▼ 



CECROPIA LIFE HISTORY BEGINS WITH THE EGGS 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

As we neared the city I heard the farmer's wife tell him 
that he must take me to my home. He said he would 
not do any such a thing, but she said he must. She 
explained that she knew me, and it would not be decent 
to put me down where they were going, and leave me to 
walk home and carry that heavy jar. So the farmer took 
me to our gate. I thanked him as politely as I knew 
how, and kissed his wife and the fat baby in payment 
for their kindness, for I was very grateful. I was so tired 
I scarcely could set down the jar and straighten my 
cramped arms when I had the opportunity. 

I had expected my family to be delighted over my 
treasure, but they exhibited an astonishing indifference, 
and were far more concerned over the state of my blis- 
tered face. I would not hear of putting my Half-luna 
on the basement screen as they suggested, but enthroned 
it in state on the best lace curtains at a parlour window, 
covered the sill with leaves and flow^ers, and went to bed 
happy. The following morning my sisters said a curtain 
was ruined, and when they removed it to attempt restor- 
ation, the general concensus of opinion seemed to be that 
something was a nuisance, I could not tell whether it was 
I, or the Half-luna. On coming to the parlour a little 
later, ladened with leaves and flowers, my treasure was 
gone. The cook was sure it had flown from the door 
over some one's head, and she said very tersely that it 
was a burning shame, and if such carelessness as that 

99 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

ever occurred again she would quit her job. Such is 
the confidence of a child that I accepted my loss as an 
inevitable accident, and tried to be brave to comfort her, 
although my heart was almost broken. Of course they 
freed my moth. They never would have dared but that 
the little mother's couch stood all day empty now, and 
her chair unused beside it. My disappointment was so 
deep and far-reaching it made me ill; then they scolded 
me, and said I had half killed myself carrying that heavy 
jar in the hot sunshine, although the pain from which 
I suffered was neither in my arms nor sunburned face. 

So I lost my first Cecropia, and from that day until 
a woman grown and much of this material secured, in 
all my field work among the birds, flowers, and animals, 
I never had seen another. They had taunted me in 
museums, and been my envy in private collections, but 
find one, I could not. When in my field work among 
the birds, so many moths of other families almost had 
thrust themselves upon me that I began a collection of 
reproductions of them, I found little difficulty in securing 
almost anything else. I could picture Sphinx Moths 
in any position I chose, and Lunas seemed eager to pose 
for me. A friend carried to me a beautiful tan-coloured 
Polyphemus with transparent moons like isinglass set 
in its wings of softest velvet down, and as for butter- 
flies, it was not necessary to go afield for them; they came 
to me. I could pick a Papilio Ajax, that some of my 

100 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

friends were years in securing, from the pinks in my 
garden. A pair of Antiopas spent a night, and waited 
to be pictured in the morning, among the leaves of my 
passion vine. Painted Beauties swayed along my 
flowered walks, and in September a Viceroy reigned in 
state on every chrysanthemum, and a Monarch was 
enthroned on every sunbeam. No luck was too good for 
me, no butterfly or moth too rare, except forever and 
always the coveted Cecropia, and by this time I had 
learned to my disgust that it was one of the commonest 
of all. 

Then one summer, late in June, a small boy, having an 
earnest, eager little face, came to me tugging a large box. 
He said he had something for me. He said "they called 
it a butterfly, but he was sure it never was." He w^as 
eminently correct. He had a splendid big Cecropia. I 
was delighted. Of course to have found one myself 
would have filled my cup to overflowing, but to secure 
a perfect, living specimen was good enough. For the 
first time my childish loss seemed in a measure compen- 
sated. Then, I only could study a moth to my satisfac- 
tion and set it free; now% I could make reproductions so 
perfect that every antler of its antennse could be counted 
with the naked eye, and copy its colours acciu-ately, 
before giving back its liberty. 

I asked him whether he wanted money or a picture of 
it, and as I expected, he said "money," so he was paid. 

102 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

An hour later he came back and said he wanted the 
picture. On being questioned as to his change of 
heart, he said "mamma told him to say he wanted the 
picture, and she would give him the money." My 
sympathy w as with her. I wanted the studies I intended 
to make of that Cecropia myself, and I wanted them very 
badly. 

I opened the box to examine the moth, and found it 
so numb with the cold over night, and so worn and 
helpless, that it could not cling to a leaf or twig. I tried 
repeatedly, and fearing that it had been subjected to 
rough treatment, and soon would be lifeless, for these 
moths live only a short time, I hastily set up a camera 
focusing on a branch. Then I tried posing my specimen. 
Until the third time it fell, but the fourth it clung, and 
crept down a twig, settling at last in a position that 
far surpassed any posing that I could do. I was very 
pleased, and yet it made a complication. It had gone so 
far that it might be off the plate and from focus. It 
seemed so stupid and helpless that I decided to risk n 
peep at the glass, and hastily removing the plate and 
changing the shutter, a slight but most essential alter- 
ation was made, everything replaced, and the bulb caught 
up. There was only a breath of sound as I turned, and 
then I stood horrified, for mj^ Cecropia was sailing over 
a large elm tree in a corner of the orchard, and for a 
block my gaze followed it skyward, flying like a bird 

104 




WALLACE HARDISON S INTERWOVEN TWIN COCOONS. LEFT, MALE; 
RIGHT3 FEMALE 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

before it vanished in the distance, so quickly had it 
recovered in fresh air and sunshine. 

I have undertaken to describe some very difficult 
things, but I would not attempt to portray my feelings, 
and three days later there was no change. It was in 
the height of my season of field work, and I had several 
extremely interesting series of bird studies on hand, and 
many miscellaneous subjects. In those days some pic- 
tures were secured that I then thought, and yet feel, 
will live, but nothing mattered to me. There was a 
standing joke among my friends that I never would be 
satisfied wdth my field v,ork until I had made a study of a 
"Ha-ha bird," but I doubt if even that specimen would 
have lifted the gloom of those days. Everything was a 
drag, and frequently I would think over it all in detail, 
and roundly bless myself for taking a prize so rare, to me 
at least, into the open. 

The third day stands lurid in my memory. It was the 
hottest, most difficult day of all my years of experience 
afield. The temperature ranged from 104 to 108 in the 
village, and in quarries open to the east, flat fields, and 
steaming swamps it certainly could have been no cooler. 
With set cameras I was working for a shot at a hawk 
that was feeding on all the young birds and rabbits in 
the vicinity of its nest. 1 also w^anted a number of 
studies to fill a commission that was pressing me. Sul)- 
jects for several pictures had been found, and exposures 

107 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

made on them when the weather was so hot that the 
rubber sHde of a plate holder woidd curl like a horseshoe 
if not laid on a case, and held flat by a camera while I 
worked. Perspiration dried, and the landscape took on 
a sombre black velvet hue, with a liberal sprinkling of 
gold stars. I sank into a stupor going home, and an old 
farmer aroused me, and disentangled my horse from a 
thicket of wild briers into which it had strayed. He said 
most emphatically that if I did not know enough to 
remain indoors w^eather like that, my friends should 
appoint me a "guardeen." 

I reached the village more worn in body and spirit than 
I ever had been. I felt that I could not endure an- 
other degree of heat on the back of my head, and I was 
much discouraged concerning my work. Why not 
drop it all, and go where there were cool forests and 
breezes sighing.^ Perhaps my studies were not half so 
good as I thought! Perhaps people would not care for 
them! For that matter, perhaps the editors and pub- 
lishers never would give the public an opportunity to see 
my work at all! 

I dragged a heavy load up the steps and swung it to 
the veranda, and there stood almost paralyzed. On the 
top step, where I could not reach the Cabin door without 
seeing it, newly emerged, and slowly exercising a pair of 
big wings, with every gaudy marking fresh with new life, 
was the finest Cecropia I ever had seen anywhere. 

108 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Recovering myself with a start, I had it under my net 
— that had waited twenty years to cover it ! Inside 
the door I dropped the net, and the moth crept on my 
fingers. What hick! What extra golden hick ! I almost 
felt that God had been sorry for me, and sent it there to 
encourage me to keep on picturing the beauties and 
wonders of His creations for people who could not go 
afield to see for themselves, and to teach those who 
could to protect helpless, harmless things for their use 
and beauty. 

I walked down the hall, and vaguely scanned the solid 
rows of books and specimens lining the library walls. 
I scarcely realized the thought that was in my mind, but 
what I was looking for was not there. The dining-room 
then, with panelled walls and curtains of tapestry? It 
was not there! Straight to the white and gold music 
room I went. Then a realizing sense came to me. It 
was Brussels lace for which I was searching! On the 
most delicate, snowiest place possible, on the finest 
curtain there, I placed my Cecropia, and then stepped 
back and gazed at it with a sort of "Touch it over my 
dead body" sentiment in my heart. An effort was 
required to arouse myself, to realize that I was not 
dreaming. To search the fields and woods for twenty 
years, and then find the specimen I had sought awaiting 
me at my own door! Well might it have been a dream, 
but that the Cecropia, clinging to the meshes of the 

111 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

lace, slowly opening and closing its wings to strengthen 
them for flight, could be nothing but a delightful reality. 

A few days later, in the valley of the Wood Robin, 
while searching for its nest I found a large cocoon. It 
was above my head, but afterward I secured it by means 
of a ladder, and carried it home. Shortly there emerged 
a yet larger Cecropia, and luck seemed with me. I 
could find them everywhere through June, the time 
of their emergence, later their eggs, and the tiny cater- 
pillars that hatched from them. During the summer I 
found these caterpillars, in different stages of growth, 
until fall, when after their last moult and casting of skin, 
they reached the final period of feeding; some were over 
four inches in length, a beautiful shade of greenish blue, 
with red and yellow warty projections — tubercles, 
according to scientific works. 

It is easy to find the cocoons these caterpillars spin, 
because they are the largest woven by any moth, and 
placed in such a variety of accessible spots. They can 
be found in orchards, high on branches, and on water 
sprouts at the base of trees. Frequently they are spun 
on swamp willows, box-elder, maple, or wild cherry. 
Mr. Black once found for me the largest cocoon I ever 
have seen; a pale tan colour with silvery lights, woven 
against the inside of a hollow log. Perhaps the most 
beautiful of all, a dull red, was found under the flooring 
of an old bridge crossing a stream in the heart of the 

112 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

swamp, by a girl not unknown to fiction, who brought 
it to me. In a deserted orchard close the Wabash, 
Raymond once found a pair of empty cocoons at the 
foot of a big apple tree, fastened to the same twigs, and 
within two inches of each other. 

But the most wonderful thing of all occurred when 
Wallace Hardison, a faithful friend to my work, sawed 
a board from the roof of his chicken house and carried 
to me twin Cecropia cocoons, spun so closely together 
they were touching, and slightly interwoven. By the 
closest examination I could discover slight difference be- 
tween them. The one on the right was a trifle fuller 
in the body, wider at the top, a shade lighter in colour 
and the inner case seemed heavier. 

All winter those cocoons occupied the place of state 
in my collection. Every few days I tried them to see 
if they gave the solid thump indicating healthy pupie, 
and listened to learn if they were moving. By May 
they were under constant surveillance. On the four- 
teenth I was called from home a few hours to attend 
the funeral of a friend. I think nothing short of a funeral 
would have taken me, for the moth from a single cocoon 
had emerged on the eleventh. I hurried home near noon, 
only to find that I was late, for one was out, and the top 
of the other cocoon heaving with the movements of the 
second. 

The moth that had escaped was a male. It clung 

113 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

to the side of the board, wings Hmp, its abdomen damp. 
The opening from which it came was so covered with 
terra cotta coloured down that I thought at first it must 
have disfigured itself; but full development proved it 
could spare that much and yet appear all right. 

In the fall I had driven a nail through one corner of the 
board, and tacked it against the south side of the Cabin, 
where I made reproductions of the cocoons. The nail 
had been left, and now it suggested the same place. 
A light stroke on the head of the nail, covered with cloth 
to prevent jarring, fastened the board on a log. Never 
in all my life did I hurry as on that day, and I called 
my entire family into service. The Deacon stood at 
one elbow, Molly-Cotton at the other, and the gardener 
in the rear. There was not a second to be lost, and no 
time for an unnecessary movement; for in the heat and 
bright sunshine those moths would emerge and develop 
with amazing rapidit3\ 

Molly-Cotton held an umbrella over them to prevent 
this as much as possible; the Deacon handed plate 
holders, and Brenner ran errands. Working as fast as I 
could make my fingers fly in setting up the camera, and 
getting a focus, the second moth's head was out, its 
front feet struggling to pull up the body, and its antennae 
beginning to lift, when I was ready for the first snap 
at half-past eleven. 

By the time I inserted the slide, turned the plate 

114 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

holder and removed another sHde, the first moth to 
appear had chmbed up the board a few steps, and the 
second was halfway out. Its antennae were nearly hori- 
zontal now, and from its position I decided that the 
wings as they lay in the pupa case were folded neither 
to the back nor to the front, but pressed against the body 
in a lengthwise crumpled mass, the heavy front rib, or 
costa, on top. 

Again I changed plates with all speed. By the time I 
was read^^ for the third snap the male had reached the 
top of the board, its wings opened for the first time, and 
began a queer trembling motion. The second one had 
emerged and was running into the first, so I held my finger 
in the line of its advance, and when it climbed on I 
lowered it to the edge of the board beside the cocoons. 
It immediately clung to the wood. The big pursy 
abdomen and smaller antennae, that now turned forward 
in position, proved this a female. The exposure was 
made not ten seconds after she cleared the case, and with 
her back to the lens, so the position and condition of 
the wings and antennae on emergence can be seen clearly. 

Quickly as possible I changed the plates again; the 
time that elapsed could not have been over half a minute. 
The male was trying to creep up the wall, and the in- 
crease in the length and expansion of the female's wings 
could be seen. The colours on both were exquisite, but 
they grew a trifle less brilliant as the moths became dry. 

117 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Again I turned to the business of plate changing. The 
heat was intense, and perspiration was streaming from 
my face. I called to Molly-Cotton to shield the moths 
while I made the change. "Drat the moths!" cried the 
Deacon. "Shade your mother!" Being an obedient girl, 
she shifted the umbrella, and by the time I was ready 
for business, the male was on the logs and traveUing up 
the side of the Cabin. The female was climbing toward 
the logs also, so that a side view showed her wings already 
beginning to lift above her back. 

I had only five snapshot plates in my holders, so I was 
compelled to stop. It was as well, for surely the record 
was complete, and I was almost prostrate with excitement 
and heat. Several days later I opened each of the co- 
coons and made interior studies. The one on the right 
was split down the left side and turned back to show the 
bed of spun silk of exquisite colour that covers the inner 
case. Some say this silk has no commercial value, as 
it is cut in lengths reaching from the top around the inner 
case and back to the top again; others think it can be 
used. The one on the left was opened down the front of 
the outer case, the silk parted and the heavy inner case 
cut from top to bottom to show the smooth interior wall, 
the thin pupa case burst by the exit of the moth, and 
the cast caterpillar skin crowded at the bottom. 

The pair mated that same night, and the female began 
laying eggs by noon the following day. She dotted them 

118 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

in lines over the inside of her box, and on leaves placed 
in it, and at times piled them in a heap instead of placing 
them as do these moths in freedom. Having taken a 
picture of a full-grown caterpillar of this moth brought 
to me by Mr. Andrew Idlewine, I now had a complete 
Cecropia history; eggs, full-grown caterpillars, twin 
cocoons, and the story of the emergence of the moths 
that wintered in them. I do not suppose ^Ir. Hardison 
thought he was doing anything unusual when he brought 
me those cocoons, yet by bringing them, he made it 
possible for me to secure this series of twin Cecropia 
moths, male and female, a thing never before recorded 
by lepidopterist or photographer so far as I can learn. 

The Cecropia is a moth whose acquaintance nature- 
loving city people can cultivate. In December of 190G, 
on a tree, niap'e I think, near No. 2'-230 North Delaware 
Street, Indianapolis, I found four cocoons of this moth, 
and on the next tree, save one, another. Then I began 
watching, and in the coming days I counted them by 
the hundred through the city. Several bushels of these 
cocoons could have been clipped in Indianapolis alone, 
and there is no reason why any other city that has maple, 
elm, catalpa, and other shade trees would not have as 
many; so that any one who would like can find them 
easily. 

Cecropia cocoons bew ilder a beginner by their difference 
in shape. You cannot determine the sex of the moth 

121 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

by the size of the cocoon. In the case of the twins, the 
cocoon of the female was the larger; bnt I have known 
male and female alike to emerge from large or small. 
You are fairly sure of selecting a pair if you depend 
upon weight. The females are heavier than the males, 
because they emerge with quantities of eggs ready to 
deposit as soon as they have mated. If any one wants 
to winter a pair of moths, they are reasonably sure of 
doing so by selecting the heaviest and lightest cocoons 
they can find. 

In the selection of cocoons, hold them to the ear, and 
with a quick motion reverse them end for end. If there 
is a dull, solid thump, the moth is alive, and will emerge 
all right. If this thump is lacking, and there is a rattle 
like a small seed shaking in a dry pod, it means that the 
caterpillar has gone into the cocoon with one of the tiny 
parasites that infest these worms, clinging to it, and the 
pupa has been eaten by the parasite. 

In fall and late summer are the best times to find 
cocoons, as birds tear open many of them in winter; and 
when weather-beaten they fade, and do not show the 
exquisite shadings of silk of those newly spun. When 
fresh, the colours range from almost white through 
lightest tans and browns to a genuine red, and there is 
a silvery effect that is lovely on some of the large, baggy 
ones, hidden under bridges. Out of doors the moths 
emerge in middle May or June, but they are earlier in 

122 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the heat of a house. They are the largest of any species, 
and exquisitely coloured, the shades being strongest on 
the upper side of the wings. They differ greatly in size, 
most males having an average wing sweep of five inches, 
and a female that emerged in my conservatory from 
a cocoon that I wintered with particular care had a 
spread of seven inches, the widest of which I have heard; 
six and three quarters is a large female. The moth, on 
appearing, seems all head and abdomen, the wings 
hanging limp and wet from the shoulders. It at once 
creeps around until a place where it can hang with the 
wings down is found, and soon there begins a sort of 
pumping motion of the body. I imagine this is to start 
circulation, to exercise parts, and force blood into the 
wings. They begin to expand, to dry, to take on 
colour with amazing rapidity, and as soon as they are 
full size and crisp, the moth commences raising and 
lowering them slowly, as in flight. If a male, he emerges 
near ten in the forenoon, and flies at dusk in search of a 
mate. 

As the females are very heavy with eggs, they usually 
remain where they are. After mating they begin almost 
at once to deposit their eggs, and do not take flight 
until they have finished. The eggs are round, having a 
flat top that becomes slightl}" depressed as they dry. 
They are of pearl colour, with a touch of brown, changing 
to grayish as the tiny caterpillars develop. Their out- 

125 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

line can be traced through the shell on which they make 
their first meal when they emerge. Female Cecropias 
average about three hundred and fifty eggs each, that 
they sometimes place singly, and again string in rows, or 
in captivity pile in heaps. In freedom they deposit the 
eggs mostly on leaves, sometimes the under, sometimes 
the upper, sides or dot them on bark, boards or walls. 
The percentage of loss of eggs and the young is large, for 
they are nowhere numerous enough to become a pest, 
as they certainly would if three hundred caterpillars 
survived to each female moth. The young feed on apple, 
willow, maple, box-elder, or wild cherry leaves, and grow 
through a series of feeding periods and moults, during 
which they rest for a few days, cast the skin and intestinal 
lining and then feed for another period. 

After the females have fijiished depositing their eggs, 
they cling to branches, vines or walls a few days, fly 
aimlessly at night and then pas? out without ever having 
taken food. 

I have painted this moth from a newly emerged female, 
when all colouring was much stronger than after a few 
days of life. I have been careful to place the most 
minute line and trace the finest colour shading from 
lavender and rose madder at the apex of the wing, to 
terra cotta, black and white at the base. How perfectly 
the engravers can reproduce all these complicated mark- 
ings remains to be seen. 

126 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Cecropia ha-s several "Cousins," Promethea, Angul- 
ifcra, Gloveri, and Cynthia, that vary shghtly in marking 
and more in colour. All are smaller than Cecropia. The 
male of Promethea is the darkest moth of the Limberlost. 
The male of Angulifera is a brownish gray, the female 
reddish, with warm tan colours on her wing borders. She 
is very beautiful. The markings on the wings of both are 
not half-moon shaped, as Cecropia and Gloveri, but are 
oblong, and largest at the point next the apex of the 
wing. 

Gloveri could not be told from Cecropia in half-tone 
reproduction by any save a scientist, so similar are the 
markings, but in colour they are vastly different, and 
more beautiful. The only living Gloveri I ever secured 
was almost done with life, and she was so badly bat- 
tered I could not think of making a picture of her. The 
wings are a lovely red wine colour, with warm tan bor- 
ders, and the crescents are white, with a line of tan and 
then of black. The abdomen is white striped with wine 
and black. 

Cynthia has pale olive green shadings on both male 
and female. These are imported moths brought here 
about 18()1 in the hope that they would prove valuable 
in silk culture. They occur mostly where the ailanthus 
grows. 

My heart goes out to Cecropia because it is such a 
noble, birdlike, big fellow, and since it has decided to be 

129 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

rare with me no longer, all that is necessary is to pick 
it up, either in caterpillar, cocoon, or moth, at any season 
of the year, in almost any location. The Cecropia moth 
resembles the robin among birds; not alone because he 
is gray with red markings, but also he haunts the same 
localities. The robin is the bird of the eaves, the back 
door, the yard and orchard. Cecropia is the moth. 
My doorstep is not the only one they grace; my friends 
have found them in like places. Cecropia cocoons are 
attached to fences, chicken-coops, barns, houses, and all 
through the orchards of old country places, so that their 
emergence at bloom time adds to May and June one more 
beauty, and frequently I speak of them as the Robin 
Moth. 

In connection with Cecropia there came to me the most 
delightful experience of my life. One perfect night dur- 
ing the middle of May, all the world white with tree bloom, 
touched to radiance with brilliant moonlight, intoxi- 
cating with countless blending perfumes, I placed a 
female Cecropia on the screen of my sleeping-room door 
and retired. The lot on which the Cabin stands is 
sloping, so that, although the front foundations are 
low, my door is at least five feet above the ground, and 
opens on a circular porch, from which steps lead down 
between two apple trees, at that time sheeted in bloom. 
Past midnight I was awakened by soft touches on the 
screen, faint pullings at the wire. I went to the door and 

130 




COCOON ON RIGHT OPENED TO SHOW OUTER CASE AND SILK BEDDING. 
ON LEFT TO SHOW INNER CASE, CAST PUPA AND CATERPILLAR SKIN 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

found the porch, orchard, and night-sky ahve with 
Cecropias holding high carnival. I had not supposed 
there were so many in all this world. From every direction 
they came floating like birds down the moonbeams. I 
carefully removed the female from the door to a window 
close beside, and stepped on the porch. No doubt I 
was permeated with the odour of the moth. As I ad- 
vanced to the top step, that laj^ even with the middle 
branches of the apple trees, the exquisite big creatures 
came swarming around me. I could feel them on my hair, 
my shoulders, and see them settling on my gown and 
outstretched hands. Far as I could penetrate the night- 
sky more were coming. They settled on the bloom- 
laden branches, on the porch pillars, on me indiscrimi- 
nately. I stepped inside the door with one on each 
hand and five clinging to my gown. This experience, I 
am sure, suggested Mrs. Comstock's moth hunting in 
the Limberlost. Then I went back to the veranda and 
revelled with the moths until dawn drove them to 
shelter. One magnificent specimen, birdlike above all 
the others, I followed across the orchard and yard 
to a grape arbour, where I picked him from the 
under side of a leaf after he had settled for the coming 
day. Repeatedly I counted close to a hundred, and then 
they would so confuse me by flight I could not be sure I 
was not numbering the same one twice. With eight 
males, some of them fine large moths, one superb, from 

133 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

which to choose, my female mated with an insistent, 
frowsy httle scrub hxcking two feet and having torn and 
ragged wings. I needed no surer proof that she had 
very dim vision. 





MOTHS OF THE CARNIVAL 



Chapter Four 
THE YELLOW EMPEROR 

EAGLES IMPERIALIS 

SEVERAL 
years ago, 
Mr. A. Eis- 

eii, a German, of 
Coldwater, Mich- 
igan, who devotes 
his leisure to col- 
lecting moths, 
gave me as pinned 
specimens a pair 
of Eacles Imper- 
ialis, and their full 
life history. An}' 
intimate friend of 
mine can testify' 
that yellow is my favourite colour, with shades of laven- 
der running into purple, second choice. When I found a 
yellow moth, liberally decorated with lavender, the com- 
bination was irresistible. Mr. Eisen said the mounted 

137 




PACING THE AUDIENCE 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

specimens were faded; but the living moths were beau- 
tiful beyond description. Naturally I coveted life. 

I was very particular to secure the history of the cater- 
pillars and their favourite foods. I learned from Mr. 
Eisen that they were all of the same shape and habit, but 
some of them might be green, with cream-coloured heads 
and feet, and black face lines, the body covered sparsely 
with long white hairs; or they might be brown, with mark- 
ings of darker brown and black with white hairs; but they 
would be at least three inches long when full grown, and 
would have a queer habit of rearing and drawing leaves 
to their mouths when feeding. I was told I would find 
them in August, on leaves of spruce, pine, cherry, birch, 
alder, sycamore, elm, or maple; that they pupated in the 
ground; and the moths were common, especially around 
lights in city parks, and at street crossings. 

Armed with this information, and spurred by my love 
of yellow, hours were spent when my cameras were fo- 
cused on a bird nest, audi was waiting for my subjects to 
assume some desirable attitude, in searching for the moths 
in June, the caterpillars in August and early September, 
and when lifting wild roots for pupae in the fall. Afield, 
when the light grew too dim for bird work, I hunted moths 
and secured them in larger numbers than I could use, and 
of many differing families, but never a yellow one. 

Coming from a drive one rare June evening, I found 
Mr. William Pettis, a shooter of oil wells, whom I fre- 

138 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

quently met while at my work, sitting on the veranda in 
an animated business discussion with the Deacon. 

"I brouglit you a pair of big moths that I found this 
morning on some bushes beside the road," said INIr. Pettis. 
"I went to give ]\Ir. Porter a peep to see if he thought 
you'd want tliem, and they both got away. He was quicker 
than I, and caught the larger one, but mine sailed over 
the top of that tree." He indicated an elm not far away. 

"Did you know them.^" I asked the Deacon. 

"No," he answered. "You have none of the kind. 
They are big as birds and a beauitful yellow." 

"Yellow!" No doubt I was unduly emphatic. "Yel- 
low! Didn't you know better than to open a V)Ox with 
moths in it outdoors at night.^" 

"It was my fault," interposed Mr. Pettis. "He 
told me not to open the box, but I had shown them a 
dozen times to-day and they never moved. I didn't think 
about night being their time to fly. I am very sorry." 

So was I. Sorry enough to have cried, but I tried my 
best to conceal it. Anyway, it might be lo, and I had 
that. On going inside to examine the moth, I found a 
large female Eacles Imperialis, with not a scale of down 
misplaced. Even by gas light I could see that the yellow 
of the living moth was a warm canary colour, and the 
lavender of the mounted specimen closer heliotrope on 
the living, for there were pinkish tints that had faded 
from the pinned moth. 

139 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

She was heavy with eggs, and made no attempt to fly, 
so I closed the box and left her until the lights were out, 
and then removed the hd. Every opening was tightly 
screened, and as she had mated, I did not think she would 
fly. I hoped in the freedom of the Cabin she would not 
break her wings, and ruin herself for a study. 

There was much comfort in the thought that I could 
secure her likeness; her eggs would be fertile, and I could 
raise a brood the coming season, in which would be both 
male and female. When life was over I could add her to 
my specimen case, for these are of the moths that do not 
eat, and live only a few days after depositing their eggs. 
So I went out and explained to Mr. Pettis what efforts I 
had made to secure this yellow moth, comforted him for 
allowing the male to escape by telling him I could raise 
all I wanted from the eggs of the female, showed him my 
entire collection, and sent him from the Cabin such a 
friend to my work, that it was he who brought me an oil- 
coated lark a few days later. Throughout the summer in 
his drives across country he kept my work in mind, and 
frequently brought me another moth, a bird in distress 
from oil, or something I could use or save suffering. Now 
he is one of the men on whom I depend to watch for me, 
and bring anything there is even a hope I can use, or guide 
me to the haunts of birds he sees while about his business. 

On rising early the next morning, I found my moth had 
deposited some eggs on the dining-room floor, before the 

140 



MOTHS OF THE LIIMBERLOST 

conservatory doors, more on the heavy tapestry that 
covered them, and she was chnging to a velvet cialain at a 
library window, liberally dotting it with eggs, almost as yel- 
low as her body. I turned a tumbler over those on the floor, 
pinned folds in the curtains, and as soon as the light was 
good, set up a camera and focused on a suitable location. 

She climbed on my finger when it was held before her, 
and was carried, with no effort to fly, to the place I had 
selected, though Molly-Cotton walked close with a spread 
net, ready for the slightest impulse toward movement. 
But female moths seldom fly until they have finished egg 
depositing, and this one was transferred with no trouble 
to the spot on which I had focused. On the back wall of 
the Cabin, among some wild roses, she was placed on a 
log, and immediately raised her wings, and started for 
the shade of the vines. The picture made of her as she 
walked is beautiful. After I had secured several studies 
she was returned to the library curtain, where she re- 
sumed egg placing. These were not counted, but there 
were at least three hundred at a rough guess. 

I had thought her lovely in gas light, but day brought 
forth marvels and wonders. When a child, I used to 
gather cowslips in a bed of lush swale, beside a little creek 
at the foot of a big hill on our farm. At the summit 
was an old orchard, and in a brush-heap a browii thrush 
nested. From a red winter pearmain the singer poured 
out his own heart in song, and then reproduced the love 

141 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

ecstasy of every other bird of the orchard. That moth's 
wings were so exactly the warm though dehcate yellow of 
the flowers I loved, that as I looked at it I could feel my 
bare feet sinking in the damp ooze, smell the fragrance of 
the buttercups, and hear again the ripple of the water and 
the mating exultation of the brown thrush. 

In the name — Eacles Imperialis — there is no mean- 
ing or appropriateness to "Eacles"; "Imperialis" — of 
course, translates imperial — which seems most fitting, 
for the moth is close the size of Cecropia, and of truly 
royal beauty. We called it the Yellow Emperor. Her 
Imperial Golden Majesty had a wing sweep of six and 
a quarter inches. From the shoulders spreading in an 
irregular patch over front and back wings, most on the 
front, were markings of heliotrope, quite dark in colour. 
Near the costa of the front wings were two almost cir- 
cular dots of slightly paler heliotrope, the one nearest the 
edge about half the size of the other. On the back wings, 
halfway from each edge, and half an inch from the mark- 
ing at the base, was one round sj^ot of the same colour. 
Beginning at the apex of the front pair, and running to 
half an inch from the lower edge, was a band of escalloped 
heliotrope. On the back pair this band began half an 
inch from the edge and ran straight across, so that at the 
outer curve of the wing it was an inch higher. The front 
wing surface and the space above this marking on the 
back were liberally sprinkled with httle oblong touches 

142 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

of heliotrope; but from the curved Hue to the bases of 
the back pair, the colouring was pure canary yellow. 

The top of the head was covered with long, silken 
hairs of heliotrope, then a band of yellow; the upper 
abdomen was strongly shaded with heliotrope almost to 
the extreme tip. The lower sides of the wings were yellow 
at the base, the spots showing through, but not the bands, 
and only the faintest touches of the mottling. The 
thorax and abdomen were yellow, and the legs heliotrope. 
The antennffi were heliotrope, fine, threadlike, and closely 
pressed to the head. The eyes were smaller than those 
of Cecropia, and very close together. 

Compared with Cecropia these moths were very easy 
to paint. Their markings were elaborate, but they could 
be followed accurately, and the ground work of colour was 
warm cowslip yellow. The only difficulty was to make the 
almost threadlike antennae show, and to blend the faint 
touches of heliotrope on the upper wings with the yellow. 
The eggs on the floor and curtains were guarded with 
care. They were dotted around promiscuously, and at 
first were clear and of amber colour, but as the little cater- 
pillars grew in them, they showed a red line three fourths 
of the way around the rim, and became slightly depressed 
in the middle. The young emerged in thirteen days. 
They were nearly half an inch long, and were yellow 
with black lines. They began the task of eating until 
they reached the pupa state, by turning on their shells 

143 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and devouring all of them to the glue by which they were 
fastened. 

They were given their choice of oak, alder, sumac, elm, 
cherry, and hickory. The majority of them seemed to 
prefer the hickory. Part of them were kept in the house 
and fed on fresh leaves, and the remainder were placed 
on trees outdoors, and guarded from birds by a covering 
of scrim. They moulted on the fifth day for the first 
time, and changed to a brown colour. Every five or six 
days they repeated the process, growing larger and of 
stronger colour with each moult, and developing a cover- 
ing of long white hairs. Part of these moulted four 
times, others five. 

At past six weeks of age they were exactly as Mr. 
Eisen had described them to me. Those I kept in con- 
finement pupated on a bed of baked gravel, in a tin bucket. 
It is imperative to bake any earth or sand used for them 
to kill pests invisible to the eye, that might bore into the 
pupa cases and destroy the moths. 

I watched the transformation with intense interest. 
After the caterpillars had finished eating they travelled 
in search of a place to burrow for a day or two. Then 
they gave up, and lay quietly on the sand. The colour 
darkened hourly, the feet and claspers seemed to draw 
inside, and one morning on going to look there were some 
greenish brown pupae. They shone as if freshly var- 
nished, as indeed they were, for the substance provided to 

144 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

facilitate the emergence of the piip?e from the caterpillar 
skins dries in a coating, that lielps to harden the cases 
and protect them. These pupae had burst the skins at 
the thorax, and escaped by working the abdomen until 
they lay an inch or so from the skins. 

What a "cast off garment" those skins were! Only 
the frailest outside covering, complete in all parts, and 
rapidly turning to a dirty brown. The pupae were laid 
away in a large box having a glass lid. It was filled 
with baked sand, covered with sphagnum moss, slightly 
dampened occasionally, and placed where it was cool, but 
never at actual freezing point. The following spring after 
the delight of seeing them emerge, the}' were released, 
for I secured a male to complete my collection a few days 
later, and only grew the caterpillars to prove it possible. 

There was a carnival in the village, and for three nights 
the streets were illuminated brightly from end to end, to 
the height of Ferris wheels and diving towers. The 
lights must have shone against the sky for miles around, 
for they drew from the Limberlost, from the Canoper, 
from Rainbow Bottom, and the ^ alley of the Wood 
Robin, their winged creatures of night. 

I know Emperors appear in these places in my locality, 
for the caterpillars feed on leaves found there, and enter 
the ground to pupate; so of course the moth of June be- 
gins its life in the same location. Mr. Pettis found the 
mated pair he brought to me, on a bush at the edge of a 

145 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

swamjD. They also emerge in cities under any tree on 
which their caterpillars feed. Once late in May, in the 
corner of a lichen-covered, old snake fence beside the 
Wabash on the Shimp farm, I made a series of studies of 
the home life of a pair of ground sparrows. They had 
chosen for a location a slight depression covered with a 
rank growth of meadow grass. Overhead wild plum and 
thorn in full bloom lay white-sheeted against the blue sky; 
red bud spread its purple haze, and at a ciu've, the breast 
of the river gleamed white as ever woman's; while under- 
foot the grass was obscured with masses of wild flowers. 

An unusually fine cluster of white violets attracted me 
as I worked around the birds, so on packing at the close 
of the day I lifted the plant to carry home for my wild 
flower bed. Below a few inches of rotting leaves and black 
mould I found a lively pupa of the Yellow Emperor. 

So these moths emerge and deposit their eggs in the 
swamps, forests, beside the river and wherever the trees on 
which they feed grow. When the serious business of life is 
over, attracted by strong lights, they go with other pleasure 
seeking companj^, and grace society by their royal presence. 

I could have had half a dozen fine Imperialis moths 
during the three nights of the carnival, and fluttering 
above buildings many more could be seen that did not 
descend to our reach. Raymond had such a busy time 
capturing moths he missed most of the joys of the car- 
nival, but I truly think he liked the chase better. One he 

146 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

brought nic, a female, was so especially large that I took 
her to the Cabin to be measured, and found her to be six 
and three quarter inches, and of the lightest yellow of any 
specimen I have seen. Her wings were quite ragged. I 
imagined she had finished laying her eggs, and was near- 
ing the end of life, hence she was not so brilliant as a 
newly emerged specimen. The moth proved this theory 
correct by soon going out naturally. 

Choice could be made in all that plethora, and a male 
and female of most perfect colouring and markings were 
selected for my studies of a pair. One male was mounted 
and a very large female on accoinit of her size. That 
completed my Imperialis records from eggs to cater- 
pillars, pupse and moths. 

The necessity for a book on this subject, made simple 
to the understanding, and attractive to the eye of the 
masses, never was so deeply impressed upon me as in an 
experience with Imperialis. Molly-Cotton was attend- 
ing a house-party, and her host had chartered a pavilion 
at a city park for a summer night dance. At the close 
of one of the numbers, over the heads of the laughing 
crowd, there swept toward the light a large yellow moth. 

With one dexterous sweep the host caught it, and while 
the dancers crowded around him with exclamations of 
wonder and delight, he presented it to Molly-Cotton and 
asked, "Do you know what it is?" 

She laughingly answered, "Yes, But you don't!" 

14-9 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

"Guilty!" he responded. "Name it." 

For one fleeting instant Molly-Cotton measured the 
company. There was no one present who was not the 
graduate of a commissioned high school. There were 
girls who were students at The Castle, Smith, Vassar, and 
Bryn Mawr. The host was a Cornell junior, and there 
were men from Harvard and Yale. 

"It is an Eacles Imperialis lo Polyphemus Cecropia Re- 
galis," she said. Then in breathless suspense she waited. 

"Shades of Homer!" cried the host. "Where did you 
learn it.'^" 

"They are flying all through the Cabin at home," she 
replied. "There was a tumbler turned over their eggs 
on the dining-room floor, and you dared not sit on the 
right side of the library window seat because of them 
when I left." 

"What do you w^ant with their eggs.^^" asked a girl. 

"Want to hatch their caterpillars, and raise them until 
they transform into these moths," answered poor Molly- 
Cotton, who had been taught to fear so few living things 
that at the age of four she had carried a garter snake into 
the house for a playmate. 

" Caterpillars ! ' ' The chorus arose to a shriek. " Don't 
they sting you? Don't they bite you.'^" 

"No, they don't!" replied Molly-Cotton. "They 
don't bite anything except leaves; they are fine big fel- 
lows; their colouring is exquisite; and they evolve these 

150 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

beautiful moths. I invite all of you to visit us, and see 
for yourselves how intensely interesting they are." 

There was a murmur of polite thanks from the girls, 
but one man measured Molly-Cotton from the top curl 
of her head to the tip of her slippers, and answered, "I 
accept the invitation. When may I come?" He came, 
and left as great a moth enthusiast as any of us. This 
incident will be recognized as furnishing the basis on which 
to build the ballroom scene in "A Girl of the Limberlost," 
in which Philip and Edith quarrel over the capture of a 
yellow Emperor. 

But what of these students from the great represen- 
tative colleges of the United States, to whom a jumbled 
string made from the names of half a dozen moths an- 
swered for one of the commonest of all.^^ 



E 






^i>^ 


iSI 


HIH^IH^^^^^^^^^^^^H^^Hc^ESSSiHHHIHHI 



""'As, poised on vibrant wingSy 
Where its siveet treasure swings 
The honey-lover clings 
To the red flowers.'' 

— Cooke. 




THE LADY BIRD 



Chapter Five 
THE LADY BIRD 

DEILEPHILA LINEATA 




LIN EAT A MOTH 



IN that same 
country gar- 
den where 
my first Cecropia 
was found, Deil- 
ephila Lineata 
was one of my 
earhest recollec- 
tions. This moth 
flew among the 
flowers of especial 
sweetness all day 
long, just as did 
the humming- 
birds; and I was 
taught that it was 
a bird also — the 
Lady Bird. The 
little tan and gray 
thing hovering in 
air before the 



155 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

flowers was almost as large as the hummingbirds, sip- 
ping honey as they did, swift in flight as they; and both 
my parents thought it a bird. 

They did not know the hummingbirds were feasting 
on small insects attracted by the sweets, quite as 
often as on honey, for they never had examined closely. 
They had been taught, as I was, that this other constant 
visitor to the flowers was a bird. When a child, a hum- 
mingbird nested in a honeysuckle climbing over my 
mother's bedroom window. My father lifted me, with 
his handkerchief bound across my nose, on the supposition 
that the bird was so delicate it would desert its nest and 
eggs if they were breathed upon, to see the tiny cup of 
lichens, with a brown finish so fine it resembled the lining 
of a chestnut burr, and two tiny eggs. I well remember 
he told me that I now had seen the nest and eggs of the 
smallest feathered creature except the Lady Bird, and 
he never had found its cradle himself. 

Every summer I discovered nests by the dozen, and 
for several years a systematic search was made for the 
home of a Lady Bird. One of the unfailing methods of 
finding locations was to climb a large Bartlett pear tree 
that stood beside the garden fence, and from an overhang- 
ing bough watch where birds flew with bugs and worms 
they collected. Lady Birds were spied upon, but when 
they left our garden they arose high in air, and went 
straight from sight toward every direction. So locating 

156 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

their nests as those of other birds were found, seemed im- 
possible. 

Then I tried going close the sweetest flowers, those often- 
est visited, the petunias, yellow day lilies, and trumpet 
creepers, and sitting so immovably I was not noticeable 
while I made a study of the Lady Birds. ^ly first dis- 
covery was that they had no tail. One poised near 
enough to make sure of that, and I hurried to my father 
with the startling news. He said it was nothing re- 
markable; birds frequently lost their tails. He ex- 
plained how a bird in close quarters has power to relax 
its muscles, and let its tail go in order to save its body, 
when under the paw of a cat, or caught in a trap. 

That was satisfactory, but I thought it must have been 
a spry cat to get even a paw on the Lady Bird, for fre- 
quently hummingbirds could be seen perching, but never 
one of these. I watched the tail question sharply, and 
soon learned the cats had been after every Lady Bird 
that visited our garden, or any of our neighbours, for 
not one of them had a tail. When this information 
was carried my father, he became serious, but finally he 
said perhaps the tail was very short; those of humming- 
birds or wrens were, and apparently some water birds had 
no tail, or at least a very short one. 

That seemed plausible, but still I watched this small 
and most interesting bird of all; this bird that no one 
ever had seen taking a bath, or perching, and whose nest 

157 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

never had been fonnd by a person so familiar with all 
outdoors as my father. Then came a second discovery: 
it could curl its beak in a little coil when leaving a flower. 
A few days later I saw distinctly that it had four wings 
but I could discover no feet. I became a rank doubter, 
and when these convincing proofs were carried to my 
father, he also grew dubious. 

"I always have thought and been taught that it was a 
bird," he said, "but you see so clearly and report so ac- 
curately, you almost convince me it is some large insect, 
possibly of the moth family." 

When I carried this opinion to my mother and told 
her, no doubt pompously', that "very possibly" I had 
discovered that the Lady Bird was not a bird at all, she 
hailed it as high treason, and said, "Of course it is a 
bird!" That forced me to action. The desperate course 
of capturing one was resolved upon. If only I could, 
surely its feet, legs, and wings would tell if it were a 
bird. By the hour I slipped among those bloom-bordered 
walks between the beds of flaming sweet-williams, but- 
tercups, phlox, tiger and day lilies, Job's tears, holly- 
hocks, petunias, poppies, mignonette, and every dear, 
old-fashioned flower that grows, and followed around 
the flower-edged beds of lettuce, radishes, and small 
vegetables, relentlessly trailing Lad}^ Birds. 

Pass after pass I made at them, but they always dived 
and escaped me. At last, when I almost had given up the 

158 




THE AlAKKlKUb AND COLOHS ARE WOUKS OF ART 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

chase, one went nearly from sight in a trumpet creeper. 
With a sweep the flower was closed behind it, and I ran 
into the house crying that at last I had caught a Lady 
Bird. Holding carefully, the trumpet was cut open with 
a pin, and although the moth must have been slightly 
pinched, and lacking in down when released, I clung to it 
until my mother and every doubting member of my 
family was convinced that this was no bird at all, for it 
lacked beak, tail, and feathers, while it had six legs and 
four wings. Father was delighted that I had learned 
something new, all by myself; but I really think it slightly 
provoked my mother when thereafter I always refused to 
call it a bird. This certainly was reprehensible. She 
should have known all the time that it was a moth. 

The other day a club woman of Chicago who never in 
her life has considered money, who always has had un- 
limited opportunities for culture both in America and 
Europe, who speaks half a dozen languages, and has the 
care of but one child, came in her automobile to investi- 
gate the Limberlost. Almost her first demand was to 
see pictures. One bird study I handed her was of a 
brooding king rail, over a foot tall, with a three-foot wing 
sweep, and a long curved bill. She cried, "Oh! see the 
dear little hummingbird!" 

If a woman of unlimited opportunity, in this day of the 
world, does not know a rail from a hummingbird, what 
could you expect of my little mother, who spoke only 

161 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

two languages, reared twelve lusty children, and never 
saw an ocean. 

So by degrees the Lady Bird of the garden resolved it- 
self into Deilephila Lineata. Deile — evening; pliila — 
lover; lineata — lined; the lined evening lover. Why 
"evening" is difficult to understand, for all my life this 
moth occurs more frequently with me in the fore and 
early afternoon than in the evening. So I agree with 
those entomologists who call it the "white-lined morning- 
sphinx." It is lovely in modest garb, delicately lined, but 
exceedingly rich in colour. It has the long slender wings 
of the Sphingid moths, and in grace, and tirelessness 
of flight resembles Celeus, the swallow of the moth 
family. 

Its head is very small, and its thorax large. The eyes 
are big, and appear bigger because set in so tiny a head. 
Under its tongue, which is a full inch long, is a small 
white spot that divides, spreads across each eye, and runs 
over the back until even with the bases of the front wings. 
The top of the head and shoulders are olive brown, dec- 
orated with one long white line dividing it in the middle, 
and a shorter, on each side. The abdomen is a pale 
brown, has a straight line running down the middle of 
the back, made up of small broken squares of very dark 
brown, touched with a tiny mark of white. Down each 
side of this small line extends a larger one, wider at the top 
and tapering, and this is composed of squares of blackish 

162 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

brown alternating with wliite, the brown being twice 
the size of the white. The sides of the abdomen are 
flushed with beautiful rosy pink, and beneath, it is tan 
colour. 

The wings are works of art. The front are a rich olive 
brown, marked the long way in the middle by a wide 
band of buff, shading to lighter buff at the base. They 
are edged from the costa to where they meet the back 
wings, with a line of almost equal width of darker buff, 
the lower edge touched with white. Beginning at the 
base, and running an equal distance apart from the costa 
to this line are fine markings of white, even and clear as if 
laid on with a ruler. 

The surprise comes in the back wings, that show almost 
entirely when the moth is poised before a flower. These 
have a small triangle of the rich dark brown, and a 
band of the same at the lower edge, with a finish of olive, 
and a fine line of white as a marginal decoration. Cross- 
ing each back wing is a broad band of lovely pink of 
deeper shade than the colour on the sides. This pink, 
combined with the olive, dark browns, and white lining, 
makes the colour scheme of peculiar richness. 

Its antennae are long, clubbed, and touched with white 
at the tips. The legs and body are tan colour. The 
undersides of the wings are the same as the upper, but 
the markings of brown and huffish pink show through in 
lighter colour, while the white lining resembles rows of 

163 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

tan ridges beneath. Its body is covered with silky hairs, 
longest on the shoulders, and at the base of the wings. 

The eggs of the moth are laid on apple, plum, or wood- 
bine leaves, or on grape, currant, gooseberry, chickweed 
or dock. During May and June around old log cabins in 
the country, with gardens that contain many of these 
vines and bushes, and orchards of bloom where the 
others can be found — the Lined Evening Lover deposits 
her eggs. 

The caterpillars emerge in about six days. The tiny 
ovoid eggs are a greenish yellow. The youngsters are 
pale green, and have small horns. After a month spent 
in eating, and skin casting, the full-grown caterpillar is 
over two inches long, and as a rule a light green. There 
are on each segment black patches, that have a touch of 
orange, and on that a hint of yellow. The horn increases 
with the growth of the caterpillar, can be moved at will, 
and seems as if it were a vicious "stinger." But there is 
no sting, or any other method of self-defense unless the 
habit of raising the head and throwing it from side to 
side could be so considered. With many people, this 
movement, combined with the sharp horn, is enough, but 
as is true of most caterpillars, they are perfectly harmless. 
Some moth historians record a mustard yellow cater- 
pillar of this family, and I remember having seen some 
that answer the description; but all I ever have known 
to be Lineata were green. 

164 



r- 



"■•■> 




MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

The piip?e are nearly two inches long and are tan 
coloured. They usually are found in the ground in free- 
dom, or deep under old logs among a mass of leaves spun 
together. In captivity the caterpillars seem to thrive 
best on a diet of purslane, and they pupate perfectly on 
dry sand in boxes. 

These moths have more complete internal develop- 
ment than those of night, for they feed and live through- 
out the summer. I photographed a free one feasting on 
the sweets of petunias in a flower bed at the Cabin, on 
the seventh of October. A few days before, Raymond 
had told me that he almost captured one at his home, and 
as we just had passed through a week of severe cold, 
there was a chance that he might have been mistaken, but 
the next da^- one came to a bed of nasturtiums beside 
which I was standing, and then darted across to the 
petunias. 

I had photographed a IJneata several years before, as it 
hovered over a head of dock. It may have been a female 
searching for a place to deposit her eggs, or it may have 
fed on the pollen of the blooming dock weed. A second 
study had been made two years later when one clam- 
bered over some rose bushes, but these would not 
compare as pictures with a Lineata hovering over 
a flower, because all of the summer from early morning 
until late evening, that was their accustomed location, 
and they may have flown during the night. I have 

167 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

seen them in the moonhght of July and August at late 
hours. 

The petunias in question grew beside a fence west of 
the Cabin. There was only a very short time during 
which the light would be strong; and rough boards for a 
background. This did not suit my ideas for a superlative 
lover of flowers. After due deliberation a petunia was 
lifted, and set in a pot. Then it was placed on a small 
sewing table, the camera set up and focused. 

Before I had finished three little pale yellow moths 
were hovering over the blooms, and when next Lineata 
came to the flower bed, it also visited my improvised 
location. There was some wind, and the intruders were 
difficult to drive away. They seemed to give a "stuck in" 
appearance to the picture, although the Deacon stood 
close and declared they should be left, as they were the 
"finishing touch." 

All the "finishing touch" I wanted for this chapter was 
a Lineata posed so that its markings showed, or hovering 
in an accustomed attitude over a favorite flower. Four 
plates were tried on it. One, on account of the wind, 
was an indistinct blur, another was better, but not what 
could be called a great success. For the last two of the 
four, the wind dropped away, and the moth poised, or it 
may have clung with its feet to the broad petals ; anyway, 
it was artistically posed, and both moth and flowers were 
photographed in two different positions. 

168 



I 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

In painting the best of these studies I found small 
difficulty in copying the exact colours of the Lady 
Bird, but the white lines on her wings were a task. Try 
as T might I could not reproduce them to my satisfaction. 
When I felt I had done my best and called the Deacon 
to my easel to see the work he looked at mj^ study 
critically and then said, "Those flowers are fine!" 




''At eve within yon studious uook, 
I ope my brass-embossed book. 
Portrayed with mang a holy deed 
Of martyrs, croivned with heavenly meed — 
Then, as my taper waxes dim. 
Chant, ere I sleep my measured hymri. 
And, at the close the gleams behold. 
Of parting wings, bedropt with gold.'' 

— Warton. 




THE TRAILED ARISTOCRAT 




LUNA MOTH 



Chapter Six 
MOTHS OF THE INIOON 

ACTIAS LUNA 

ONE morning there was a tap at my door, and when 
I opened it I found a tall, slender woman having 
big, soft brown eyes, and a winning smile. In 
one hand she held a shoe-box, having many rough per- 
forations. I always have been glad that my eyes softened 
at the touch of pleading on her face, and a smile sprang in 
answer to hers before I saw what she carried. For 
confession must be made that a perforated box is a pass- 
port to my good graces any day. 

The most wonderfid things come from those that are 
brought to my front door. Sometimes they contain a 

173 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

belated hummingbird, chilled with the first heavy frost 
of autumn, or a wounded weazel caught in a trap set for 
it near a chicken coop, or a family of baby birds whose 
parents some vandal has killed. Again they carry a sick 
or wounded bird that I am expected to doctor; and 
butterflies, moths, insects, and caterpillars of every 
description, 

"I guess I won't stop," said the woman in answer to my 
invitation to enter the Cabin. *'I found this creature on 
my front porch early this morning, and I sort of wanted to 
know what it was, for one thing, and I thought you might 
like to have it, for another." 

*'Then of course you will come in, and we will see what 
it is," I answered, leading the way into the library. 

There I lifted the lid slightly to take a peep, and then 
with a cry of joy, opened it wide. That particular shoe- 
box had brought me an Actias Luna, newly emerged, and 
as yet unable to fly. I held down my finger, it climbed 
on, and was lifted to the light. 

"Ain't it the prettiest thing .^" asked the woman, with 
stars sparkling in her dark eyes. "Did you ever see 
whiter white.^" 

Together we studied that moth. Clinging to my finger, 
the living creature was of such delicate beauty as to 
impoverish my stock of adjectives at the beginning. Its 
big, pursy body was covered with long, furry scales of 
the purest white imaginable. The wings were of an ex- 

174 




A LUNA COURTSHIP 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

qiiisite light green colour; the front pair having a heavy 
costa of light purple that reached across the back of the 
head: the back pair ended in long artistic "trailers," 
faintly edged with light yellow. The front wing had an 
oval transparent mark close the costa, attached to it with 
a purple line, and the back had circles of the same. These 
decorations were bordered with lines of white, black, and 
red. At the bases of the wings were long, snowy, silken 
hairs; the legs were purple, and the antennae resembled 
small, tan coloured ferns. That is the best I can do at 
description. A living moth must be seen to form a 
realizing sense of its shape and delicacy of colour. Luna 
is our only large moth having trailers and these are much 
longer in proportion to size and of more graceful curves 
than our trailed butterflies. 

The moth's wings were fully expanded, and it was 
beginning to exercise, so a camera w^as set up hastily, 
and several pictures of it secured. The woman helped 
me through the entire process, and in talking with her, I 
learned that she was Mrs. McCollum, from a village a 
mile and a half north of ours; that when she reached home 
she would have walked three miles to make the trip; and 
all her neighbours had advised her not to come, but she 
"had a feeling that she would like to." 

"Are you sorry?" I asked. 

"Am I sorry!" she cried. "Why I never had a better 
time in my life, and I can teach the children what you 

177 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

have told me. I'll bring you everything I can get my 
fingers on that you can use, and send for you when I find 
bird nests." 

Mrs. McCollum has kept that promise faithfully. 
Again and again she trudged those three miles, bringing 
me small specimens of many species or to let me know 
that she had found a nest. 

A big oak tree in Mrs. McCollum's yard explained the 
presence of a Luna there, as the caterpillars of this specie 
greatly prefer these leaves. Because the oak is of 
such slow growth it is seldom planted around residences 
for ornamental purposes; but is to be found most fre- 
quently in the forest. For this reason Luna as a rule is 
a moth of the deep wood, and so is seldom seen close a 
residence, making people believe it quite rare. As a 
matter of fact, it is as numerous, where the trees 
its caterpillars frequent are to be found, as any other 
moth in its natural location. Because it is of the 
forest, the brightest light there is to attract it is the 
glare of the moon as it is reflected on the face of a murky 
pool, or on the breast of the stream rippling its way 
through impassable thickets. There must be a self-satis- 
fied smile on the face of the man in the moon, in whose 
honour these delicate creatures are named, when on fragile 
wing they hover above his mirrored reflection; for of all 
the beauties of a June night in the forest, these moths 
are most truly his. 

178 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

In August of the same year, while driving on a cor- 
duroy road in Michigan, I espied a Luna moth on the 
trunk of a wahiut tree close the road. The cold damp 
location must account for this late emergence; for sub- 
sequent events proved that others of the family were as 
slow in appearing. A storm of protest arose, when I 
stopped the carriage and started to enter the swamp. 
The remaining occupants put in their time telling blood- 
curdling experiences with "massaugers," that infested 
those marshes; and while I bent grasses and cattails to 
make the best footing as I worked my way toward 
the moth, I could hear a mixed chorus — "brought up 
thirteen in the dredge at the cement factory the other 
day," "killed nine in a hayfield below the cemetery," 
''saw a buster crossing the road before me, and my horse 
almost plunged into the swamp," "died of a bite from 
one that struck him while fixing a loose board in his front 
walk." 

I am dreadfully afraid of snakes, and when it seemed I 
could not force myself to take another step, and I was 
clinging to a button bush while the water arose above my 
low shoes, the moth low^ered its wings flat against the 
bark. From the size of the abdomen I could see that it 
was a female heavily weighted with eggs. Possibly she 
had mated the previous night, and if I could secure her, 
Luna life history would be mine. 

So I set my teeth and advanced. INIy shoes were 

181 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

spoiled, and my skirts bedraggled, but I captured the 
moth and saw no indication of snakes. Soon after she 
was placed in a big pasteboard box and began dotting 
eggs in straight lines over the interior. They were white 
but changed colour as the caterpillars approached time to 
hatch. The little yellow-green creatures, nearly a quar- 
ter of an inch long, with a black line across the head, 
emerged in about sixteen days, and fed with most satis- 
faction on oak, but they would take hickory, walnut or 
willow leaves also. When the weather is cold the young 
develop slower and I have had the egg period stretched 
to three weeks at times. Every few days the young 
caterpillars cast their skins and emerged in brighter col- 
our and larger in size. It is usually supposed they mature 
in four moults, and many of them do, but some cast a fifth 
skin before transforming. When between seven and 
eight weeks of age, they were three inches long, and 
of strong blue-green colour. Most of them had tuber- 
cles of yellow, tipped with blue, and some had 
red. 

They spun a leaf -cover cocoon, much the size and shape 
of that of Polyphemus, but whiter, very thin, with no 
inner case, and against some solid surface whenever pos- 
sible. Fearing I might not handle them rightly, and 
lose some when ready to spin, I put half on our walnut 
tree so they could weave their cocoons according to char- 
acteristics. 

182 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

They are fine, large, gaudy caterpillars. The hand- 
somest one I ever saw I found among some gifts offered 
by Molly-Cotton for the celebration of my birthday. It 
had finished feeding, soon pupated in a sand pail and the 
following spring a big female emerged that attracted 
several males and they posed on a walnut trunk for beau- 
tiful studies. 




LU.\A CA'IXRPILLAU 



Once under the oak trees of a summer resort, Miss 
Katherine Howell, of Philadelphia, intercepted a Euna 
caterpillar in the preliminary race before pupation and 
brought it to me. We offered young oak leaves, but they 
were refused, so it went before the camera. Behind the 

183 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

hotel I found an empty hominy can in which it soon began 
spinning, but it seemed to be difficult to fasten the threads 
to the tin, so a piece of board was cut and firmly wedged 
inside. The caterpillar clung to this and in the darkness 
of the can spun the largest and handsomest Luna winter 
quarters of all my experience. You will find the study 
at the close of this chapter. This cocoon differed in 
every particular from any I ever found that were spun 
under natural conditions. The outer wall was snow 
white, thicker than is the rule, and rough with a thousand 
upstanding filaments, as if it were frosted. 

Luna hunters can secure material from which to learn 
this exquisite creature of night, by searching for the moths 
on the trunks of oak, walnut, hickory, birch or willow, 
during the month of June. The moths emerge on the 
ground, and climb these trees to unfold and harden their 
wings. The females usually remain where they are, and 
the males are attracted to them. If undisturbed they 
do not fly until after mating and egg depositing are ac- 
complished. The males take wing as soon as dusk of the 
first night arrives, after their wings are matured. They 
usually find the females by ten o'clock or midnight, and 
remain with them until morning. I have found mated 
pairs as late as ten o'clock in the forenoon. 

The moths do not eat, and after the affairs of life are 
accomplished, they remain in the densest shade they can 
find for a few days, and fly at night, ending their life 

184 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

period in from three days to a week. Few of these gaud- 
ily painted ones have the chance to die naturally, for 
both birds and squirrels prej^ upon them, tearing away 
the delicate wings, and feasting on the big pulp^- bodies. 

White eggs on the upper side of leaves of the trees 
mentioned are a sign of Lima caterpillars in deep woods, 
and full-grown larvae can be found on these trees in 
August. By breaking off a twig on which the}^ are feed- 
ing, carrying them carefully, placing them in a box where 
they cannot be prej'ed upon by flies and parasites, and 
keeping a liberal supply of fresh damp leaves, they will 
finish the feeding daj^s, and weave their cocoons. 

Or the cocoons frequently can be found already spun 
among the leaves, by nutting parties later in the fall. 
There is small question if Luna pupie be alive, for on 
touching the cocoons they squirm and twist so vigor- 
ously that they can be heard plainly. There is so little 
difference in the size of male and female Lunas, that I 
am not sure of telling them apart in the cocoon, as I am 
certain I can Cecropia. 

Cocoon gathering in the fall is one of the most delightful 
occupations imaginable. When flowers are gone; when 
birds have migrated; when brilliant foliage piles knee 
deep underfoot; during those last few days of summer, 
zest can be added to a ramble by a search for cocoons. 
Carrying them home with extreme care not to jar or dent 
them, they are placed in the conservatory among the 

185 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

flowers. They hang from cacti spines and over thorns 
on the big century plant and lemon tree. When sprink- 
ling, the hose is turned on them, as they would take the 
rain outside. Usually they are placed in the coolest 
spots, where ventilation is good. 

There is no harm whatever in taking them if the ivork 
is carefully and judiciously done. With you they are safe. 
Outside they have precarious chance for existence, for 
they are constantly sought by hungry squirrels and field 
mice, while the sharp eyes and sharper beaks of jays, and 
crows, are forever searching for them. The only danger is 
in keeping them too warm, and so causing their emergence 
before they can be placed out safely at night, after you 
have made yourself acquainted with Luna history. 

If they are kept cool enough that they do not emerge 
until May or June, then you have one of the most ex- 
quisite treats nature has in store for you, in watching the 
damp spot spread on the top of the cocoon where an acid 
is ejected that cuts and softens the tough fibre, and allows 
the moth to come pushing through in the full glory of its 
gorgeous birth. Nowhere in nature can you find such 
delicate and daintily shaded markings or colours so bril- 
liant and fresh as on the wings of these creatures of night. 

After you have learned the markings and colours, and 
secured pictures if you desire, and they begin to exhibit 
a restlessness, as soon as it is dusk, release them. They 
are as well prepared for all life has for them as if they had 

186 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

emerged in the woods. The chances are that they are 
surer of hfe at your hands than they would have been if 
left afield, provided you keep them cool enough that they 
do not emerge too soon. 

If you want to photograph them, do it when the wings 
are fully developed, but before they have flown. They 
need not be handled; their Vvings are unbroken; their 
down covering in place to the last scale; their colours 
never so brilliant; their markings the plainest they ever 
will be; their l)ig pursy bodies full of life; and they will 
climb with perfect confidence on any stick, twig, or limb 
held before them. Reproductions of them are even more 
beautiful than those of birds. By all means photograph 
them out of doors on a twig or leaf that their caterpillars 
will eat. Moths strengthen and dry very quickly out- 
side in the warm crisp air of May or June, so it is neces- 
sary to have some one beside you with a spread net cover- 
ing them, in case they want to fly before you are ready to 
make an exposure. In painting this moth the colours 
always should be copied from a living specimen as soon 
as it is dry. No other moth of my acquaintance fades so 
rapidly. 

Repeatedly I am asked which I think the most beauti- 
ful of these big night moths. I do not know. All of 
them are indescribably attractive. Whether a pale green 
moth with purple markings is lovelier than a light yellow 
moth with heliotrope decorations; or a tan and l)rown one 

]S7 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

with pink lines, is a difficult thing to determine. When 
their descriptions are mastered, and the colour combi- 
nations understood, I fancy each person will find the 
one bearing most of his favourite colour the loveliest. 
It may be that on account of its artistically cut and col- 
oured trailers, Luna has a touch of grace above any. 





KING or THK HOLLYHOCKS 




OPENED EAKTH BALL SHOWING WORK OF CELEUS CATERPILLAR AND PUPA 

CASE FOUND IN IT 

Chapter Seven 
KING OF THE HOLLYHOCKS 

PROTOPARCE CELEUS 

PROTOPARCE CELEUS was the companion of 
Deilepliila Lineata in the country garden where I 
first studied Nature. AVhy I was taught that Lin- 
eata was a bird, and Celeus a moth, it is difficult to under- 
stand, for they appear very similar when poising before 
flowers. They visit the same blooms, and vary but little 
in size. The distinction that must have made the differ- 
ence was that while Lineata kept comi)any with the hum- 
mingbirds and fed all day, Celeus came forth at dusk, and 
flew in the evening and at night. But that did not con- 

191 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

clusively prove it a moth, for niglithawks and whip-poor- 
wills did the same; yet unquestionably they were birds. 

Anyway, I always knew Celeus was a moth, and that 
every big, green caterpillar killed on the tomato vines 
meant one less of its kind among the flowers. I never 
saw one of these moths close a tomato or potato vine, a 
jimson weed or ground cherry, but all my life I have seen 
their eggs on these plants, first of a pale green closely re- 
sembling the under side of the leaves, and if they had 
been laid some time, a yellow colour. The eggs are not 
dotted along in lines, or closely placed, but are deposited 
singly, or by twos, at least very sparsely. 

The little caterpillars emerge in about a week, and then 
comes the process of eating until they grow into the large, 
green tomato or tobacco worms that all of us have seen. 
When hatched the caterpillars are green, and have gray 
caudal horns similar to Lineata. After eating for four or 
five days, they cast their skins. This process is repeated 
three or four times, when the full-grown caterpillars are 
over four inches long, exactly the colour of a green tomato, 
with pale blue and yellow markings of beautiful shades, 
the horns blue-black, and appearing sharp enough to in- 
flict a severe wound. 

Like all sphinx caterpillars Celeus is perfectly harm- 
less; but this horn in connection with the habit the 
creatures have of clinging to the vines with the back 
feet, raising the head and striking from side to side, 

192 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOSt 

makes people very sure they can bite or sting, or inflict 
some serious hurt. So very vigorous are they in self- 
defense when disturbed, that robins and cuckoos are 
the only birds I ever have seen brave enough to pick 
them until the caterpillars loosen their hold and drop to 
the ground, where they are eaten with evident relish. 

One cuckoo of my experience that nested in an old 
orchard, adjoining a potato patch, frequently went there 
caterpillar-hunting, and played havoc with one wherever 
found. The shy, deep wood habits of the cuckoo pre- 
vent it from coming close houses and into gardens, 
but robins will take these big caterpillars from tomato 
vines. However, they go about it rather gingerly, and 
the work of reducing one to non-resistance does not seem 
to be at all coveted. IVIost people exhibit symptoms of 
convulsions at sight of one. Yet it is a matter of edu- 
cation. I have seen women kiss and fondle cats and 
dogs, one snap from which would result in disfiguration or 
horrible death, and seem not to be able to get enough of 
them. But they were quite equal to a genuine faint if 
contact were suggested with a perfectly harndess cater- 
])illar, a creature lacking all means of defense, save this 
demonstration of throwing the head. 

When full-fed the caterpillars enter the earth to pupate, 
and on the fifteenth of October, 1906, only the day before 
I began this chapter, the Deacon in digging worms 
for a fishing trip to the river, found a pupa case a 

195 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

yard from the tomato vines, and six inches below the 
surface. He came to my desk carrying on a spade a 
ball of damp earth larger than a quart bowl. With all 
care we broke this as nearly in halves as possible and found 
in the centre a firm, oval hole, the size and shape of a 
hen's egg, and in the opening a fine fresh pupa case. 

It was a beautiful red-brown in colour, long and slen- 
derer than a number of others in my box of sand, and had 
a long tongue case turned under and fastened to the pupa 
between the wing shields. The sides of the abdomen 
were pitted; the shape of the head, and the eyes showed 
through the case, the wing shields were plainly indicated, 
and the abdominal shield was in round sections so that 
the pupa could twist from side to side when touched, 
proving that the developing moth inside was very much 
alive and in fine condition. 

There were no traces of the cast skin. The caterpillar 
had been so strong and had pushed so hard against the 
surrounding earth that the direction from which it had 
entered was lost. The soil was packed and crowded 
firmly for such a distance that this large ball was forced 
together. Trembling with eagerness I hurriedly set up 
a camera. This phase of moth life often has been de- 
scribed, but I never before heard of any one having been 
able to reproduce it, so my luck was glorious. A care- 
ful study of this ball of earth, the opening in which the 
case lies, and the pupa, with its blunt head and elaborate 

196 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

tongue shield, will convince any one that when ready to 
emerge these moths must bore the six inches to the sur- 
face with the point of the abdomen, and there burst the 
case, cling to the first twig and develop and harden the 
wings. The a])dominal point is sharp, surprisingly 
strong, and the rings of the segments enable it to turn in 
all directions, while the earth is mellow and moist with 
spring rains. To force a way head first would be im- 
possible on account of the delicate tongue shield, and for 
the moth to emerge underground and dig to the surface 
without displacing a feather of down, either before or 
after wing expansion, is unthinkable. Yet I always had 
been in doubt as to precisely how the exit of a pupa 
case moth took place, until I actually saw the earth 
move and the sharp abdominal point appear while work- 
ing in my garden. A few days later the Deacon found a 
larger pupa a yard from the place he had located the first 
one, but the spade cut the earth so it crumbled. I have 
had several fine pupa? of this moth given me by Curry 
Pyle, a friend to my work. 

Living pup?e can be had in the fall, by turning a few 
shovels of soil close vegetables in any country garden. 
In the mellow mould, among cabbages and tomato vines, 
around old log cabins close the Limberlost swamp, they 
are numerous, and the emerging moths haunt the sweet 
old-fashioned flowers. 

The moth named Celeus, after a king of Eleusis, 

197 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

certainly has kingly qualities to justify the appella- 
tion. The colouring is all gray, black, brown, white and 
yellow, and the combinations are most artistic. It is a 
relative of Lineata. It flies and feeds by day, has nearly 
the same length of life, and is much the same in shape. 

The head is small and sharp, eyes very much larger than 
Lineata, and tongue nearly four inches in length. The 
antennae are not clubbed, but long and hairlike. It has 
the broad shoulders, the long wings, and the same shape 
of abdomen. The wings, front and back are so mottled, 
lined, and touched with gray, black, brown and white, as 
to be almost past definite description. The back wings 
have the black and white markings more clearly defined. 
The head meets the thorax with a black band. The back 
is covered with long, gray down, and joins the abdomen 
with a band of black about a quarter of an inch wide, 
and then a white one of equal width. The abdomen 
is the gaudiest part of the moth. In general it is a 
soft gray. It is crossed by five narrow white lines the 
length of the abdomen, and a narrow black one down the 
middle. Along each side runs a band of white. On this 
are placed four large yellow spots each circled by a band 
of black that joins the black band of the spot next to it. 
The legs and under side of the abdomen, and wings are a 
light gray-tan, with the wing markings showing faintly, and 
the abdomen below is decorated with two small black dots. 

My first Celeus, a very large and beautiful one, was 

198 




NO OTHER CELEUS SO BIG AND BEAUTIFUL 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

brought to me by Mr. Wallace Hardison, wlio has been 
an interested helper with this book. The moth had a 
wing sweep of fully five and a half inches, and its mark- 
ings were unusually bright and strong. No other Celeus 
quite so big and beautiful ever has come to my notice. 
From four and a half to five inches is the average size. 

There was something the matter with this moth. Not 
a scale of down seemed to be missing, but it was torpid 
and would not fly. Possibly it had been stung by some 
parasite before taking flight at all, for it was very fresh. 
I just had returned from a trip north, and there were some 
large pieces of birch bark lying on the table on which the 
moth had been placed. It climbed on one of these, and 
clung there, so I set up the bark, and made a time ex- 
posure. It felt so badly it did not even close them when 
I took a brush, and spread its wings full width. Soon 
after it became motionless. It is to be regretted that 
this superb moth was not given a natural background, 
but the colour combination it made on the softly 
shaded bark was irresistible. I had begun photograj)h- 
ing moths recently; it was one of my very first, and no 
thought of using it for natural history purposes occurred 
at the time. I merely made what I considered a beauti- 
ful likeness, and this was so appreciated whenever shown, 
that I went farther and painted it in water colours. 

Since moth pictures have accumulated, and moth his- 
tory has engrossed me with its intense interest, I have 

201 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

been very careful in making studies to give each one its 
proper environment when placing it before my camera. 
Of all the flowers in our garden, Celeus prefers the holly- 
hocks. At least it comes to them oftenest and remains 
at them longest. But it moves continually and flies 
so late that a picture of it has been a task. After years 
of fruitless effort, I made one passable snapshot early in 
July, while the light was sufficiently strong that a 
printable picture could be had by intensifying the 
plate, and one good time exposure as a Celeus, with 
half folded wings, clambered over a hollyhock, pos- 
sibly hunting a spot on which to deposit an egg or two. 
The hollyhock painting of this chapter is from this 
study. The flowers were easy but it required a second 
trial to do justice to the complicated markings of the moth. 
This evening lover and strong flyer, with its swal- 
low-like sweep of wing, comes into the colour schemes 
of nature with the otter, that at rare times thrusts 
a sleek gray head from the river, with the gray- 
brown cottontails that bound across the stubble, 
and the coots that herald dawn in the marshes. Ex- 
actly the shades, and almost the markings of its wings 
can be found on very old rail fences. This lint shows 
lighter colour, and even gray when used in the house- 
building of wasps and orioles, but I know places in the 
country where I could carve an almost perfectly shaded 
Celeus wing from a weather-beaten old snake fence rail. 

202 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 



Celeus visits many flowers, almost all of the trumpet- 
shaped ones, in fact, but if I were an artist I scarcely 
would think it right to paint a hollyhock without putting 
King Celeus somewhere in the picture, poised on his throne 
of air before a perfect bloom as he feasts on pollen and 
honey. The hollyhock is a kingly flower, with its regally 
lifted heads of l)right bloom, and that the king of moths 
should show his preference for it seems eminently fitting, 
so we of the Cabin named him King of the Hollyhocks 




'^Her bright gray form that spread so slimly. 

Some fan she seemed of pygmy Queen; 
Her silky cloak that lay so trimly, 

Her wee, icee eyes that lookes so keen. 
Poor moth! near iveeping I lament thee. 

Thy glassy form, thy instant ivoe; 
'Tivas zeal for 'things too high' that sent thee. 
From cheery earth to shades below.'' 

Carlyle. 




lO MOTH 

Chapter Eight 
HERA OF THE CORN 

HYPERCHIRIA lO 

AT THE same time he gave me the Eacles Im- 
perialis moths, Mr. Eisen presented me with 
a pair of Hyperchiria lo. They were nicely 
mounted on the black velvet lining of a large case in my 
room, but I did not care for them in the least. A pic- 
ture I would use could not be made from dead, dried 
specimens, and history learned from books is not worth 
knowing, in comparison with going afield and threshing 
it out for yourself, in your own way. Because the lo 
was yellow, I wanted it — more than several specimens I 

207 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

had not found as yet, for yellow, be it on the face of a 
flower, on the breast of a bird, or in the gold of sunshine, 
always warms the depths of my heart. 

One night in June, sitting with a party of friends in the 
library, a shadow seemed to sweep across a large window 
in front. I glanced up, and arose with a cry that 
must have made those present doubt my sanity. A 
perfect and beautiful lo was walking leisurely across 
the glass. 

"A moth!" I cried. "I have none like it! Deacon, 
get the net!" 

I caught a hat from the couch, and ran to the veranda. 
The Deacon followed with the net. 

"I was afraid to wait," I explained. "Please bring a 
piece of pasteboard, the size of this brim." 

I held the hat while the Deacon brought the board. 
Then with trembling care we slipped it under, and care- 
fully carried the moth into the conservatory. First we 
turned on the light, and made sure that every ventilator 
was closed ; then we released the lo for the night. In the 
morning we found a female clinging to a shelf, dotting 
it with little top-shaped eggs. I was delighted, for I 
thought this meant the complete history of a beautiful 
moth. So exquisite was the living, breathing creature, she 
l)ut to shame the form and colouring of the mounted 
specimens. No wonder I had not cared for them! 

Her fore-wings were a strong purplish brown in general 

208 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

effect, but on close examination one found the purplish 
tinge a commingling of every delicate tint of lavender and 
heliotrope imaginable. They were crossed by escalloj^ed 
bands of grayish white, and flecked with touches of the 
same, seeming as if they had been placed with a brush. 
The back wings were a strong yellow. Each had, for 
its size, an immense black eye-spot, with a blue pupil 
covering three fourths of it, crossed by a perfect comma 
of white, the heads toward the front wings and the curves 
bending outward. Each eye-spot was in a yellow field, 
strongly circled with a sharp black line; then a quarter of 
an inch band of yellow; next a heliotrope circle of equal 
width ; yellow again twice as wide ; then a faint heliotrope 
line; and last a very narrow edging of white. Both wings 
joined the body under a covering of long, silky, purple- 
brown hairs. 

She was very busy with egg depositing, and climbed to 
the twig held before her without offering to fly. The 
camera was carried to the open, set up and focused on a 
favourable spot, while Molly-Cotton walked beside me 
holding a net over the moth in case she took flight in 
outer air. The twig was placed where she woidd be in 
the deepest shade possible while I worked rapidly with 
the camera. 

By this time experience had taught me that these crea- 
tures of moonlight and darkness dislike the open glare of 
day, and if placed in sunlight will take flight in search of 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

shade more quickly than they will move if touched. So 
until my lo settled where I wanted her with the wings 
open, she was kept in the shadow. Only when I grasped 
the bulb and stood ready to snap, was the covering lifted, 
and for the smallest fraction of a second the full light 
fell on her; then darkness again. 

In three days it began to be apparent there was some- 
thing wrong with the eggs. In four it was evident, and 
by five I was not expecting the little caterpillars to emerge 
and they did not. The moth had not mated and the 
eggs were not fertile. Then I saw my mistake. In- 
stead of shutting the female in the conservatory at night, 
I should have tied a soft cotton string firmly around her 
body, and fastened it to some of the vines on the veranda. 
Beyond all doubt, before morning, a male of her kind 
would have been attracted to her. 

One learns almost as much by his mistakes as he prof- 
its by his successes in this world. Writing of this piece 
of stupidity, at a time in my work with moths when 
a little thought would have taught me better, reminds me 
of an experience I had with a caterpillar, the first one I 
ever carried home and tried to feed. I had an order to 
fill for some swamp pictures, and was working almost 
waist deep in a pool in the Limberlost, when on a wild 
grapevine swinging close to my face, I noticed a big cater- 
pillar placidly eating his way around a grape leaf. The 
caterpillar was over four inches long, had no horn, and 

210 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

was of a clear red wine colour, that was beautiful in the 
sunlight. I never before had seen a moth caterpillar 
that was red and I decided it must be rare. As there 
was a wild grapevine growing over the east side of the 
Cabin, and another on the windmill, food of the right 
kind would be plentiful, so I instantly decided to 
take the caterpillar home. It was of the specimens 
that I consider have almost "thrust themselves upon 
me. 

When the pictures were finished and my camera car- 
ried from the swamp, I returned with the clippers and cut 
off vine and caterpillar, to carry with me. On arrival I 
placed it in a large box with sand on the bottom, 
and every few hours took out the wilted leaves, put 
in fresh ones, and sprinkled them to insure crispness, 
and to give a touch of moisture to the atmosphere 
in the box, that would make it seem more like the 
swamp. 

My specimen was readily identified as Philampelus 
Pandorus, of which I had no moth, so I took extra care 
of it in the hope of a new picture in the spring. It had a 
little flat head that could be drawn inside the body like 
a turtle, and on the sides were oblique touches of salmon. 
Something that appeared to be a place for a horn could be 
seen, and a yellow tubercle was surrounded by a black 
line. It ate for three days, and then began racing so 
frantically around the box, I thought confinement nuist 

213 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

be harmful, so I gave it the freedom of the Cabin, warn- 
ing all my family to "look well to their footsteps." It 
stopped travelling after a day or two at a screen covering 
the music-room window, and there I found it one morn- 
ing lying still, a shrivelled, shrunken thing, only half the 
former length, so it was carefully picked up, and thrown 
away ! 

Of course the caterpillar was in the process of changing 
into the pupa, and if I had known enough to lay it on 
the sand in my box, and wait a few days, without doubt a 
fine pupa would have emerged from that shrunken skin, 
from which, in the spring, I could have secured an ex- 
quisite moth, with shades of olive green, flushed with 
pink. The thought of it makes me want to hide my head. 
It was six years before I found a living moth, or saw 
another caterpillar of that species. 

A few days later, while watching with a camera focused 
on the nest of a blackbird in Mrs. Corson's woods east of 
town, Raymond, who was assisting me, crept to my side 
and asked if it would do any harm for him to go specimen 
hunting. The long waits with set cameras were ex- 
tremely tedious to the restless spirits of the boy, 
and the birds were quite tame, the light was under a 
cloud, and the woods were so deep that after he had 
gone a few rods he was from sight, and under cover; 
besides it was great hunting ground, so I gladly told him 
to go. 

214 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 



The place was almost "virgin," much of it impassable 
and fully half of it was under water that lay in deep, 
murky pools throughout summer. In the heat of late June 
everything was steaming; insect life of all kinds was 
swarming; not far away I could hear sounds of trouble 
between the crow and hawk tribes; and overhead a pair 
of black vultures, whose young lay in a big stump in 
the interior, were 
searching for signs 
of food. If ever 
there was a "like- 
ly" place for speci- 
mens it was here; 
Raymond was an 
expert at locating 
them, and fearless 
to foolhardiness. 
He had been gone 
only a short time 
when I heard a cry, and I knew it must mean something, 
in his opinion, of more importance than blackbirds. 

I answered "Coming," and hastilj^ winding the long 
hose, I started in the direction Raymond had taken, 
calling occasionally to make sure I was going the right 
way. When I found him, the boy was standing beside 
a stout weed, hat in hand, intently watching something. 
As I leaned forward I saw that it was a Hyperchiria lo 

215 




SPINNING, CAST SKIN, AND PUPA CASE OF lO 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

that just had emerged from the cocoon, and as yet was 
resting with wings untried. It differed so widely from 
my moth of a few days before, I knew it must be a 
male. 

This was only three fourths as large as mine, but in- 
finitely surpassed it in beauty. Its front wings were 
orange-yellow, flushed with red-purple at the base, and 
had a small irregular brown spot near the costa. Con- 
trary to all precedent, the under side of these wings were 
the most beautiful, and bore the decorations, that in all 
previous experience with moths, had been on the upper 
surface, faintly showing on the under. For instance, 
this irregular brown marking on the upper side proved 
to be a good-sized black spot with a white dot in the 
middle on the under; and there was a curved line of 
red-purple from the apex of the wing sloping to the lower 
edge, nearly half an inch from the margin. The space 
from this line to the base of the wing was covered with 
red-purple down. The back wings were similar to the 
female's, only of stronger colour, and more distinct 
markings; the eye-spot and lining appeared as if they 
had been tinted with strong fresh paint, while the 
edges of the wings lying beside the abdomen had the 
long, silken hairs of a pure, beautiful red their entire 
length. 

A few rods away men were plowing in the adjoining 
corn field, and I remembered that the caterpillar of this 

216 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

moth liked to feed on corn blades, and last summer un- 
doubtedly lived in that very field. When I studied lo his- 
tory in my moth books, I learned these caterpillars ate 
willow, wild cherry, hickory, plum, oak, sassafras, ash, and 
poplar. The caterpillar was green, more like the spiny 
butterfly caterpillars than any moth one I know. It 
had brown and white bands, brown patches, and was 
covered with tufts of stiff upstanding spines that pierced 
like sharp needles. This was not because the caterpillar 
tried to hurt you, but because the spines were on it, and 
so arranged that if pressed against, an acid secretion 
sprang from their base. This spread over the flesh the 
spines touched, stinging for an hour like smartweed, or 
nettles. 

When I identified this caterpillar in my books, it came 
to me that I had known and experienced its touch. But 
it did not forcibly impress me until that instant that I 
knew it best of all, and that it was my childhood enemy of 
the corn. Its habit was to feed on the young blades, 
and cling to them with all its might. If I was playing 
Indian among the rows, or hunting an ear with especially 
long, fine "silk" for a make-believe doll, or helping the 
cook select ears of Jersey Sweet to boil for dinner, and 
accidentally brushed one of these caterpillars with cheek 
or hand, I felt its burning sting long afterward. So I 
disliked those caterpillars. 

For I always had played among the corn. Untold 

219 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

miles I have ridden the plow horses across the spring 
fields, where mellow mould rolled black from the shining 
shares, and the perfumed air made me feel so near flying 
that all I seemed to need was a high start to be able to 
sail with the sentinel blackbird, that perched on the big 
oak, and with one sharp "T'check!" warned his feeding 
flock, surely and truly, whether a passing man carried a 
gun or a hoe. Then came the planting, when bare 
feet loved the cool earth, and trotted over other untold 
miles, while little fingers carefully counted out seven 
grains from the store carried in my apron skirt, as I 
chanted : 

" One for the blackbird, one for the crow, 
One for the cutworm and four to grow." 

Then father covered them to the right depth, and 
stamped each hill with the flat of the hoe, while 
we talked of golden corn bread, and slices of mush, 
fried to a crisp brown that cook would make in the 
fall. We had to plant enough more to feed all the 
horses, cattle, pigs, turkeys, geese, and chickens, 
during the long winter, even if the sun grew uncom- 
fortably warm, and the dinner bell was slow about 
ringing. 

Then there were the Indian days in the field, when a 
fallen eagle feather stuck in a braid, and some poke- 
berry juice on the face, transformed me into the Indian 

220 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Big Foot, and I fled down green aisles of the corn before 
the wrath of the mighty Adam Poe. At times Big Foot 
grew tired fleeing, and said so in remarkably distinct 
English, and then to keep the game going, my sister Ada, 
who played Adam Poe, had to turn and do the fleeing or be 
tomahawked with a stick. 

When the milk was in the ears, they were delicious 
steamed over salted water, or better yet roasted 
before coals at the front of the cooking stove, and 
eaten with butter and salt, — if you have missed the 
flavour of it in that form, really you never have known 
corn ! 

Next came the cutting days. These were after all the 
caterpillars had climbed down, and travelled across the 
fence to spin their cocoons among the leaves of the woods ; 
as if some instinct warned them that they would be 
plowed up too early to emerge, if they remained in the 
field. The boys bent four hills, lashed the tassels to- 
gether for a foundation, and then with one sweep of their 
big knives, they cut a hill at a time, and stacked it in 
large shocks, that lined the field like rows of sentinels, 
guarding the gold of pumpkin and squash tying all around. 
While the shocks were drying, the squirrels, crows, and 
quail took possession, and fattened their sides against 
snow time. 

Then the gathering days of October — they were the 
best days of all! Like a bloom-outlined vegetable bed, 

221 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the goldenrod and iron wort, in gaudy border, filled the 
fence corners of the big fields. A misty haze hung in 
the air, because the Indians were burning the prairies 
to round up game for winter. The cawing of the 
crows, the chatter of blackbirds, and the piping bob- 
whites, sounded so close and so natural out there, while 
the crowing cocks of the barnyard seemed miles away 
and slightly unreal. Grown up and important, I sat 
on a board laid across the wagon bed, and guided the 
team of matched grays between the rows of shocks, and 
around the "pie-timber" as my brother Leander called 
the pumpkins, while father and the boys opened the 
shocks and husked the ears. How the squirrels scam- 
pered to the woods, and to the business of storing away 
the hickory nuts that we could hear rattling down every 
frosty morning! We hurried with the corn; because as 
soon as the last shock was in, we might take the horses, 
wagon, and our dinner, and go all day to the woods, where 
we gathered our winter store of nuts. Leander would take 
a gun along, and shoot one of those saucy squirrels for 
the little sick mother. 

Last came the November night, when the cold had 
shut us in. Then selected ears that had been dried in 
the garret were brought down, white for "rivel" and to 
roll things in to fry and yellow for corn bread and 
mush. A tub full of each was shelled, and sacked to 
carry to the mill the following day. I sat on the floor 

222 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

while father and the boys worked, listening to their talk, 
as I built corncob castles so high they toppled from their 
many stories. Sometimes father made cornstock fiddles 
that would play a real tune. Oh ! the pity of it that every 
little child cannot grow, live, learn and love among the 
corn. For the caterpillars never stopped the fun, even 
the years when they were most numerous. 

The eggs laid Ijy my female never hatched, so I do 
not know this caterpillar in its early stages from expe- 
rience, but I had enough experience with it in my early 
stages, that I do not care if I never raise one. No doubt 
it attains maturity by the same series of moults as the 
others, and its life history is quite similar. The full-fed 
caterpillars spin among the leaves on the ground, and 
with their spines in mind, I would much prefer finding 
a cocoon, and producing a moth from that stage of its 
evolution. 

The following season I had the good fortune to secure 
a male and female lo at the same time and bj' persistence 
induced them to pose for me on an apple branch. There 
was no trouble in securing the male as I desired him, with 
wings folded showing the spots, lining and flushing of 
colour, as described. But the female was a perverse 
little body and though I tried patiently and repeatedly 
she would not lower her wings full width. She climbed 
around with them three fourths spread, producing the 
most beautiful efi^ect of life, but failing to display her 

223 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

striking markings. This is the one disadvantage in 
photographing moths from life. You secure hfehke 
effects but sometimes you are forced to sacrifice their 
wonderful decorations. 





THE SWEETHEART AND THE BRIDE OF LIMBERLOST CABIN 




HIDING AMONG THE ROaKS 

Chapter Nine 
THE SWEETHEART AND THE BRIDE 

CATOCALA AMATRIX CATOCALA NEOGAMA 

THERE are no moths so common with us as these, 
for throughout their season, at any time one is 
wanted, it is sure to be found either on the sweet- 
brier chimbering over the back wall, among the morning- 
glories on one side, the wistaria and wild grape on tlie 
other, or in the shade of the wild clematis in front. On 
very sunny days, they leave the shelter of the vines, and 
rest on the logs of the Cabin close the roof of the verandas. 
Clinging there they appear like large gray flies, for they 
are of peculiar shape, and the front wings completelv 
cover the back when in repose. A third or a half of the 

227 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

back wings show as they are hfted to balance the moths 
when walking over vines and uncertain footing. They 
are quite conspicuous on our Cabin, because it is built of 
the red cedar of Wisconsin; were it of the timber used by 
our grandfathers, these moths with folded wings would 
be almost indistinguishable from their surroundings. 

Few moths can boast greater beauty. The largest 
specimen of the "Sweetheart" that homes with us would 
measure three and one half inches if it would spread its 
wings full width as do the moths of other species. No 
moth is more difficult to describe, because of the delicate 
blending of so many intangible shades. The front wings 
are a pale, brownish gray, with irregular markings of tan, 
and dark splotches outlined with fine deep brown lines. 
The edges are fluted and escalloped, each raised place 
being touched with a small spot of tan, and above it a 
narrow escalloped line of brown. The back wings are 
bright red, crossed by a circular band of brownish black, 
three fourths of an inch from the base, a secondary wider 
band of the same, and edged with pale yellow. 

There is no greater surprise in store for a student of 
moths than to locate a first Catocala Amatrix, and see 
the softly blended gray front wings suddenly lift, and the 
vivid red of the back ones flash out. The under sides of 
the front wings are a warm creamy tan, crossed by wide 
bands of dark brown and gray-brown, ending in a deli- 
cate gray mist at the edges. The back wings are the 

228 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

same tan shade, with red next the abdomen, and crossed 
by brown bands of deeper shade than the fore-wings. 
The shoulders are covered with long silky hair like the 
front wings. This is so delicate that it becomes detached 
at the slightest touch of vine or leaf. The abdomen is 
slightly lighter in colour on top, and a creamy tan be- 
neath. The legs are gray, and the feet to the first joint 
tan, crossed by faint lines of brown. 

The head is small, with l^ig prominent eyes that see 
better by day than most night moths; for Catocala takes 
precipitate flight at the merest shadow. The antennae 
are long, delicate and threadlike, and must be broken 
very easily in the flight of the moth. It is nothing un- 
usual to see them with one antenna shorter than the other, 
half, or entirely gone; and a perfect specimen with both 
antennae, and all the hair on its shoulders, is rare. They 
have a long tongue that uncoils like Lineata, and Celeus, 
so they are feeders, l)ut not of day, for they never take 
flight until evening, except when disturbed. The male 
is smaller than the female, his fore-wings deeply flushed 
with darker colour and the back brighter red with more 
black in the bands. 

Neogama, another member of this family, is a degree 
smaller than Amatrix, but of the same shape. The fore- 
wings are covered with broken lines of different colours, 
the groundwork gray, with gold flushings, the lines and 
dots of the border very like the Sweetheart's. The back 

229 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

wings are pure old gold, almost reddish, with dark 
brownish-black bands, and yellow borders. The top of 
the abdomen is a gray -gold colour. Underneath, the 
markings are nearly the same as Amatrix, but a gold 
flush suffuses the moth. 

There are numbers of these Catocala moths running 
the colour scheme of yellow, from pale chrome to umber. 
Many shade from light pink through the reds to a dark 
blood colour. Then there is a smaller number having 
brown back wings and with others they are white. 

The task of tracing the markings and colouring the 
general ground of the fore-wings of these moths, was 
one of the most difficult of the book. I did the best I 
could, and the engravers worked faithfully. I fear the 
Sweetheart is a trifle darker than she should be for an 
average representation; the Bride is better. But it must 
be remembered that these colours are copied from fresh 
specimens. The moths live the summer season and grow 
more of a grayish tan as they age. Like all others they 
fade rapidly when mounted. I never have seen either a 
Sweetheart or Bride among museum specimens that I 
would have recognized without its identifying label. 

Just why these moths, when they are so very wild, seek 
the shade of my vines and veranda persistently, I do 
not understand. It is only by the use of extreme care 
in handling them when I was so fortunate as to capture 
one of each, that I have secured any likenesses at all. 

230 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Very few are satisfactory, for the instant you approacli 
these moths closely, they go battering against the logs, 
or tearing through vines until, if a photograph of one 
is taken, it frequently shows a broken antenna, hairless 
shoulders, or a torn wing. The only way I know to 
photograph them is to focus on some favourable spot, 
mark the place your plate covers in length and width, 
and then do your best to coax your subjects in range. If 
they can be persuaded to walk, they will open their wings 
to a greater or less degree. A reproduction would do 
them no sort of justice unless the markings of the back 
wings shov\'. It is on account of the gorgeous colourings 
of these that scientists call the species "after-wings." 
Still, while writing, it appeals to me that a picture of 
Catocala with folded wings, as they cling to the logs of 
the Cabin in the "fly" position, would be worth while, 
and the coming summer I intend to try for one. 

In that attitude I must look twice in order to distin- 
guish them from the Cabin tree toad. He shares the logs 
of the front veranda in common with the Sweetheart 
and Bride, though on very hot, dry days, he abandons 
wood and lies on the earth of one particular big pot of 
palms that stands on a table close a window. In damp 
weather he sings beautifully; and at night he is a never- 
ending source of anuisement. Dozens of visitors at the 
Cabin have had the pleasure of watching him. His feeding 
ground is a six-foot square plate glass window, the same 

233 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

on which I found the lo and several other fine moths. As 
soon as the inside hgiits are on, myriads of mosquitoes, 
gnats, small flies, and moths gather at the top of this 
window. Then up comes Mr. Tree Toad, and no one 
can imagine just where he stores all he consumes. His 
method is to sit immovably in one spot until something 
approaches. Then, so quietly the thrust is almost invis- 
ible, out darts his tongue, and the insect is gone. After 
taking two or three in one place, he moves a few feet, and 
repeats the process. Several times I placed a camera, 
focused on a limb or tree trunk, gently transfeiTed him 
and took his picture. If you see a tree toad among the 
illustrations of any book of mine, you may be reasonably 
sure that he posed for it ; although I did once carry a pair 
from the swamps in Michigan and make several studies 
before releasing them 

During the summer of 1904 he slept among the flower 
pots by day, and went hunting on the window at night; 
where he wintered we did not know. The summer of 
1905 he, or one that appeared similar to him, and pur- 
sued the same methods, homed among the palms, and 
hunted on the window. In the fall, this one entered the 
basement before the ventilators were closed. The fur- 
nace kept the temperature even, and above freezing. 
What he ate I cannot surmise; perhaps there were spiders. 
Anyway, he was alive, and singing throughout his time 
of hibernation. Every few days we heard him, and in 

234 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the warm sunny weather of that December and the fore 
part of January he was esiDecially tuneful, to our dehght 
and the great amusement of many friends. In writing 
from college, Molly-Cotton always inquired concerning 
his welfare. He was all right until March, then his song 
ceased and the following summer the gray spots close the 
veranda roof were Sweethearts and Brides, for the tree 
toad never came again. 

One would suppose that with so many specimens of 
this beautifid species living with us and swarming the 
swamp close by, I would be prepared to give their com- 
plete life history; but I know less concerning them than 
any other moths common with us, and all the scientific 
works I can buy afford little help. Professional lepidop- 
terists dismiss them with few words. One would-be 
authority disposes of the species with half a dozen lines. 
You can find at least a hundred Catocala reproduced from 
museum specimens and their habitat given, in the Hol- 
land "]\Ioth Book," but I fail to learn what I most desire 
to know: what these moths feed on; how late they live; 
how their eggs appear; where they are deposited; which 
is their caterpillar; what does it eat; and where and how 
does it pupate. 

Packard, in his "Guide to the Study of Insects," offers 
in substance this much help upon the subject: "The 
genus is beautiful, the species numerous, of large size, 
often three-inch expansion, and in repose form a flat 

235 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

roof. The larva is elongate, slender, flattened beneath 
and spotted with black, attenuated at each end, with 
fleshy filaments on the sides above the legs, while the 
head is flattened and rather forked above. It feeds on 
trees and rests attached to the trunks. The pupa is 
covered with a bluish efflorescence, enclosed in a slight 
cocoon of silk, spun amongst leaves or bark." 

This will tend to bear out my contention that scientific 
works are not the help they should be to the Nature Lover. 
Heaven save me from starting to locate Catocala moths, 
eggs, caterpillars or pupse on the strength of this infor- 
mation. I might find moths by accident; nothing on the 
subject of eggs; neither colour of body, characteristics 
nor food, to help identify caterpillars; for the statement, 
"it feeds on trees," cannot be considered exactly illu- 
minating when we remember the world full of trees on 
which caterpillars are feeding; and should one search for 
cocoon encased pupae among the leaves and bark of tree- 
tops or earth? 

The most reliable information I have had, concerning 
these moths of which I know least, comes from Professor 
Rowley. He is the only lepidopterist of four to whom I 
applied, who could tell me any of the things I am in- 
terested in knowing. He writes in substance: *'Tlie 
Bride and Sweetheart are common northern species, as 
are most of the other members of the group. The Ama- 
trix, with its red wings, is called the Sweetheart because 

236 



I 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

amor means love, and red is love's own colour. The 
caterpillar feeds on willow. The Catocala of the yellow 
* after-wings' is commonly called the Bride, because 
Neogama, its scientific name, means recently wedded. 
Its caterpillar feeds on walnut leaves. 

"If you will examine the under side of the body of a 
Catocala moth you will find near the junction of the 
thorax and abdomen on either side, large open organs re- 
minding one of the ears of a grasshopper, which are on 
the sides of the first abdominal segment. Examine the 
bodies of Sphinges and other moths for these same open- 
ings. They appear to be ears. Catocala moths feed 
on juices, and live most of the summer season. Numbers 
of them have been found sipping sap at a tree freshly cut 
and you know we take them at night with bait. 

*'New Orleans sugar and cider or sugar and stale beer 
are the usual baits. This 'concoction,' is put on the 
bodies of trees with a brush, between eight and ten o'clock 
at night. During good Catocala years, great numbers of 
these moths may be taken as they feed at the sweet 
syrup. So it is proved that their food is sap, honeydew, 
and other sugary liquids. INIr. George Dodge assures me 
that he has taken Catocala abbreviatella at milkweed 
blooms about eight o'clock of early July evenings. Other 
species also feed on flowers." 

You will observe that in his remarks about the "open 
organs on the side of the first abdominal segment," 

239 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Professor Rowley may have settled the "ear" question. 
I am going to keep sharp watch for these organs, here- 
after. I am led to wonder if one could close them in 
some way and detect any difference in the moth's sense 
of hearing after having done so. 

All of us are enthusiasts about these moths with their 
modest fore-wings and the gaudy brilliance of the wonder- 
ful "after-wings," that are so bright as to give common 
name to the species. We are studying them constantly 
and hope soon to learn all we care to know of any moths, 
for our experience with them is quite limited when com- 
pared with other visitors from the swamp. But think of 
the poetry of adding to the long list of birds, animals 
and insects that temporarily reside with us, a Sweetheart 
and a Bride! 





VELVET ROBED AND JEWEL BEDECKED THE GIANT SEEKS A MATE 



Chapter Ten 
THE GIANT GAMIN 

TELEA POLYPHEMUS 




A COCOON JUST FINISHED BY POLYPHEMUS 



Ti :vi E 
cannot 
be used 
to tell of mak- 
ing the acquain- 
tance of this 
moth until how 
well wort h 
knowing it is, 
has been ex- 
plained. That it 
is a big birdlike 
fellow, with a 
six inch sweep 
of wing, is indi- 
cated by the fact 
that it is named 
in honor of the 
giant Polyphe- 
m u s . T e 1 e a 



243 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

means "the end," and as scientists fail to explain the 
appropriateness of this, I am at liberty to indulge a 
theory of my own. Nature made this handsome moth 
last, and as it was the end, surpassed herself as a finish- 
ing touch on creatures that are, no doubt, her frailest and 
most exquisite creation. 

Polyphemus is rich in shadings of many subdued col- 
ours, that so blend and contrast as to give it no superior 
in the family of short-lived lovers of moonlight. Its 
front wings are a complicated study of many colours, for 
some of which it would be difficult to find a name. Really, 
it is the one moth that must be seen and studied in 
minutest detail to gain an idea of its beauty. The near- 
est I can come to the general groundwork of the wing is a 
rich brown-yellow. The costa is gray, this colour spread- 
ing in a widening line from the base of the wing to more 
than a quarter of an inch at the tip, and closely peppered 
with black. At the base, the wing is covered with silky 
yellow-brown hairs. As if to outline the extent of these, 
comes a line of pinkish white, and then one of rich golden 
brown, shading into the prevailing colour. 

Close the middle of the length of the wing, and half 
an inch from the costa, is a transparent spot like isin- 
glass, so clear that fine print can be read through it. 
This spot is outlined with a canary yellow band, and that 
with a narrow, but sharp circle of black. Then comes a 
cloudlike rift of golden brown, drifting from the costa 

244 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

across the wing, but growing fainter until it merges with 
the general colour near the abdomen. Then half an 
inch of the yellow-brown colour is peppered with black, 
similar to the costa; this grows darker until it terminates 
in a quarter of an inch wide band of almost gray-black 
crossing the wing. Next this, comes a narrower band 
of pinkish white. The edge begins with a quarter of an 
inch band of clear yellow-brown, and widens as the wing 
curves until it is half an inch at the point. It is the 
lightest colour of rotten apple. The only thing I ever 
have seen in nature exactly similar was the palest shade 
of "mother" found in barrels of vinegar. A very light 
liver colour comes close it. On the extreme tip is a 
velvety oval, half black and half pale pink. 

The back wings are the merest trifle stronger in this 
yellow-brown colour, and with the exception of the brown 
rift are the same in marking, only that all colour, similar 
to the brown, is a shade deeper. 

The "piece de resistance" of the back wing, is the eye- 
spot. The transparent oval is a little smaller. The 
canary band is wider, and of stronger colour. The black 
band around the lower half is yet wider, and of long 
velvety hairs. It extends in an oval above the trans- 
parent spot fully half an inch, then shades through pea- 
cock blue, and gray to the hairlike black line enclosing 
the spot. 

The under sides of the wings are pure tan, clouded and 

245 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

lined with shades of rich brown. The transparent spots 
are outhned with canary, and show a faint hne drawn 
across the middle the long way. 

The face is a tiny brown patch with small eyes, for the 
size of the moth, and large brown antennae, shaped like 
those of Cecropia. The gray band of the costa crosses 
the top of the head. The shoulders are covered with 
pinkish, yellow-brown hair. The top and sides of the 
abdomen are a lighter shade of the same. 

The under side of the abdomen is darker brown, and 
the legs brown with very dark brown feet. These de- 
scriptions do the harmonizing colours of this moth no 
sort of justice, but are the best I can offer. In some lights 
it is a rich yellow-brown, and again a pink flush pervades 
body and wings. 

My first experience with a living Polj^phemus (I know 
Telea is shorter, but it is not suitable, while a giant 
among moths it is, so that name is best) occurred several 
years ago. A man brought me a living Polyphemus 
battered to rags and fringes, antennae broken and three 
feet missing. He had found a woman trying to beat the 
clinging creature loose from a door screen, with a towel, 
before the wings were hardened for flight, and he rescued 
the remains. There was nothing to say; some people 
are not happy unless they are killing helpless, harmless 
creatures; and there was nothing to do. 

The moth was useless for a study, while its broken 

246 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

antennse set it crazy, and it shook and trembled contin- 
ually, going out in a short time without depositing any 
eggs. One thing I did get was complete identification, and 
another, to attribute the experience to Mrs. Comstock in 
"A Girl of the Limberlost," when I wished to make her 
do something particularly disagreeable. In learning a 
moth I study its eggs, caterpillars, and cocoons, so that 
fall Raymond and I began searching for Polyphemus. I 
found our first cocoon hanging by a few spun threads of 
silk, from a willow twig overhanging a stream in the 
Limberlost, 

A queer little cocoon it was. The body was tan col- 
our, and thickly covered with a white sprinkling like 
lime. A small thorn tree close the cabin yielded Ray- 
mond two more; but these were darker in colour, and 
each was spun inside three thorn leaves so firmly that it 
appeared triangular in shape. The winds had blown the 
cocoons against the limbs and worn away the projecting 
edges of the leaves, but the mid ribs and veins showed 
plainly. In all we had half a dozen of these cocoons 
gathered from different parts of the swamp, and we found 
them dangling from a twig of willow or hawthorn, by a 
small piece of spinning. During the winter these oc- 
cupied the place of state in the conservatory, and were 
watched every day. They were kept in the coolest spot, 
but where the sun reached them at times. Always in 
watering the flowers, the hose was turned on them, be- 

249 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

cause they would have been in the rain if they had been 
left put of doors, and conditions should be kept as natural 
as possible. 

Close time for emergence I became very uneasy, be- 
cause the conservatory was warm ; so I moved them to my 
sleeping room, the coolest in the cabin, where a fireplace, 
two big windows and an outside door, always open, pro- 
vide natural atmospheric conditions, and where I 
would be sure to see them every day. I hung the twigs 
over a twine stretched from my dresser to the window 
sill. One day in May, when the trees were in full bloom, 
I was working on a tulip bed under an apple tree in the 
garden, when Molly-Cotton said to me, "How did you 
get that cocoon in your room wet?" 

*'I did not water am^ of the cocoons," I answered. 
"I have done no sprinkling to-day. If they are wet, 
it has come from the inside." 

Molly-Cotton dropped her trowel. "One of them was 
damp on the top before lunch," she cried. "I just now 
thought of it. The moths are coming!" She started 
on a run and I followed, but stopped to wash my 
hands, so she reached them first, and her shout told the 
news. 

" Hurry ! " she cried. " Hurry ! One is out, and another 
is just struggling through ! " 

Quickly as I could I stood beside her. One Poly- 
phemus female, a giant indeed, was clinging to a twig 

250 




OCCUPIED AND DESERTED TENEMENTS 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

with her feet, and from her shoulders depended her wings, 
wet, and w rinkled as they had been cramped in the pupa 
case. Even then she had expanded in body until it 
seemed impossible that she had emerged from the open- 
ing of the vacant cocoon. The second one had its front 
feet and head out, and was struggling frantically to free 
its shoulders. A fresh wet spot on the top of another 
cocoon, where the moth had ejected the acid with which it 
is provided to soften the spinning, was heaving with the 
pushing head of the third. 

Molly-Cotton was in sympathy with the imprisoned 
moths. 

"Why don't you get something sharp, and split the 
cocoons so they can get out.^" she demanded. "Just 
look at them struggle! They will kill themselves!" 

Then I explained to her that if we wanted big, perfect 
moths we must not touch them. That the evolution of 
species was complete to the minutest detail. The prov- 
idence that supplied the acid, required that the moths 
make the fight necessary to emerge alone, in order to 
strengthen them so they would be able to walk and cling 
with their feet, while the wings drooped and dried prop - 
erly. That if I cut a case, and took out a moth with no 
effort on its part, it would be too weak to walk, or bear 
its weight, and so would fall to the floor. Then because 
of not being in the right position, the wings would harden 
half spread, or have broken membranes and never de- 

253 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

velop h\\\y. So instead of doing a kindness I really would 
work ruination. 

"Oh, I see!" cried the w^ondering girl, and her eyes 
were large enough to have seen anything, while her brain 
was racing. If you want to awaken a child and teach it 
to think, give object lessons such as these, in natural 
history and study with it, so that every miraculous point 
is grasped when reached. We left the emerging moths 
long enough to set up a camera outside, and focus on an 
old tree. Then we hurried back, almost praying that the 
second moth would be a male, and dry soon enough that 
the two could be pictured together, before the first one 
would be strong enough to fly. 

The following three hours were spent with them, and 
every minute enjoyed to the fullest. The first to emerge 
was dry, and pumping her wings to strengthen them 
for flight; the second was in condition to pose, but a 
disappointment, for it was another female. The third 
was out, and by its smaller size, brighter markings and 
broad antennae we knew it was a male. His "antlers" 
were much wider than those of the first two, and where 
their markings were pink, his were so vivid as to be al- 
most red, and he was very furry. He had, in fact, almost 
twice as much long hair as the others, so he undoubtedly 
was a male, but he was not sufficiently advanced to pose 
with the females, and I was in doubt as to the wisest 
course to pursue. 

254 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

*' Hurry him up!" suggested Molly-Cotton. "Tie a 
a string across the window and hang him in the sunshine. 
I'll bring a fan, and stir the air gently." 

This plan seemed feasible, and when the twine was 
ready, I lifted his twig to place it in the new location. 
The instant I touched his resting place and lifted its 
weight from the twine both females began ejecting a 
creamy liquid. They ruined the frescoing behind them, 
as my first Cecropia soiled the lace curtain when I was 
smaller than Molly-Cotton at that time. We tacked a 
paper against the wall to prevent further damage. A 
point to remember in moth culture, is to be ready for 
this occurrence before they emerge, if you do not want 
stained frescoing, floors, and hangings. 

In the sunshine and fresh air the male began to dry 
rapidly, and no doubt he understood the presence of his 
kind, for he was much more active than the females. He 
climbed the twig, walked the twine body pendent, and 
was so energetic that we thought we dared not trust him 
out of doors; but when at every effort to walk or fly he 
only attempted to reach the females, we concluded that 
he would not take wing if at liberty. By this time he 
was fully developed, and so perfect he would serve for a 
study. 

I polished the lenses, focused anew on the tree, marked 
the limits of exposure, inserted a plate, and had every- 
thing ready. Then I brought out the female, Molly- 

^55 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Cotton walking beside me hovering her with a net. The 
moth chmbcd from the twig to the tree, and chmg there, 
her wings spread fiat, at times setting them quivering in 
a fluttering motion, or raising them. While Molly- 
Cotton guarded her I returned for the male, and found 
him with wings so hardened that he could raise them 
above his back, and lower them full width. 

I wanted my study to dignify the term, so I planned it 
to show the under wings of one moth, the upper of the 
other. Then the smaller antennae and large abdomen of 
the female were of interest. I also thought it would be 
best to secure the male with wings widespread if possible, 
because his colour was stronger, his markings more pro- 
nounced. So I helped the female on a small branch fac- 
ing the trunk of the tree, and she rested with raised wings 
as I fervently hoped she would. The male I placed on 
the trunk, and with wide wings he immediately started 
toward the female, while she advanced in his direction. 
This showed his large antennae and all markings and 
points especially noteworthy, being good composition 
as well, for it centred interest; but there was one objec- 
tion. It gave the male the conspicuous place and made 
him appear the larger because of his nearness to the lens 
and his wing spread; while as a matter of fact, the female 
had almost an inch more sweep than he, and was bigger 
at every point save the antennae. 

The light was full and strong, the lens the best money 

256 



I 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

could buy, the plate seven by nine inches. By this time 
long practice had made me rather expert in using my 
cameras. When the advancing pair were fully inside 
my circle of focus, I made the first exposure. Then I 
told ]\Iolly-Cotton to keej) tlieni as nearly as possible 
where they were, while I took one breathless peep at the 
ground glass. Talk about exciting work ! No better focus 
could be had on them, so I shoved in another plate with 
all speed, and made a second exposure, which was no 
better than the first. Had there been time, I would have 
made a third to be sure, for plates are no object when a 
study is at all worth while. As a rule each succeeding 
effort enables you to make some small change for the 
better, and you must figure on always having enough to 
lose one through a defective plate or ill luck in develop- 
ment, and yet end with a picture that will serve your 
purpose. 

Then we closed the ventilators and released the moths 
in the conservator3\ The female I placed on a lemon 
tree in a shad}' spot, and the male at the extreme far 
side to see how soon he woidd find her. We had sup- 
posed it would be dark, but they were well acquainted 
by dusk. The next morning she was dotting eggs over 
the plants. 

The other cocoons produced mostly female living 
moths, save one that was lost in emergence. I tried to 
help when it was too late; but cutting open the cocoon 

259 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

afterward proved the moth defective. The wings on one 
side were only about half size, and on the other little 
patches no larger than my thumb nail. The body was 
shrunken and weakly. 

At this time, as I remember, Cecropia eggs were the 
largest I had seen, but these were larger; the same shape 
and of a white colour with a brown band. The moth 
dotted them on the under and upper sides of leaves, on 
sashes and flower pots, tubs and buckets. They turned 
brown as the days passed. The little caterpillars that 
emerged from them were reddish brown, and a quarter of 
an inch long. 

I could not see my way to release a small army of two or 
three hundred of these among my plants, so when they 
emerged I held a leaf before fifty, that seemed liveliest, 
and transferred them to a big box. The remainder I 
placed with less ceremony, over mulberry, elm, maple, 
wild cherry, grape, rose, apple and pear, around the 
Cabin, and gave the ones kept in confinement the same 
diet. 

The leaves given them always were dipped in water to 
keep them fresh longer, and furnish moisture for the 
feeders. They grew by a series of moults, like all the 
others I had raised or seen, and were full size in forty- 
eight days, but travelled a day or two before beginning 
the pupa stage of their existence. 

The caterpillars were big fellows; the segments deeply 

260 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

cut; the bodies yellow-green, with a few sparse scattering 
hairs, and on the edge of each segment, from a triple row 
of dots arose a tiny, sharp spine. Each side had series 
of black touches and the head could be drawn inside the 
thorax. They were the largest in circumference of any 
I had raised, but only a little over three inches long. 

I arranged both leaves and twigs in the boxes, but they 
spun among the leaves, and not dangling from twigs, as 
all the cocoons I had found outdoors were placed previous 
to that time. Since, I have found them spun lengthwise 
of twigs in a brush heap. The cocoons of these I had 
raised were whiter than those of the free caterpillars, 
and did not have the leaves fastened on the outside, but 
were woven in a nest of leaves, fastened together by 
threads. 

Polyphemus moths are night flyers, and do not feed. 
I have tried to tell how beautiful they are, with indifferent 
success, and they are common with me. Since I learned 
them, I find their cocoons easiest to discover. Through 
the fall and winter, when riding on trains, I see them 
dangling from wayside thorn bushes. Once, while taking 
a walk with Raymond in late November, he located one 
on a thorn tree in a field beside the road, but he has the 
eyes of an Indian. 

These are the moths that city people can cultivate, 
for in Indianapolis, in early December, I saw fully one 
half as many Polyphemus cocoons on the trees as there 

261 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

were Cecropia, and I could have gathered a bushel of 
them. They have emerged in perfection for me always, 
with one exception. Personally, I have found more 
Polyphemus than Cecropia. 

These moths are the gamins of their family, and love 
the streets and lights at night. Under an arc light at 
Wabash, Indiana, I once picked up as beautiful a speci- 
men of Polyphemus as I ever saw, and the following 
day a friend told me that several had been captured the 
night before in the heart of town. Of course the high 
bright lights attracted them, but they have a peculiar 
habit of alighting on the pavement, instead of on trees or 
bushes. I think this moth is as easy to capture, or to find 
in the cocoon and preserve through the winter, as any. 
To an army of Nature Lovers its rich shades, and won- 
derful markings will be most attractive. 

I experienced great joy in painting the pair on the log, 
and also a very large, beautiful specimen secured several 
years later on my wistaria vines. INIuch delicate blending 
of shades was required to reproduce them, but their colours 
were so distinct there was no chance to fail. They were 
not nearly so difficult as Cecropia. In Polyphemus the col- 
ours softly blended, and the shadings were easily laid on. 
But the Robin moth with its sharp contrasts of fine col- 
oured lines was a task, and with the exceptions of Regalis 
and the female Promethea, was the most difficult moth 
of all to paint. The first proof from my study of Poly- 

262 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

pliemus appeared as if in the exacting work of super- 
imposing colour, a tinge of green fiushed the moths. If 
this cannot be removed it is wrong. They should be 
pure tans and browns as described, with pink flushing. 




*^When the fierce northwestern blast 
Cools the sea and land so far and fast — 
Thou already slumberest deep; 
Woe and want thou canst outsleep; 
Want and ivoe, which torture us. 
Thy sleep makes ridiculous." 

— Emerson 



Chapter Eleven 
THE GARDEN FLY 

PROTOPARCE CAROLINA 

PEOTOPARCE 
CAROLINA 
is a " cousin " 
of Celeiis, and so nearly 
its double that the cat- 
erpillars and moths 
must be seen together 
to be differentiated by 
amateurs; while it is 
doubtful if skilled 
scientists can always 
identify the pupa cases 
with certainty. Carol- 
ina is more common in 
the south, but it is 
frequent throughout the north. Its caterpillars eat the 
same food as Celeus, and are the same size. They are 
a dull green, while Celeus is shining, and during the suc- 
cession of moults, they show slight variations in colour. 
They pupate in a hole in the ground. The moths on 

267 




GARDEN FLY 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

close examination show quite a difference from Celeus. 
They are darker in color. The fore-wings lack the effect 
of being laid off in lines. The colour is a mottling of 
almost black, darkest gray, lighter gray, brown, and 
white. The back wings are crossed by wavy bands of 
brownish gray, black, and tan colour, and the yellow 
markings on the abdomen are larger. 

In repose, these moths fold the front wings over the 
back like large flies. In fact, in the south they are called 
the "Tobacco Fly"; and we of the north should add the 
"Tomato and Potato Fly." Because I thought such 
a picture would be of interest, I reproduced a pair — the 
male as he clung to a piece of pasteboard in the "fly" 
attitude. 

Celeus and Carolina caterpillars come the nearest 
being pests of those of any large moth, because they feed 
on tomato, potato, and tobacco, but they also eat jim- 
son weed, ground cherry, and several vines that are of 
no use to average folk. 

The Carolina moths come from their pupa cases as 
featherweights step into the sparring ring. They feed 
partially by day, and their big eyes surely see more than 
those of most other moths, that seem small and deep- 
set in comparison. Their legs are long, and not so hairy 
as is the rule. They have none of the blind, aimless, 
helpless appearance of moths that do not feed. They 
exercise violently in the pupa cases before they burst 

2G8 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the shields, and when they emerge their eyes glow and 
dilate. They step with firmness and assurance, as if 
they knew where they wanted to go, and how to arrive. 
They are of direct swift flight, and much experience and 
dexterity are required to take them on wing. 

Both my Carolina moths emerged in late afternoon, 
about four o'clock, near the time their kind take flight 
to hunt for food. The light was poor in the Cabin, so I 
set up my camera and focused on a sweetbrier climbing 
over the back door. At that hour the sun was so low 
there w^as not good light in the garden on anything 
native to Carolina; besides, I had seen a free moth of 
this species darting over the roses the previous evening 
hunting sweets, so I knew I would be right in picturing 
one there. 

The newly emerged moth was travelling briskly in 
that first exercise it takes, while I arranged my camera; 
so by the time I was ready, it had reached the place to 
rest quietly until its wings developed. Carolina climbed 
on my finger with all assurance, walked briskly from it 
to the roses, and clung there firmly. 

The wet wings dropped into position, and the sun 
dried them rapidly. I fell in love with my subject. He 
stepped around so jauntily in comparison with most 
moths. The picture he made while clinging to the roses 
during the first exposure was lovely. The flowers were 
at their prime, and their delicate pinks and greens made 

269 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

a setting that could not have been surpassed in harmony, 
and it had the added attraction of bemg appro- 
priate. 

His slender, trim legs seemed to have three long joints, 
and two short in the feet. In his sidewise position 
toward the lens, the abdomen showed silver-white be- 
neath, silvery gray on the sides, and large patches of 
orange surrounded by black, with touches of white on 
top. His wings were folded together on his back as they 
drooped, showing only the under sides, and on these the 
markings were more clearly defined than on top. In 
the sunlight the fore pair were a warm tan gray, exquis- 
itely lined and shaded. They were a little more than 
half covered by the back pair, that folded over them. 
These were a darker gray, with tan and almost black 
shadings, and crossed by sharply zig-zagging Hues of 
black. The gray legs were banded by lines of white. 
The first pair clung to the stamens of the rose, the second 
to the petals, and the third stretched out and rested on 
a leaf. 

There were beautiful markings of very dark colour and 
white on the thorax, head, shoulders, and back wings 
next the body. The big eyes, quite the largest of any 
moth I remember, reminded me of owl eyes in the light. 
The antennae, dark, gray -brown on top, and white on the 
under side, turned back and drooped beside the costa, 
no doubt in the position they occupied in the pupa case. 

270 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

The location was so warm, and the moth dried so 
rapidly, that by the time two good studies were made of 
him in this position, he felt able to step to some leaves, 
and with no warning whatever, reversed his wings to the 
"fly" position, so that only the top side of the front pair 
showed. The colour was very rich and beautiful, but 
so broken in small patches and lines, as to be difficult to 
describe. With the reversal of the wings the antennae 
flared a little higher, and the exercise of the sucking tube 
began. The moth would expose the whole length of 
the tube in a coil, which it would make larger and con- 
tract by turns, at times drawing it from sight. When it 
was uncoiled the farthest, a cleft in the face where it 
fitted could be seen. I tried to take a snapshot showing 
this tongue exercise, but the dark leaves made such a 
poor background that the picture is not much of a success. 

The next day my second Carolina case produced a 
beautiful female. The history of her emergence was 
exactly similar to that of the male. Her head, shoul- 
ders, and abdomen seemed nearly twice the size of his, 
while her wings but a trifle, if any larger. 

As these moths are feeders, and live for weeks, I pre- 
sume when the female has deposited her eggs, the abdo- 
men contracts, and loses its weight so that she does not 
require the large wings of the females that only deposit 
their eggs and die. They are very heavy, and if forced 
to flight must have big wings to support them. I was 

271 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

so interested in this that I shghtly chloroformed the 
female, and made a study of the pair. The male was 
fully alive and alert, but they had not mated, and he 
would not take wing. He clung in his natural position, 
so that he resembled a big fly, on the smooth side of the 
sheet of corrugated paper on which I placed the female. 
His wings folded over each other. The abdomen and 
the antennae were invisible, because they were laid flat on 
the costa of each wing. 

The female clung to the board, in any position in 
which she was jilaced. Her tongue readily uncoiled, 
showing its extreme length, and curled around a pin. 
With a camel's-hair brush I gently spread her wings to 
show how near they were the size of the male's, and how 
much larger her body was. 

Her fore-wangs were a trifle lighter in colour than the 
male's, and not so broken with small markings. The 
back wings were very similar. Her antennae stood 
straight out from the head on each side, of their own 
volition and differed from the male's. It has been my 
observation that in repose these moths fold the antennne 
as showm by the male. The position of the female was 
unnatural. In flight, or when feeding, the antennae 
are raised, and used as a guide in finding food flowers. 
A moth with broken antennae seems dazed and helpless, 
and in great distress. 

I have learned by experience in handling moths, that 

272 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

when I induce one to climb upon bark, branch, or flower 
for a study, they seldom place their wings as I want them. 
Often it takes long and patient coaxing, and they are 
sensitive to touch. If I try to force a fore-wing with 
my fingers to secure a wider sweep, so that the markings 
of the back wings show, the moths resent it by closing 
them closer than before, climbing to a different location 
or often taking flight. 

But if I use a fine camel's-hair brush, that lacks the 
pulsation of circulation, and gently stroke the wing, and 
sides of the abdomen, the moths seems to like the sensa- 
tion and grow sleepy or hypnotized. By using the 
brush I never fail to get wing extension that w ill show 
markings and at the same time the feet and body are in 
a natural position. After all is said there is to say, and 
done there is to do, the final sunniiing up and judgment 
of any w^ork on Natural History will depend upon whether 
it is true to nature. It is for this reason I often have 
waited for days and searched over untold miles to find 
the right location, even the exact leaf, twig or branch on 
which a subject should be placed. Then I have used 
from one to three assistants, worked under the nerve 
racking suspense of fearing my moth would take sudden 
flight, and escape entirely or be broken and disfigured in 
recapture, in order that these studies may have an out- 
door atmosphere, a proper background, middle distance 
and foreground, the subject sharply outlined in a natural 

275 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

pose, and nothing introduced that detracts from the 
central interest. 

Ahnost without exception each ilhistration of this book 
conforms to these requirements; if one does not, I have 
explained why in the text of that chapter. Then with 
the finest water colours and brushes I could buy, using 
the living, newly emerged moth for my model, I have 
copied line and colour as exactly as lay in my power. 
Having undertaken the work with no knowledge of 
water colours and gone on with it by applying what I 
knew of work in oils to the different medium, it is very 
possible that some of it may appear crude in its finer 
details, but you will have the satisfaction of knowing 
you possess a handmade, homemade book, and that 
colour markings, pose, and background are right. 

Perhaps you have been smiling as you read because I 
have dignified my illustration by repeatedly referring to 
it as "studies," of differing subjects. If you have, 
think again before you indulge in any more mirth at 
my expense. I have undertaken all the work and used 
the time necessary to secure these illustrations as I have 
described, also I have gone farther and raised most of 
the subjects by hand, which begins with watching the 
egg period, runs through weeks of exacting and scrupu- 
lous work in feeding and cleaning after caterpillars, 
providing spinning locations, properly caring for cocoon 
or pupae through months of changing winter weather, 

276 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

delaying emergence until the season is sufficiently ad- 
vanced to provide the natural, outdoor background for 
each species., then carrying them to it and inducing 
them to pose naturally. I frankly admit that I consider 
painstaking work, extending over a year in most instances, 
elevates these illustrations to the dignity of studies. I 
plead guilty to the use of an anaesthetic in this chapter 
onl}' to show the tongue extension of Carolina, because 
it is the extremest with which I am acquainted; and to 
coaxing wide wing sweep with the camel's-hair brush; 
otherwise either the fact that my subjects are too close 
emergence ever to have taken flight, or sex attraction 
alone holds them. 

If you do not discover love running through every 
line of this text and see it shining from the face of each 
study and painting, you do not read aright and your 
eyes need attention. Again and again to the protests 
of my family, I have made answer, 

" To work we love we rise betimes, and go to it with delight." 
From the middle of ^Nlay to the end of June of the year 
I was most occupied with this book, my room was filled 
with cocoons and pupa cases. The encased moths I 
had reason to believe were on the point of appearing lay 
on a chair beside my bed or a tray close my pillow. 
That month I did not average two hours of sleep in a 
night, and had less in the daytime. I not only arose 
"betimes," but at any time I heard a scratching and 

279 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

tugging moth working to enter the world, and when its 
head was out, I was up and ready with note book and 
camera. Day helped the matter but shghtly, for any 
moth emerging in the night had to be provided a loca- 
tion, and pictured before ten o'clock or it was not safe to 
take it outside. Then I had literally "to fly,*' to develop 
the plate, make my print and secure exact colour repro- 
duction while the moth was fresh. If these i:)aintings 
appear brighter to you tlian any others you ever have 
seen, remember this; and also compare the positions in 
which these moths are reproduced ^^"ith your favourite 
work on this subject. If a moth shows no feet, its 
antenna? always stand stiffly forward, its abdomen is 
shrunken and shrivelled, and its wings are raised above 
a straight line crossing the top of the thorax level with 
the wing bases, by these signs you ^^ ill know it is a dried, 
faded subject from a museum or private collecti()n, and 
that its colours are as untrue to life as its position and form. 
For this is a point to remember in photographing a 
moth. A free living moth never raises its ici)igs higher 
than a straight Hue from the bases crossing the top of the 
thorax. It requires expert and adept coaxing to get them 
horizontal with their bases. If you do. you show all 
markings required: and preserve natural values, quite 
the most important things to be considered. Since 190-4 
I have been collecting subjects, reproducing tlieni in half- 
tone and colour, and gathering data for this book. 

^280 



MOTHS OF THE LI:MBERL0ST 

All the big, non-feeding night moths of the Limberlost 
are here reproduced and some of day. Of the latter 
there are thousands, almost as beautiful, but one would 
require ten ordinary lifetimes and never a duty besides, 
to secure and reproduce all of them as I have these. 
There is a big brown moth with white lines and dark 
markings, Erebus odora, that I in all probability would 
lose my head completely if I found in the Limberlost. 
It is a South American species and has been taken as 
far north as Canada, so it is not impossible that I yet 
may find one. I am firmly convinced that a moth even 
rarer has been in the locality. One day coming from work 
on a cuckoo nest on the banks of the Wabash, I found 
Bob and Molly-Cotton scarlet of face, almost breath- 
less and wailing like the paid mourners of an Arabian 
funeral, for volume, but with heartbreaking earnestness. 

They had chased a moth neither ever before had seen, 
until reduced to this state, when it arose high, crossed 
the river and was lost in the Stanley woods. Pressed 
for description Bob said it was "gray Scotch plaid." 
Molly was more definite. She stoutly affirmed it was a 
big moth cut from a piece of her camel's-hair dress. 
Now the dress was purchased in Cincinnati, at greater 
expense than I could afford really, my excuse being that 
it was irresistibly beautiful. The cloth was soft fine 
camel's-hair, the background white, the plaid broad 
wavy bands covering the white, and these were made up 

281 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

of the softest of grays, half a dozen browns, almost a 
hint of yellow and delicate black lines. I was then and 
am yet convinced they pursued Thysania zenobia, an 
abundant Mexican species, that I do not know of having 
been taken north of Georgia. 

I made a discovery with Carolina. Moths having 
digestive organs, and that are feeders are susceptible to 
anaesthetics in a far higher degree than those that do not 
feed. Many scientific workers confess to having poured 
full strength chloroform directly on non-feeders, mounted 
them as pinned specimens and later found them living; so 
that sensitive lepidopterists have abandoned its use for the 
cyanide or gasoline jai*. I intended to give only a whiff of 
chloroform to thi^ moth, just enough that she would allow 
her tongue to remain uncoiled until I could snap its fullest 
extent, but I could not revive her. The same amount 
would have had no effect whatever on a non-feeder. 





BLOODY NOSE OF SUNSHINE HIIJ. 



Chapter Twelve 
BLOODY-NOSE OF SUNSHINE HILL 



HEAIAKIS TIIYSBE 




TIIV.SBE RESEMBLES A BIG BUMBLE BEE 

285 



JOHNBROWN 
lives a mile 
north of our 
village, in the little 
hamlet of Ceylon. 
Like his illustrious 
predecessor of the 
same name he is 
willing to do some- 
thing for other 
people. Mr. Brown 
owns a large farm, 
that for a long 
distance borders 
the Wabash Kiver 
where it is at its 
best, and always 
the cameras and I 
have the freedom 
of his premises. 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

On the east side of the village, about half its length, 
swings a big gate, that opens into a long country lane. 
It leads between fields of wheat and corn to a stretch of 
woods pasture, lying on a hillside, that ends at the river. 
This covers many acres, most of the trees have been cut; 
the land rises gradually to a crest, that is crowned by a 
straggling old snake fence, velvety black in places, gray 
with lint in others, and liberally decorated its entire 
length with lichens, in every shade of gray and green. 
Its corners are filled with wild flowers, ferns, gooseberries, 
raspberries, black and red haw% papaw, wild grapevines, 
and trees of all varieties. Across the fence a sumac 
covered embankment falls precipitately to the Wabash, 
where it sweeps around a great curve at Horseshoe Bend. 
The bed is stone and gravel, the water flows shallow and 
pure in the sunlight, and mallows and willows fringe 
the banks. 

Beside this stretch of river most of one summer was 
spent, because there were two broods of cardinals, whose 
acquaintance I was cultivating, raised in those sumacs. 
The place w^as very secluded, as the water was not deep 
enough for fishing or swimming. On days when the 
cardinals were contrary, or to do the birds justice, when 
they had experiences with an owl the previous night, or 
with a hawk in the morning, and were restless or undulj^ 
excited, much grist for my camera could be found on the 
river banks. 

286 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

These were the most beautiful anywhere in my locahty. 
The hum of busy hfe was incessant. From the top twig 
of the giant sycamore in Rainbow Bottom, the father 
of the cardinal flock hourly challenged all creation to 
contest his right to one particular sumac. The cardinals 
were tJie attraction there; across the fence where the hill 
sloped the length of the pasture to the lane, lures were 
many and imperative. Despite a few large trees, com- 
pelling right to life by their majesty, that hillside was 
open pasture, where the sunshine streamed all day long. 
Wild roses clambered over stumps of fallen monarchs, 
and scrub oak sheltered resting sheep. As it swept to 
the crest, the hillside was thickly dotted with mullein, 
its pale yellow-green leaves spreading over the grass, and 
its spiral of canary coloured bloom stiffly upstanding. 
There were thistles, the big, rank, richly growing kind, 
that browsing cattle and sheep circled widely. 

Very beautiful were these frosted thistles, with their 
large, widespreading base leaves, each spine needle- 
tipped, their uplifted heads of delicate purple bloom, 
and their floating globes of silken down, with a seed in 
their hearts. No wonder artists have painted them, 
decorators conventionalized them; even potters could 
not pass by their artistic merit, for I remembered that in 
a china closet at home there were Belleek cups moulded 
in the shape of a thistle head. 

Experience had taught me how the birds appreciate 

287 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

this plant. There was a chewink in the Stanley woods, 
that brought off a brood of four, under the safe shelter 
of a rank thistle leaf, in the midst of trampling herds of 
cattle driven wild by flies. There was a ground sparrow 
near the Hale sand pit, covered by a base leaf of another 
thistle, and beneath a third on Bob's lease, I had made 
a study of an exquisite nest. Protection from the rank 
leaves was not all the birds sought of these plants, for 
goldfinches were darting around inviting all creation to 
"See me.''" as they gathered the silken down for nest 
lining. Over the sweetly perfumed purple heads, the 
hummingbirds held high carnival on Sunshine Hillside 
all the day. The honey and bumble bees fled at the 
birds' approach, but what were these others, numerous 
everywhere, that clung to the blooms, greedily thrusting 
their red noses between the petals, and giving place to 
nothing else.^ 

For days as I passed among them, I thought them huge 
bees. The bright colouring of their golden olive-green, 
and red-wine striped bodies had attracted me in passing. 
Then one of them approached a thistle head opposite 
me in such a way its antennae, and the long tongue it 
thrust into the bloom could be seen. That proved it 
was not a bee, and punishment did not await any one 
who touched it. 

There were so many that with one sweep of the net 
two were captured. They were examined to my satis- 

288 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

faction and astonishment. They were moths! Truly 
moths, feeding in the brilhant sunshine all the day; 
bearing a degree of light and heat I never had known 
any other moth to endure. Talk about exquisite crea- 
tures! These little day moths, not much larger than 
the largest bumble bees, had some of their gaudiest 
competitors of moonlight and darkness outdone. 

The head was small and pointed, with big eyes, a long 
tongue, clubbed antennae, and a blood-red nose. The 
thorax above was covered with long, silky, olive-green 
hair; the top of the abdomen had half an inch band of 
warm tan colour, then a quarter of an inch band of 
velvety red wine, then a band nearer the olive of the 
shoulders. The males had claspers covered with small 
red- wine feathers tan tipped. The thorax was cream 
coloured below and the under side of the abdomen 
red wine crossed with cream coloured lines at each 
segment. 

The front wings had the usual long, silky hairs. They 
were of olive-green shading into red, at the base, the 
costa was red, and an escalloped band of red bordered 
them. The intervening space was transparent like 
thinnest isinglass, and crossed with fine red veins. The 
back wings were the same, only the hairs at the base were 
lighter red, and the band at the edge deeper in colour. 

The head of the male seemed sharper, the shoulders 
stronger olive, the wings more pointed at the apex, 

289 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

where the female's were a Httle rounded. The top of the 
abdomen had the middle band of such strong red that it 
threw the same colour over the bands above and below 
it; giving to the whole moth a strong red appearance when 
on wing. They were so fascinating the birds were for- 
gotten, and the hillside hunted for them until a pair 
were secured to carry home for identification, before the 
whistle of the cardinal from Rainbow Bottom rang so 
sharply that I remembered this was the day I had hoped 
to secure his likeness; and here I was allowing a little 
red-nosed moth so to thrust itself upon my attention, 
that my cameras were not even set up and focused on 
the sumac. 

This tiny sunshine moth, Hemaris Thysbe, was easy 
of identification, and its whole life Jiistory before me 
on the hillside. I was too busy with the birds to raise 
many caterpillars, so reference to several books taught 
me that they all agreed on the main points of Hemaris 
history. 

Hemaris means "bloody nose." "Bloody nose" on 
account of the red first noticed on the face, though some 
writers called them "Clear wings," because of the trans- 
parent spaces on the wings. Certainly "clear wings" 
is a most appropriate and poetic name for this moth. 
Fastidious people will undoubtedly prefer it for common 
usage. For myself, I always think of the delicate, gaudy 
little creature, greedily thrusting its blood-red nose into 

290 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the purple thistle blooms; so to my thought it returns as 
"bloody nose." 

The pairs mate early after emerging, and lay about 
two hundred small eggs to the female, from which the 
caterpillars soon hatch, and begin their succession of 
moults. One writer gave black haw and snowball as 
their favourite foods, and the length of the caterpillar 
when full grown nearly two inches. They are either a 
light brown with yellow markings, or green with yellow; 
all of them have white granules on the body, and a blue- 
black horn with a yellow^ base. They spin among the 
leaves on the ground, and the pupa, while small, is shaped 
like Regalis, except that it has a sharper point at each 
end, and more prominent wing shields. It has no raised 
tongue case, although it belongs to the family of "long 
tongues. " 

On learning all I could acquire by experience with 
these moths, and what the books had to teach, I became 
their warm admirer. One sunny morning climbing the 
hill on the way to the cardinals, with fresh plates in mj^ 
cameras, and high hopes in my heart, I passed an unusu- 
ally large fine thistle, with half a dozen Thysbe moths 
fluttering over it as if nearly crazed with fragrance, or 
honey they were sipping. 

"Come here! Come here! Come here!" intoned the 
cardinal, from the sjxamore of Rainbow^ Bottom. 

"Just you wait a second, old fellow!" I heard myself 

291 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

answering. Scarcely realizing what I was doing, the 
tripod was set up, the best camera taken out, and focused 
on that thistle head. The moths paid no attention to 
bees, butterflies, or hummingbirds visiting the thistle, 
but this was too formidable, and by the time the choicest 
heads were in focus, all the little red fellows had darted 
to another plant. If the camera was moved there, they 
would change again, so I sat in the shade of a clump of 
papaws to wait and see if they would not grow accus- 
tomed to it. 

They kept me longer than I had expected, and the 
chances are I would have answered the cardinal's call, 
and gone to the river, had it not been for the interest 
found in watching a beautiful gray squirrel that homed 
in an ivy-covered stump in the pasture. He seemed to 
have much business on the fence at the hilltop, and 
raced back and forth to it repeatedly. He carried some- 
thing, I could not always tell what, but at times it was 
green haws. Once he came with no food, and at such a 
headlong run that he almost turned somersaults as he 
scampered up the tree. 

For a long time he was quiet, then he cautiously peeped 
out. After a while he ventured to the ground, raced to a 
dead stump, and sitting on it, barked and scolded with 
all his might. Then he darted home again. When he 
had repeated this performance several times, the idea 
became apparent. There was some danger to be defied 

292 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

in Rainbow Bottom, but not a sound must be made from 
his home. The bark of a dog hurried me to the fence 
in time to see some hunters passing in the bottom, but 
I thanked mercy they were on the opposite side of the 
river and it was not probable they would wade, so my 
birds would not be disturbed. When the squirrel felt 
that he must bark and chatter, or burst with tense emo- 
tions, he discreetly left his mate and nest. I did some 
serious thinking on the "instinct" question. He miglit 
choose a hollow log for his home by instinct, or eat certain 
foods because hunger urged him, but could instinct teach 
him not to make a sound where his young family 
lay.^ Without a doubt, for this same reason, the car- 
dinal sang from every tree and bush around Horse- 
shoe Bend, save the sumac where his mate hovered their 
young. 

The matter presented itself in this way. The squirrel 
has feet, and he runs with them. He has teeth, and he 
eats with them. He has lungs, and he breathes with 
them. Every organ of his interior has its purpose, 
and is used to fulfill it. His big, prominent eyes come 
from long residence in dark hollows. His bushy tail 
helps him in long jumps from tree to tree. Every i)art 
of his anatomy is created, designed and used to serve 
some purpose, save only his brain, the most complex 
and complicated part of him. Its only use and purpose 
is — to form one small "tidbit" for the palate of the 

^95 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

epicure! Like St. Francis, who preached a sermon to 
the birds, I found me delivering myself of a lecture to 
the squirrels, birds, and moths of Sunshine Hill. The 
final summing up was, that the squirrel used his feet, 
teeth, eyes and tail; that could be seen easily, and by 
his actions it could be seen just as clearly that he used 
his brain also. 

There was not a Thysbe in front of the lens, so picking 
up a long cudgel I always carry afield, and going quietly 
to surrounding thistles, I jarred them lightly with it, 
and began rounding up the Hemaris family in the direc- 
tion of the camera. The trick was a complete suc- 
cess. Soon I had an exposure on two. After they had 
faced the camera once, and experienced no injury, 
like the birds, they accepted it as part of the land- 
scape. The work was so fascinating, and the pictures 
on the ground glass so worth while, that before I rea- 
lized what I was doing, half a dozen large plates were 
gone, and for this reason, work with the cardinals that 
day ended at noon. This is why I feel that at times in 
bird work the moths literally "thrust themselves" upon 
me. 

I made a second effort with water colours, before I 
secured these dainty little red-nosed creatures at their 
feast of thistle nectar. When the first attempt was 
dry, the reds and olive-greens of the moths were too dull 
and so were the exquisite colours of the thistle heads 

296 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and down. Being blest with more patience than any 
other trait I tried again, and worked with them until the 
dry painting exactly reproduced the colours of a living 
Bloody Nose. 




'Insect lover of the sun, 
Joy of thy dominion! 
Sailor of the atmosphere; 
Sunmmer through the waves of air. 
Voyager of light and noon, 
Ejncurean of June!"' 

— Emerson. 




THE MODEST MOTH 




SOFT GRAYS AND BROWNS 

Chapter Thirteen 
THE MODEST MOTH 

TRIPTOGON MODESTA 

F COURSE this moth was named ]Modesta 
because of modest colouring. It reminds me of 
a dove, being one of my prime favourites. On 
wing it is suggestive of Polyphemus, but its colours are 
lighter and softer. Great beauty that Polyphemus is, 
Modesta equals it. 

301 



O 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Modesta belongs to the genus Triptogon, species 
Modesta — hence the common name, the Modest moth. 
I am told that in the east this moth is of stronger 
colouring than in the central and western states. I do 
not know about the centre and west, but I do know that 
only as far east as Indiana, Modesta is of more delicate 
colouring than it is described by scientists of New York 
and Pennsylvania; and of course, as in almost every case, 
the female is not so strongly coloured as the male. 

I can class the Modest moth and its caterpillar among 
those I know, but my acquaintance with it is more limited 
than with almost any other. My first introduction came 
when I found a caterpillar of striking appearance on 
water sprouts growing around a poplar stump in a 
stretch of trees beside the Wabash. I carried it home 
with a supply of the leaves for diet, but as a matter of 
luck, it had finished eating, and was ready to pupate. 
I write of this as good luck, because the poplar tree is 
almost extinct in my location. I know of only one in the 
fields, those beside the river, and a few used for ornamen- 
tal shade trees. They are so scarce I would have had 
trouble to provide the caterpillar with natural food; so 
I was glad that it was ready to pupate when found. 

Any one can identify this caterpillar easily, as it is 
most peculiar. There is a purplish pink cast on the head 
and mouth of the full-grown caterpillar, and purplish 
red around the props. The bod}^ is a very light blue- 

302 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

green, faintly tinged with white, and yellow in places. 
On the sides are white obliques, or white, shaded with 
pink, and at the base of these, a small oval marking. 
There is a small short horn on the head. But the dis- 
tinguishing mark is a mass of little white granules, scat- 
tered all over the caterpillar. It is so peppered with 
these, that failure to identify it is impossible. 

These caterpillars pupate in the ground. I knew that, 
but this was before I had learned that the caterpillar 
worked out a hole in the ground, and the pupa case only 
touched the earth upon which it la3^ So when my 
Modesta caterpillar ceased crawling, lay quietly, turned 
dark, shrank one half in length, and finally burst the 
dead skin, and emerged in a shining dark brown pupa 
case two inches long, I got in my work. I did well. A 
spade full of garden soil was thoroughly sifted, baked in 
the oven to kill parasites and insects, cooled, and put in a 
box, and the pupa case buried in it. Every time it rained, 
I opened the box, and moistened the earth. Two months 
after time for emergence, I dug out the pupa case to find 
it white with mould. I had no idea wdiat the trouble 
was, for I had done much work over that case, and the 
whole winter tended it solicitously. It was one of my 
earliest attempts, and I never have found another 
caterpillar, or any eggs, though I often search the poplars 
for them. 

However, something better happened. I say better, 

303 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

because I think if tliey will make honest confession, all 
people who have gathered eggs and raised caterpillars 
from them in confinement, by feeding cut leaves, will 
admit that the pupa cases they get, and the moths they 
produce are only about half size. The big fine cases and 
cocoons are the ones you find made by caterpillars in 
freedom, or by those that have passed at least the fourth 
or fifth moult out of doors. So it was a better thing for 
my illustration, and for my painting, when in June of 
this year, Raymond, in crossing town from a ball game, 
found a large, perfect Modesta female. He secured her 
in his hat, and hurried to me. Raymond's hat has had 
many wonderful things in it besides his head, and his 
pockets are always lumpy with boxes. 

Although perfect, she had mated, deposited her eggs, 
and was declining. All she wanted was to be left alone, 
and she Avould sit w ith wings widespread wherever placed. 
I was in the orchard, treating myself to some rare big 
musky red raspberries that are my especial property, 
when Raymond came with her. He set her on a shoot 
before me, and guarded her while I arranged a camera. 
She was the most complacent subject I ever handled 
outdoors, and did not make even an attempt to fly. 
Raymond was supposed to be watching while I worked, 
but our confidence in her was so great, that I paid all 
my attention to polishing my lenses, and getting good 
light, while Raymond gathered berries with one hand, 

304 




1\ Mil \ \i,l.l 1 i)V THE WOOU UdlUN 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and promiscuously waved the net over the bushes with 
the other. 

During the first exposure, Modesta was allowed to 
place and poise herself as seemed natural. For a second, 
I used the brush on her gently, and coaxed her wings 
into spreading a little wider than was natural. These 
positions gave every evidence of being pleasing and 
yet I was not satisfied. There was something else in 
the back of my head that kept obtruding itself as I 
walked to the Cabin, with the beautiful moth clinging 
to my fingers. I did not feel quite happy about her, 
so she was placed in a large box, lined with corrugated 
paper, to wait a while until the mist in my brain cleared, 
and my nebulous disturbance evolved an idea. It came 
slowly. I had a caterpillar long ago, and had investi- 
gated the history of this moth. I asked Raymond where 
he found her and he said, "Coming from the game." 
Now I questioned him about the kind of a tree, and he 
promptly answered, "On one of those poplars behind 
the schoolhouse. " 

That was the clue. Instantly I recognized it. A 
poplar limb was what I wanted. Its fine, glossy leaf, 
flattened stem, and smooth upright twigs made a setting, 
appropriate, above all others, for the INIodest moth. 

I explained the situation to the Deacon, and he had 
Brenner drive with him to the Hirschj^ farm, and help 
secure a limb from one of the very few Lombardy pop- 

307 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

lars of this region. They drove very fast, and I had no 
trouble to induce Modesta to clamber over a poplar twig, 
and settle. Then by gently stroking, an unusual wing 
sweep was secured, because there is a wonderful purple- 
pink and a peculiar blue on the back wings. 

It has been my experience that the longer a moth of 
these big short-lived subjects remains out of doors, the 
paler its colours become, and most of them fade rapidly 
when mounted, if not kept in the dark. So my Modesta 
may have been slightly faded, but she could have been 
several shades paler and yet appeared most beautiful 
to me. 

Her head, shoulders, and abdomen were a lovely dove 
gray; that soft tan gray, with a warm shade, almost 
suggestive of pink. I suppose the reason I thought of 
this was because at the time two pairs of doves, one 
on a heap of driftwood overhanging the river, and the 
other in an apple tree in the Aspy orchard a few rods 
away, were giving me much trouble, and I had dove 
gray on my mind. I had tried for a study of the brood- 
ing dove by the river five times, and the one in the apple 
tree fifteen. I had lived in the locality, practically. I 
had set up a tripod, first yards away, then slipped to it 
with a camera, but could only screw it on. After leaving 
half an hour I crept up and opened it, working in the sun 
until almost melted, to get a focus. I only hoped to 
make a little thumb-nail picture that would serve for 

308 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

an enlargement, and failure heaped on failure. When I 
was three rods away, those doves tore from the nest until 
I was afraid they would break their eggs. A joke on me 
is as good as on any one else, and the point to this is that 
I was trying to make these studies at times when the 
male bird was brooding, while the female went to hunt 
food and drink. After days of as difficult field work as 
I ever endured, I made exposures on both those female 
doves in the afternoon. The one on the river bank sat 
for a four foot focus, after an hour's work; and the one 
in the orchard endured three, after a half day's cautious 
approach. Perhaps I saw so much dove gray on that 
moth because I had seen it all day for days, and dreamed 
of it in my sleep. 

This same dove gray coloured the basic third of the 
fore-wings. Then they were crossed with a band only a 
little less in width, of rich cinnamon brown. There was a 
narrow wavy line of hghter brown, and the remaining 
third of the wing was paler, Init with darker shadings. 
These four distinct colour divisions were exquisitely 
blended, and on the darkest band, near the costa, was a 
tiny white half moon. The under sides of the fore-wings 
were a delicate brownish gray, with heavy flushings of a 
purplish pink, a most beautiful colour. 

The back wings were dove colour near the abdomen, 
more of a mouse colour around the edges, and beginning 
strongly at the base, and spreading in lighter shade over 

309 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the wing, was the same purplish pink of the front under 
wing, only much stronger. Near the abdomen, a little 
below half the length, and adjoining the gray, each wing 
had a mark difficult to describe in shape, and of rich blue 
colour. 

The antennae stood up stoutly, and were of dove gray 
on one side, and white on the other. The thorax, legs, 
and under side of the abdomen were more of the mouse 
gray in colour. Over the whole moth in strong light, 
there was an almost intangible flushing of palest purplish 
pink. It may have shaded through the fore-wing from 
beneath, and over the back wing from above. At any 
rate, it was there, and so lovely and delicate was the 
whole colour scheme, it made me feel that I would give 
much to see a newly emerged male of this species. In 
my childhood my mother called this colour aniline red. 

I once asked a Chicago importer if he believed that 
Oriental rug weavers sometimes use these big night 
moths as colour guides in their weaving. He said he 
had heard this, and gave me the freedom of his rarest 
rugs. Of course the designs woven into these rugs have 
a history, and a meaning for those who understand. 
There were three, almost priceless, one of which I am 
quite sure copied its grays, terra cotta, and black shades 
from Cecropia. 

There was another, a rug of pure silk, that never 
could have touched a floor, or been trusted outside a case, 

310 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

had it been my property, that beyond all question took 
its exquisite combinations of browns and tans with pink 
lines, and peacock blue designs from Polyphemus. A 
third could have been copied from no moth save Modesta, 
for it was dove gray, mouse gray, and cinnamon brown, 
with the purplish pink of the back wings, and exactly the 
blue of their decorations. Had this rug been woven of 
silk, as the brown one, that moment would have taught me 
why people sometimes steal when they cannot afford to 
buy. Examination of the stock of any importer of high 
grade rugs will convince one who knows moths, that 
many of our commonest or their near relatives native 
to the Orient are really used as models for colour com- 
binations in rug weaving. The Herat frequently has 
moths in its border. 

The painting of this moth I laboured over with loving 
care, and I think that to the reproduction I succeeded 
in giving the purplish cast, but what will become of it 
in engraving is a question. The female was used as a 
model, every colour was tested on a blotter beside her 
wing until it exactly matched, and then made a degree 
stronger, for water colours dry lighter in shade, and the 
subject was not fresh in the beginning. 

The ]VIodest moth has a wing sweep in large females 
of from five and one half to six inches. In my territory 
they are very rare, only a few caterpillars and one moth 
have fallen to me. This can be accounted for by the fact 

311 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

that the favourite food tree of the caterpillar is so scarce, 
for some reason having become almost extinct, except in 
a few cases where they are used for shade. 

The eggs are a grayish green, and have the pearly 
appearance of almost all moth eggs. On account of 
white granules, the caterpillar cannot fail to be identified. 
The moths in their beautiful soft colouring are well worth 
search and study. They are as exquisitely shaded as any, 
and of a richness difficult to describe. 





THE PRIDE OF THE LILACS 



Chapter Fourteen 
THE PRIDE OF THE LH^ACS 

ATTACUS PROMETHEA 




s 



O FAR as 

the ar- 
rangement 
of the subjects 
of this book in 
family groupings 
is concerned, any 
chapter might 
come first or last. 
It is frankly an- 
nounced as the 
book of the Na- 
ture Lover, and 
as such is put to- 
gether in the form 
that appears to 
me easiest to com- 
prehend and most 

TllHEE PUOMETHEA COCOONS ON ONE SMALL LILAC ^^'^* ^ & 

TWIG PKOVE THESE CATERPILL.'UiS FEED AND aminC. Yicldiug 



SPIN IN GROUPS 



315 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

to the almost universal distaste for caterpillars, I have used 
them in this illustration only enough to make their im- 
portant part in the life history of moths clearly under- 
stood. I decided that it would be sufficient to explain 
the whole situation to the satisfaction of any one, if I 
began the book with a detailed history of moth, egg, 
caterpillar, and cocoon and then gave complete por- 
trayal of each stage in the evolution of one cocoon and 
one pupa case moth. I began with Cecropia, the com- 
monest of all and one of the most beautiful for the 
spinners, and ended with Regalis, of earth — and the 
rarest. At the time I wrote the Regalis chapter, I 
thought the book finished, in so far that it contained 
faithful studies of one or more species of each im- 
portant family, and afforded enough history to put 
any Nature Lover who wished to go farther, on the 
right road to glean what he desired from scientific 
works. 

The luck I had in securing Regalis in such complete 
form seems to me, the greatest that ever happened to 
any worker in this field, and it reads more like a fairy 
tale than sober every-day fact, copiously illustrated with 
studies from life. At its finish I said, "Now I am done. 
This book is completed." Soon afterward, Raymond 
walked in with a bunch of lilac twigs in his hand from 
which depended three rolled leaves securely bound to their 
twigs by silk spinning. 

316 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

"I don't remember that we ever found any like these," 
he said. "Would you be interested in them?" 

Would I? Instantly I knew this book was not finished. 
As I held the firm, heavy, leaf rolled cocoons in my hand, 
I could see the last chapter sliding over from fourteen to 
fifteen to make place for Promethea, the loveliest of the 
Attacine group, a cousin of Cecropia. Often I had seen 
the pictured cocoon, in its neat little, tight little leaf 
covered shelter, and the mounted moths of scientific 
collections and museums; I knew their beautiful forms 
and remembered the reddish tinge flushing the almost 
black coat of the male and the red wine and clay coloured 
female with her elaborate marks, spots, and lines. Right 
there the book stopped at leaf-fall early in November 
to await the outcome of those three cocoons. If they 
would yield a pair in the spring, and if that pair would 
emerge close enough together to mate and produce 
fertile eggs, then by fall of the coming year I would have 
a complete life history. That was a long wait, thickly 
punctuated with "ifs." 

The good work began by holding up the publication 
of the book. It progressed by making photographic 
studies of the cocoons that very afternoon. Then the 
twig was carried to my room and stood in a vase of intri- 
cate workmanship and rare colouring. A vase of silver, 
having a body of blue enamel, the decorations pale red, 
yellow, blue, green; manj- shades — each of silver bound 

317 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

enamel set to form patterns; my wildest extravagance, 
and of never ending interest, because In alternating 
shields of palest green and salmon, were reproductions 
of the Dragon and the Sacred Bird of Japan. Every 
time I fully made up my mind that the figure on the 
green ground was the Bird, and the other the Dragon, 
along came some discriminating soul whose judgment 
I respected, and brought forth strong points to prove that 
the figure on the salmon ground was the Bird, and that 
of the green the Dragon. I spent so much time trying to 
decide, that at last that vase became a personal posses- 
sion and I carried it to my room and set it on the mantel 
where I could study it when no weightier matter was on 
my mind. It was not worth a cent for the purpose I 
used other vases. I learned that by putting one big pink 
Killarney rose, from the Deacon's choicest bush, in it 
and having the water run out and ruin my best table top. 
This may have helped to relegate it to my room where 
I seldom had time to decorate with flowers. Anything 
that would not hold water seemed to drift there and 
become the obvious receptacle for cocoon bearing twigs. 
It was the best place in the Cabin for cocoons, on 
account of its fireplace, outside door, and two big win- 
dows, all of which stood wide the year around, so outdoor 
conditions reigned as nearly as possible. Throughout the 
winter I watched the cocoons and occasionally studied 
the Bird and the Dragon. I may as well confess that 

318 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the question is yet unsettled, but I know a Japanese 
who is coming to the Cabin some day for the express 
purpose of telHng me surely. 

Every few days I examined those cocoons and tested 
them by weight. I was sure they were perfect. That 
spring I had been working all day and often at night, 
so I welcomed an opportunity to spend a few days at a 
lake where I would meet many friends; boating and 
fishing were fine, while the surrounding country was one 
uninterrupted panorama of exquisite land and water 
pictures. I packed and started so hastily I forgot my 
precious cocoons. I had such a good time I never 
thought of them while away. Tw^o weeks later on my 
return, before I entered the Cabin, I walked around it to 
see if my flowers had been properly w^atered and tended. 
It was not later than three in the afternoon but I saw 
at least a dozen wonderful big moths, dusky and luring, 
fluttering eagerly over the wild roses covering a south 
window of the Deacon's room adjoining mine on the 
west. Instantly I knew what that meant. I hurried 
to the room and found a female Promethea at the top 
of the screen covering a window that the caretaker had 
slightly lowered. I caught up a net and ran to bring a 
stepladder. The back foundation is several feet high 
and that threw the tops of the windows close under the 
eaves. I mounted to the last step and balancing, made a 
sweep to capture a moth. They could see me and scat- 

319 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

tered in all directions. I waited until they were begin- 
ning to return, when from the thicket of leaves emerged 
a deep rose-flushed little moth that sailed away, with 
every black one in pursuit. I almost fell from the ladder. 
I went inside, only to learn that what I feared was true. 
The wind had loosened the screen in my absence, and the 
moth had passed through a crack, so narrow it seemed 
impossible for it to escape. 

Only those interested as I was, and who have had 
similar experience know how to sympathize. I had 
thought a crowbar would be required to open one of 
those screens! With sinking heart I hurried to my room. 
Joy! There was yet hope! The escaped moth was the 
only one that had emerged. The first thing was to fasten 
the screen, the next to live with the remaining cocoons. 

The following morning another female appeared, and 
a little later a male. As soon as their down was dry, 
and before either had taken flight, the title page study 
of this chapter was made while each clung to the cocoon 
from which it emerged. They behaved beautifully, and 
posed in almost any shape they were coaxed to assume 
with the brushes. I was so happy I went singing through 
the Cabin as I worked. 

The cocoons were long, slender, closely leaf-wrapped 
and hung from stout spinning longer than the average 
leaf stem. The outside leaf covering easily could be 
peeled away as the spinning did not seem to adhere except 

320 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

at the edges. There was a thin waterproof coating as 
with Cecropia, then a Httle loose spinning that showed 
most at top and bottom, the leaf wrapping being so 
closely drawn that it was plastered against the body of 
the heavy inner case aronnd the middle until it adhered. 
The inner case was smooth and dark inside and the 
broken pupa case nearly black. 

The male and female differed more widely in colour 
and markings than any moths with which I had worked. 
At a glance, the male reminded me of a monster Mourn- 
ing Cloak butterfly. The front wings from the base 
extending over half the surface were a dark brownish 
black, outlined with a narrow escalloped line of clay 
colour of light shade. The black colour from here light- 
ened as it neared the margin. At the apex it changed to 
a reddish brown tinge that surrounded the typical eye- 
spot of all the Attacus group for almost three fourths of 
its circumference. The bottom of the eye was blackish 
blue shading abruptly to pale blue at the top. The 
straggle M of white was in its place at the extreme tip, 
on the usual rose madder field. From there a broad 
clay coloured band edged the wing and joined the dark 
colour in escallops. Through the middle of it in an irreg- 
ular wavy line was traced an almost hair-fine marking 
of strong brown. The back wings were darker than the 
darkest part of tlie fore-wings and this colour covered 
them to the margin lightening very slightly. A clay 

323 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

coloured band bordered the edge, touched with irregular 
splashes of dark brown, a little below them a slightly 
heavier line than that on the fore- wing, which seemed to 
follow the outline of the decorations. 

Underneath, the wings were exquisitely marked, 
flushed, and shaded almost past description in delicate 
and nearly intangible reddish browns, rose madder on 
gray, pink tinged brown and clay colour. On the fore- 
wings the field from base to first line was reddish brown 
with a faint tinge of tan beside the costa. From this to 
the clay coloured border my descriptive powers fail. You 
could see almost any shade for which you looked. There 
were grayish places flushed with scales of red and white 
so closely set that the result was frosty pinko Then the 
background would change to brown with the same over- 
decoration. The bottom of the eye-spot was dark only 
about one fourth the way, the remaining three fourths, 
tan colour outlined at the top with pale blue and black 
in fine lines. The white M showed through on a reddish 
background, as did the brown line of the clay border. 
The back wings widespread were even lovelier. Begin- 
ning about the eighth of an inch from the top was a 
whitish line tracing a marking that when taken as a 
whole on both outspread wings, on some, slightly resem- 
bled a sugar maple leaf, and on others, the perfect profile 
of a face. There was a small oblong figure of pinkish 
white where the eye would fall, and the field of each space 

324 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

was brownish red velvet. From this to the clay coloured 
band with its paler brown markings and lines, the pink 
and white scales sprinkled the brown ground; most of 
the pink, around the marking, more of the white, in the 
middle of the space; so few of either, that it appeared to 
be brown where the clay border joined. 

The antennae were shaped as all of the Attacus group, 
but larger in proportion to size, for ni}- l)iggest Promethea 
measured only four and a quarter from tip to tip, and for 
his inches carried larger antlers than any Cecropia I ever 
saw of this measurement, those of the male being very 
much larger than the female. In colour they were 
similar to the darkest part of the wings, as were the back 
of the head, thorax and abdomen. The hair on the back 
of the thorax was very long. The face wore a pink flush 
over brown, the eyes bright brown, the under thorax 
covered Avith long pinkish brown hairs, and the legs the 
same. A white stripe ran down each side of the abdomen, 
touched with a dot of brownish red wine colour on the 
rings. The under part was pinkish wine crossed with 
a narrow white line at each segment. The claspers were 
prominent and sharp. The finishing touch of the ex- 
quisite creation lay in the fact that in motion, in strong 
light the red wine shadings of the under side cast an in- 
tangible, elusive, rosy flush over the dark back of the moth 
that was the most delicate and loveliest colour effect I 
ever have seen on marking of flower, bird, or animal. 

325 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

For the first time in all my experience with moths the 
female was less than the male. Her wing sweep was 
scant four inches, her antennae very small compared 
with his. From base to first marking was not quite half 
the wing surface, the colour bright red-brown at the base 
shading browner, then a curved line of almost black, 
another of pinkish white, and the remainder of the space 
to the borders, a light brownish pink field peppered so 
closely with red wine and white scales, that nearest 
the costa, the wing showed red wine with a white frost 
over it, and the other edge pale brown with pink frost- 
ing. There was the usual rose madder shade at the 
apex, the straggling M of white, the blue-black eye-spot 
with its pale blue line outlining the top and the clay 
border, very light with its escalloped line of red. The 
back wing closest the abdomen for about one third of 
its surface was enclosed with a ragged wavering line of 
black and another of the whitish pink. This space was 
brownish in places, tan in others, pink flushed all over, 
and bore a white mark shaped as it shows in the 
pictures of the moth. This was surrounded by a very 
dark line that shaded to the vanishing point into the 
enclosing colour. The mark was like old yellow ivory. 

Then began a broad band of pale pink over a gray 
ground, that shaded into a terra cotta red at the border, 
the wliole speckled so closely with white scales, as to 
give the frosty appearance; most of this at the top, the 

326 




" I'HOMKTHKUSi liULND 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

red at tlie bottom. The clay colour of the border was 
a shade deeper than on the fore-wings, the touches on 
it of red, and the waving line such deep red as to seem 
almost black. The under sides of the wings were marked 
and coloured similar to the upper, save that the red wine 
was more in evidence and silvery, pinkish white covered 
more space. All markings were a trifle stronger colour, 
so that the moth became most beautiful with lifted 
wings. Her thorax was covered with long red-wine 
hairs, also the top of abdomen. Her face was like the 
male's, with the exception of being redder, her side bands 
wider white, and the dots on them almost black. The 
rings of the pale red-wine abdomen were outlined with 
white on the under side and the feet red. 

I have followed these markings and copied them faith- 
fully as I could in the painting; but my best effort appears 
feeble compared with the delicate shadings and flushings 
of the moth; and if the engravers fail me in exact colour- 
ing, I shall regret that I tried to reproduce them at all. 
Allowing for the worst that could happen, the work is 
sure to be close enough a copy that it can be used for 
identification. It is too much to expect that paper and 
ink can do the velvety, intangible red effects justice. 

Even the eggs of this mated pair carried a pinkish 
white shade and were stained with brown. They were 
ovoid in shape and dotted the screen door in rows. Tlie 
tiny caterpillars were out eleven days later and proved 

329 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

to be of the kind that march independently from their 
shells without stopping to feed on them. Of every food 
offered, the youngsters seemed to prefer lilac leaves. I 
remembered that they had passed the winter wrapped 
in these, dangling from their twigs, and that the under- 
wings of the male and much of the female bore a flushing 
of colour that was lilac, for what else is red wine veiled 
with white? So I promptly christened them, "The Pride 
of the Lilacs." They were said to eat ash, apple, pear, 
willow, plum, cherry, poplar and many other leaves, 
but mine liked lilac, and there was a supply in reach of 
the door, so they undoubtedly were lilac caterpillars, for 
they had nothing else to eat. 

The little fellows were pronouncedly yellow. The 
black head with a gray stripe joined the thorax with a 
yellow band. The body was yellow with black rings, 
the anal parts black, the legs pale grayish yellow. They 
made their first moult on the tenth day and when ready 
to eat again they were stronger yellow^ than before, wath 
many touches of black. They moulted four times, each 
producing slight changes' until the third when the body 
took on a greenish tinge, delicate and frosty in appearance. 
The heads were yellow with touches of black, and the 
anal shield even stronger yellow, with black. At the 
last moult there came a touch of red on the thorax, and 
of deep blue on the latter part of the body. 

In spinning they gummed over the upper surface of a 

330 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

leaf and covering it with silk, drew it together so that 
nothing could be seen of the work inside. They began 
spinning some on the forty-second, some on the forty- 
third day, when about three inches in length and plump 
to bursting. I think at a puncture in the skin they 
would have spurted like a fountain. They began spin- 
ning at night and were from sight before I went to them 
the following morning. 

Because they were much care to tend I had released 
most of the caterpillars, only keeping six spinners; but 
all of them were healthful and their cases fine pieces of 
work. I had reason to guard them w ith especial care, for 
on developing my plates, for the first time in my expe- 
rience, I found myself the victim of a cracked plate holder 
slide. A streak of light crossed the lower half of one 
plate and one wing of the male moth. That was a great 
disappointment, but I expected to overcome it with 
many studies from the half dozen cocoons I now had. So 
I hunted a box and packed them away with utmost care, 
instead of keeping them in the Dragon and Bird vase as 
I had the others. 

The result of this especial attention was disastrous. 
I selected a box in which some mounted moths had been 
sent me by a friend in Louisiana, and when I went to 
examine my cocoons toward spring, to my horror I foiuid 
the contents of the box chopped to pieces and totally 
destroyed. Pestiferous little "clothes" moths must 

331 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

have infested the box, for there were none elsewhere in 
the Cabin. For a while this appeared to be too bad 
luck; but when luck turns squarely against you, that is 
the time to test the essence and quality of the word 
"friend." So I sat me down and wrote to my friend^ 
Professor Rowley of Missouri, and told him I wanted 
Promethea for the completion of this book; that I had 
an opportunity to make studies of them and my plate 
was light-struck, and house-moths had eaten my cocoons. 
Could he do anything.'^ To be sure he could. I am very 
certain he sent me two dozen "perfectly good" cocoons. 

I pinned them on a heavy piece of corrugated paste- 
board and they emerged in bunches. It was with the 
first of these to appear, that I had the experience with free 
males locating a confined female, recorded in the second 
chapter. From these living moths as they emerged, I 
made studies until I impoverished myself on plates. 
When it came to painting, my old light-struck plate of 
my first study was the most pleasing pose of all to me, 
so as I could paint out the light, I used a print from that 
negative for outline and these moths for colour-guides. 

From the abundance of males that have come to seek 
females of this species at the Cabin, ample proof seems 
furnished that they are a very common Limberlost prod- 
uct; but I never have found, even when searching for 
them, or had brought to me a cocoon of this variety, save 
the three on one little branch found by Raymond, when 

332 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

he did not know what they were. Because of the length 
of spinning which these caterpillars use to attach their 
cocoons, they dangle freely in the wind, and scientists 
say this gives them especial freedom from attack by 
birds. 




With their rich, restless wings that gleam 
Variously in the crimson beam 
Of the warm west, — as if inlaid 
With brilliants from the mine, or made 
Of tearless rainboivs, such as span 
The unclouded skies of peristan!'' 

— Moore. 




^m 





KING CITHERONIA 



Chapter Fifteen 
THE KING OF THE POETS 

CITHERONIA REGALIS 



H^^MHl 


■Mf'*' 







PRELIMINARY EXERCISE 



TO THE impetuosity of youth I owe my first 
acquaintance with the rarest moth of the Lim- 
berlost; "not common anywhere," say scientific 
authorities. Molly-Cotton and I were driving to Port- 
land-town, ten miles south of our home. As customary, 
I was watching fields, woods, fence corners and roadside 
in search of subjects; for many beautiful cocoons and 
caterpillars, much to be desired, have been located while 
driving over the country on business or pleasure. 

With the magnificent independence of the young, 
Molly-Cotton would have scouted the idea that she 

337 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

was searching for moths also, but I smiled inwardly as 
I noticed her check the horse several times and scan 
a wayside bush, or stretch of snake fence. We were 
approaching the limits of town, and had found nothing; 
a slow rain was falling, and the shimmer on bushes and 
fences made it difficult to see objects plainly. Several 
times I had asked her to stop the horse, or drive close 
the fields when I was sure of a moth or caterpillar, 
though it was very late, being close the end of August; 
but we found only a dry leaf, or some combination that 
had deceived me. 

Just on the outskirts of Portland, beside a grassy ditch 
and at the edge of a cornfield, grew a cluster of wild tiger 
lilies. The water in the ditch had kept them in flower 
long past their bloomtime. On one of the stems there 
seemed to be a movement. 

"Wait a minute!" I cried, and Molly-Cotton checked 
the horse, but did not stop, while I leaned forward and 
scanned the lilies carefully. What I thought I saw move, 
appeared to be a dry lily bloom of an orange-red colour, 
that had fallen and lodged on the grasses against a stalk. 

*'It's only a dead lily," I said; "drive on." 

"Is there a moth that colour.^" asked Molly Cotton. 

"Yes," I replied. "There is an orange-brown species, 
but it is rare. I never have seen a living one. " 

So we passed the lilies. A very peculiar thing is that 
when one grows intensely interested in a subject, and 

338 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

works over it, a sort of instinct, an extra sense as it were, 
is acquired. Three rods away, I became certain I had 
seen something move, so strongly the conviction swept 
over me that we had passed a moth. Still, it was raining, 
and the ditch was wet and deep. 

"I am sorry we did not stop," I said, half to myself, 
"I can't help feeling that was a moth." 

There is where youth, in all its impetuosity helped me. 
If the girl had asked, ''Shall I go back.'^" In all prob- 
ability I would have answered, "No, I must have been 
mistaken. Drive on!" 

Instead, Molly-Cotton, who had straightened herself, 
and touched up her horse for a brisk entrance into town, 
said, "Well, we will just settle that 'feeling' right 
here!" 

At a trot, she deftly cut a curve in the broad road and 
drove back. She drew close the edge of the ditch as we 
approached the lilies. As the horse stopped, what I 
had taken for a fallen lily bloom, suddenly opened to 
over five inches of gorgeous red-brown, canary-spotted 
wing sweep, and then closed again. 

"It is a moth!" we gasped, with one breath. 

Molly-Cotton cramped the wheel on my side of the 
carriage and started to step down. Then she dropped 
back to the seat. 

"I am afraid," she said. "I don't want you to wade 
that ditch in the rain, but you never have had a red one, 

339 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and if I bungle and let it escape, I never will forgive 
myself. " 

She swung the horse to the other side, and I climbed 
down. Gathering my skirts, I crossed the ditch as best 
I could, and reached the lily bed, but I was trembling 
until my knees wavered. I stepped between the lilies 
and the cornfield, leaned over breathlessly, and waited 
in the pelting rain, until the moth again raised its wings 
above its back. Then with a sweep learned in childhood, 
I had it. 

While crossing the ditch, I noticed there were numbers 
of heavy yellow paper bags lying where people had 
thrown them when emptied of bananas and biscuits, 
on leaving town. They were too wet to be safe, but to 
carry the moth in my fingers would spoil it for a study, 
so I caught up and drained a big bag; carefully set my 
treasure inside, and handed it to Molly-Cotton. If you 
consider the word "treasure," too strong to fit the case, 
offer me your biggest diamond, ruby, or emerald, in 
recompense for the privilege of striking this chapter, 
with its accompanying illustration from my book and 
learn what the answer will be. 

When I entered the carriage and dried my face and 
hands, we peeped, marvelled, and exclaimed in wonder, 
for this was the most gorgeous moth of our collections. 
We hastened to Portland, where we secured a large box 
at a store. In order that it might not be dark and set 

340 





^J^^ll 


■"^»^ ^**'. ""^ - ...iD-.i^i^^ ■ '^l^^^^dMBlR6^fl^^^Hilk^'^>' • 




W"^^ ■ A - 






^ j^^^' w^ **' *ld 







MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

the moth beating in flight, we copiously punctured it with 
as large holes as we dared, and bound the lid securely. 
On the way home we searched the lilies and roadside for 
a mile, but could find no trace of another moth. Indeed, 
it seemed a miracle that we had found this one late in 
August, for the time of their emergence is supposed to 
be from middle May to the end of June. Professor 
Rowley assures me that in rare instances a moth will 
emerge from a case or cocoon two seasons old, and find- 
ing this one, and the Luna, prove it is well for nature 
students to be watchful from May until October. 
Because these things happened to me in person, I made 
bold to introduce the capture of a late moth into the 
experience of Edith Carr in the last chapter of "A Girl 
of the Limberlost." I am joointing out some of these 
occurrences as I come to them, in order that you may 
see how closely I keep to life and truth, even in books 
exploited as fiction. There may be such incidents that 
are pure imagination incorporated; but as I write I can 
recall no instance similar to this, in any book of mine, 
that is not personal experience, or that did not happen to 
other people within my knowledge, or was not told me 
by some one whose word I consider unquestionable; 
allowing very little material indeed, on the last provision. 
There is one other possibility to account for the 
moth at this time. Beyond all question the gorgeous 
creature is of tropical origin. It has made its way north 

343 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

from South or Central America. It occurs more fre- 
quently in Florida and Georgia than with us, and there 
it is known to have been double brooded; so standing on 
the records of professional lepidopterists. That gives 
rise to grounds for the possibility that in some of our 
long, almost tropical Indiana summers, Regalis may be 
double brooded with us. At any rate — many people saw 
the living moth in my possession on this date. In fact 
I am prepared to furnish abundant proof of every state- 
ment contained in this chapter; while at the same time 
admitting that it reads like the veriest fairy tale, "ever 
thought or wondered. " 

The storm had passed and the light was fine, so we 
posed the moth before the camera several times. It was 
nervous business for he was becoming restless, and every 
instant I expected him to fly, but of course we kept him 
guarded. 

There was no hope of a female that late date, so the 
next step was to copy his colours and markings as exactly 
as possible. He was the gaudiest moth of my experience, 
and his name seemed to suit rarely well. Citheronia — 
a Greek poet, and Regalis — regal. He was truly royal 
and enough to inspire poetry in a man of any nation. 
His face was orange-brown, of so bright a shade that 
any one at a glance would have called it red. His eyes 
were small for his size, and his antennae long, fine, and 
pressed against the face so closely it had to be carefully 

344 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

scrutinized to see them. A band of bright canary yellow 
arched above them, his thorax was covered above with 
long silky, orange-brown hairs, and striped lengthwise 
with the same yellow. His abdomen was the longest and 
slenderest I had seen, elegantly curved like a vase, and 
reaching a quarter of an inch beyond the back wings, 
which is unusual. It was thickly covered with long hair, 
and faintly lined at the segments with yellow. The 
claspers were very sharp, prominent brown hooks. His 
sides were dotted with alternating red and orange-brown 
spots, and his thorax beneath, yellow. The under side 
of the abdomen was yellow, strongly shaded with orange- 
brown. His legs and feet were the same. 

His fore-wings were a silvery lead colour, each vein 
covered with a stripe of orange-brown three times its 
width. The costa began in lead colour, and at half its 
extent shaded into orange-brown. Each front wing had 
six yellow spots, and a seventh faintly showing. Half 
an inch from the apex of the wings, and against the costa, 
lay the first and second spots, oblong in shape, and wide 
enough to cover the space between veins. The third 
was a tiny dot next the second. The hint of one crossed 
the next vein, and the other three formed a triangle; one 
lay at the costa about three quarters of an inch from the 
base, the second at the same distance from the base at 
the back edge of the wing, and the third formed the apex, 
and fell in the middle, on the fifth space between veins, 

347 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

counting from either edge. These were almost perfectly 
round. 

The back wings were very hairy, of a deep orange- 
brown at the base, shading to lighter tones of the same 
colour at the edge, and faintly clouded in two patches 
with yellow. 

Underneath the fore-wings were yellow at the base, 
and lead colour the remainder of their length. The 
veins had the orange-red outlining, and the two large 
yellow dots at the costa showed through as well as the 
small one beside them. Then came another little yellow 
dot of the same size, that did not show on the upper 
side, and then four larger round spots between each 
vein. Two of them showed in the triangle on the upper 
side full size, and the two between could be seen in the 
merest speck, if looked for very closely. 

The back wings underneath were yellow three fourths 
of their length, then next the abdomen began a quarter 
of an inch wide band of orange-brown, that crossed the 
wing to the third vein from the outer edge, and there 
shaded into lead colour, and covered the space to the 
margin. The remainder of the wing below this band was 
a lighter shade of yellow than above it. From tip to 
tip he measured five and a half inches, and from head to 
point of abdomen, a little over two. 

While I was talking Regalis, and delighted over finding 
so late in the season, the only one I lacked to complete 

348 



MOTHS OF THE Li:\rBERLOST 

my studies of every important species, Arthur Fensler 
brought me a large RegaHs caterpillar, full fed, and in 
the last stages of the two days of exercise that every 
caterpillar seems to take before going into the pupa 
state. It was late in the evening, so I put the big fellow 
in a covered bucket of soft earth from the garden, plan- 
ning to take his picture the coming day. Before morning 
he had burrowed into the earth from sight, and was 
pupating, so there was great risk in disturbing him. I 
was afraid there were insects in the earth that would 
harm him, as care had not been taken to bake it, as 
should have been done. 

A day later Willis Glendenning brought me another 
Regalis caterpillar. I made two pictures of it, although 
transformation to the pupa stage was so far advanced 
that it was only half length, and had a shrivelled appear- 
ance like the one I once threw away. I was disgusted 
with the picture at the time, but now I feel that it is very 
important in the history of transformation from cater- 
pillar to pupa, and I am glad to have it. 

Two days later, Andrew Idlewine, a friend to my work, 
came to the Deacon with a box. He said that he thought 
maj'be I would like to take a picture of the fellow inside, 
and if I did, he wanted a copy; and he wished he knew 
what the name of it was. He had found it on a butter- 
nut tree, and used great care in taking it lest it "horn" 
him. He was horrified when the Deacon picked it up, 

349 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and demonstrated how harmless it was. This is difficult 
to believe, but it was a third Regalis and came into my 
possession at night again. My only consolation was that 
it was feeding, and would not pupate until I could make 
a picture. This one was six inches from tip to tip, the 
largest caterpillar I ever saw; a beautiful blue-green 
colour, with legs of tan marked with black, each segment 
having four small sharp horns on top, and on the sides 
an oblique dash of pale blue. The head bore ten horns. 
Four of these were large, an inch in length, coloured tan 
at the base, black at the tip. The foremost pair of this 
formidable array turned front over the face, all the others 
back, and the outside six of the ten were not quite the 
length of the largest ones. 

The first caterpillar had measured five inches, and the 
next one three, but it was transforming. Whether the 
others were males and this a female, or whether it was 
only that it had grown under favourable conditions, I 
could not tell. It was differently marked on the sides, 
and in every way larger, and brighter than the others, 
and had not finished feeding. Knowing that it was called 
the "horned hickory devil" at times, hickory and walnut 
leaves were placed in its box, and it evinced a decided 
preference for the hickory. As long as it ate, and seemed 
a trifle larger it w^as fed. The day it walked over fresh 
leaves and began the preliminary travel, it was placed on 
some hickory sprouts around an old stump, and exposures 

350 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

made on it, or rather on the places it had been, for it was 
extremely restless and difficult to handle. Two plates 
were spoiled for me by my subject walking out of focus, 
as I snapped, but twice it was caught broadside in good 
position. 

While I was working with this caterpillar, there came 
one of my clearest cases of things that "thrust themselves 
upon me." I would have preferred to concentrate all 
my attention on the caterpillar, for it was worth wliile; 
but in the midst of my work a katydid deliberately 
walked do^vn the stump, and stopped squarely before the 
lens to wash her face and make her toilet. She was on 
the side of the stump, and so clearly outlined by the lens 
that I could see her long wavering antennae on the ground 
glass, and of course she took two plates before she re- 
sumed her travels. I long had wanted a katydid for 
an illustration. I got that one merely by using what 
was before me. All I did was to swing the lens about six 
inches, and shift the focus slightly, to secure two good 
exposures of her in fine positions. My caterpillar almost 
escaped while I worked, for it had put in tlie time climb- 
ing to the ground, and was a yard away hurrying across 
the grass at a lively pace. 

Two days later it stopped travelling, and pupated on 
the top of the now hardened earth in the bucket that 
contained the other two. It was the largest of the pupte 
when it emerged, a big shining greenish brown thing 

353 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

flattened and seeming as if it had been varnished. On 
the thin pupa case the wing shields and outhnes of the 
head and different parts of tlie bod}^ could be seen. 
Then a pan of sand was baked, and a box with a glass 
cover was filled. I laid the pupa on top of the sand, and 
then dug up the first one, as I was afraid of the earth in 
which it lay. The case was sound, and in fine condition. 
All of these pup?e lived and seemed perfect. Narrow 
antenna? and abdominal formation marked the big one 
a female, while broader antlers and the clearly outlined 
"claspers, " proved the smaller ones males. A little 
sphagnum moss, that was dampened slightly every few 
days was kept around them. The one that entered the 
ground had pushed the earth from it on all sides at a 
depth of three inches, and hollowed an oval space the 
size of a medium hen egg, in which the pupa lay, but 
there was no trace of its cast skin. Those that pupated 
on the ground had left their skins at the thorax, and lay 
two inches from them. The horns came off with the 
skin, and the lining of the segments and the covering of 
the feet showed. At first the cast skins were green, but 
they soon turned a dirty gra3% and the horns blackened. 
So from having no personal experience at all with our 
rarest moth, inside a few days of latter August and early 
September, weeks after hope had been abandoned for 
the season, I found myself with several as fine studies 
of the male as I could make, one of an immense cater- 

354 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

pillar at maturity, one half transformed to the moth, 
and three fine pupa cases. Besides, I had every reason to 
hope that in the spring I could secure eggs and a likeness 
of a female to complete my illustration. Call this luck, 
fairy magic, what you will, I admit it sounds too good 
to be true; but it is. 

All winter these three fine Regalis pupa cases were 
watched solicitously, as well as my twin Cecropias, some 
Polyphemus, and several ground cocoons so spun on limbs 
and among debris that it was not easy to decide whether 
they were Polyphemus or Luna. When spring came, 
and the Cecropias emerged at the same time, I took 
heart, for I admit I was praying for a pair of Regalis 
moths from those pupa cases in order that a female, a 
history of their emergence, and their eggs, might be 
added to the completion of this chapter. In the begin- 
ning it was my plan to use the caterpillars, and give the 
entire history of one spinning, and one burrowing moth. 
My Cecropia records were complete; I could add the twin 
series for good measure for the cocoon moth; now if only 
a pair would come from these pupa cases, I would have 
what I wanted to compile the history of a ground moth. 

Until the emergence of the Cecropias, my cocoons and 
pupa cases were kept on my dresser. Now I moved 
the box to a chair beside my bed. That was a lucky 
thought, for the first moth appeared at midnight, from 
Mr. Idlewine's case. She pushed the wing shields away 

357 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

with her feet, and passed through the opening. She 
was three and one half inches Jong, with a big pursy 
abdomen, and wings the size of my thumb nail. I was 
anxious for a picture of her all damp and undeveloped, 
beside the broken pupa case; but I was so fearful of 
spoiling my series I dared not touch, or try to reproduce 
her. The head and wings only seemed damp, but the 
abdomen was quite wet, and the case contained a quan- 
tity of liquid, undoubtedlj^ ejected for the purpose of 
facilitating exit. When you next examine a pupa, study 
the closeness with which the case fits antennae, eyes, feet, 
wings, head, thorax, and abdominal rings and you will 
see that it would be impossible for the moth to separate 
from the case and leave it with down intact, if it were dry. 

Immediately the moth l)egan racing around energet- 
ically, and flapping those tiny wings until the sound 
awakened the Deacon in the adjoining room. After a 
few minutes of exercise, it seemed in danger of mjuring 
the other cases, so it was transferred to the dresser, 
where it climbed to the lid of a trinket case, and clinging 
with the feet, the wings hanging, development began. 
There was no noticeable change in the head and shoul- 
ders, save that the down grew fluffier as it dried. The 
abdomen seemed to draw up, and became more compact. 
No one can comprehend the story of the wings unless 
they have seen them develop. 

At twelve o'clock and five minutes, they measured 

358 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

two thirds of an inch from the base of the costa to the tip. 
At twelve fifteen they were an inch and a quarter. At 
half-past twelve they were two inches. At twelve forty- 
five they were two and a half, and at one o'clock they 
were three inches. At complete expansion this moth 
measured six and a half inches strong, and this full sweep 
was developed in one hour and ten minutes. To see those 




CHANGING TO PUPA 



large brilliantly coloured wings droop, widen, and develop 
their markings, seemed little short of a miracle. 

The history of the following days is painful. I not 
only wanted a series of this moth as I wanted nothing 
else concerning the book, but with the riches of three 
fine pupa cases of it on hand, I had promised Professor 

361 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

Rowley eggs from which to obtain its history for himself. 
I had taxed Mr. Rowley's time and patience as an expert 
lepidopterist, to read my text, and examine my illustra- 
tion; and I hoped in a small way to repay his kindness 
by sending him a box of fertile Regalis eggs. 

The other pupa cases were healthful and lively, but 
the moths would not emerge. I coaxed them in the 
warmth of closed palms — I even laid them on dampened 
moss in the sun in the hope of softening the cases, and 
driving the moths out with the heat, but to no avail. 
They would not come forth. 

I had made my studies of the big moth, when she was 
fully developed; but to my despair, she was depositing 
worthless eggs over the inside of my screen door. 

Four days later, the egg-laying period over, the female, 
stupid and almost gone, a fine male emerged, and the 
following day another. I placed some of the sand from 
the bottom of the box on a brush tray, and put these two 
cases on it, and set a focused camera in readiness, so that 
I got a side view of a moth just as it emerged, and one 
facing front when about ready to cling for wing expansion. 
The history of their appearance was similar to that of 
the female, only they were smaller, and of much brighter 
colour. The next morning I wrote Professor Rowley of my 
regrets at being-unable to send the eggs as I had hoped. 

At noon I came home from half a day in the fields, to 
find Raymond sitting on the Cabin steps with a big box, 

362 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

That box contained a perfect pair of mated Regalis moths. 
This was positively the last appearance of the fairies. 

Raymond had seen these moths clinging to the under 
side of a rail while riding. He at once dismounted, 
coaxed them on a twig, and covering them with his hat, 
he weighted the brim with stones. Then he rode to the 
nearest farm house for a box, and brought the pair 
safely to me. Several beautiful studies of them were made, 




_M \i.i: AM) m:_\iali: i:\i asi.d foh winter 



into one of which I also introduced my last moth to emerge, 
in order to show the males m two different positions. 

The date was June tenth. The next day the female began 
egg placing. A large box was Imed with corrugated paper, 
so that she could find easy footmg, and after she had depos- 
ited many eggs on this, fearing some element m it might 
not be liealthful for them, I substituted hickory leaves. 

Then the happy time began. Soon there were heaps 

of pearly pale yellow eggs piled ui pyramids on the leaves, 

3G3 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

and I made a study of them. Then I gently hfted a leaf, 
carried it outdoors, and in full light, reproduced the fe- 
male in the position in which she deposited her eggs, 
even in the act of placing them. Of course, Molly- 
Cotton stood beside with a net in one hand to guard, and 
an umbrella in the other to shade the moth, except at 
the instant of exposure; but she made no movement 
indicative of flight. 

I made every study of interest of which I could think. 
Then I packed and mailed Professor Rowley about two 
hundred fine, fertile eggs, with all scientific data. I only 
kept about one dozen, as I could think of nothing more 
to record of this moth except the fact that I had raised 
its caterpillar. As I explained in the first chapter, from 
information found in a work on moths supposed to be 
scientific and accurate, I depended on these caterpillars 
to emerge in sixteen days. The season was unusually 
rainy and unfavourable for field work, and I had a 
large contract on hand for outdoor stuff. I was so 
extremely busy, I was glad to box the eggs, and put them 
out of mind until the twenty-seventh. By the merest 
chance I handled the box on the twenty-fourth, and 
found six caterpillars starved to death, two more feeble, 
and four that seemed lively. One of these was bitten by 
some insect that clung to a leaf placed in their box for 
food, in spite of the fact that all leaves were care- 
fully washed. One died from causes unknown. One 

364 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

stuck in pupation, and moulded in its skin. Three 
went through tlie succession of moults and feeding 
periods in fine shape, and the first week in September 
transformed into shiny pupa cases, not one of which 
was nearly as large as that of tlie caterpillar brought to 
me by Mr. Idlewine. I fed these caterpillars on black 
walnut leaves as they ate them in preference to hickory. 
I am slightly troubled about this moth. On page two 
hundred ninetv-nine of Packard's "Guide to the Studv of 




LEAVING WINTER QUARTERS 



Moths," he writes: "Citheronia RegalLs expands five to six 

inches, and its fore-wings are olive coloured, spotted with 

yellow and veined w^ith broad red lines, while the hind wings 

are orange-red, spotted with olive, green, and yellow." 

He describes two other species. Citheronia Mexicana, 

a tropical moth that has drifted as far north as Mexico. 

It is quite similar to Regalis, "having more orange and 

less red," but it is not recorded as having been found 

within a thousand miles of my localit}^ A third small 

365 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

species Citheronia sepulcralis, expands only a little over 
three inches, is purple-brown with yellow spots; and is a 
rare Atlantic Coast species having been found once in Mas- 
sachusetts, oftener in Georgia, never west of Pennsylvania. 

This eliminates them as possible Limberlost species, 
and leaves it certain that the moths here photographed, 
painted and described, from eggs back to moth again, 
with such full demonstration of life processes, as never 
has been given by any one in the history of lepidoptera, 
can be nothing save Regalis. Professor Rowley raised 
this moth from the eggs I sent him. 

The trouble is this: Packard describes the fore-wings 
as "olive," the hind as "olive, and green." Holland makes 
no reference to colour, but on plate X, figure three, page 
eighty-seven, he reproduces Regalis with fore-wings of 
olive-green, the remainder of the colour as I describe and 
paint, only lighter. In all the Regalis moths I have 
handled, raised, studied minutely, painted, and photo- 
graphed, there never has been tinge or shade of green. 
Not the slightest trace of it! Each moth, male and 
female has had a basic colour of pure lead or steel gray. 
White tinged with the proper proportions of black and 
blue gives the only colour that will exactly match it. I 
have visited my specimen case since writing the pre- 
ceding. I find there the bodies of four Regalis moths, 
saved after their decline. One is four years old, one 
three, the others two, all have been exposed to da^dight 

366 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBER LOST 

for that length of time. The yellows are slightly faded, 
tJie reds very niueli degraded, the grays a half lighter 
than when fresh; but showing to-day a pure, clear gray. 
What troubles me is whether Regalis of the Limberlost 
is gray, where others are green; or whether I am colour 
blind or these men. Referring to other writers, I am 
growing "leery" of the word "Authority"; half of what 
was written fifty years ago along almost any line you can 
mention, to-day stands disproved; all of us are merely 
seekers after the truth: so referring to other writers, 
I find the women of Massachusetts, who wrote "Cat- 
erpillars and Their JNIoths, " and who in all probability 
have raised more difl^erent caterpillars for the purpose of 
securing life history, than any other workers of our 
country, possibly of any, state that the front wings of 
Regalis have "stripes of lead colour between the veins of 
the wings," and "three or four lead coloured stripes" on 
the back wings. The remainder of my description and 
colouring also agrees with theirs. If these men worked 
from museum or private collections, there is a possibility 
that chemicals used to kill, preserve, and protect the 
specimens from pests may have degraded the colours, 
and changed the gray to green. But to accept this as 
the explanation of the variance upsets all their colour 
values, so it must not be considered. This proves that 
there must be a Regalis that at times has olive-green 
stripes where mine are gray; but I never have seen one. 

369 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

I think people need not fear planting trees on their 
premises that will be favourites with caterpillars, in the 
hope of luring exquisite moths to become common with 
them. I have put out eggs and released caterpillars near 
the Cabin, literally by the thousand, and never have 
been able to see the results by a single defoliated branch. 
Wrens, warblers, flycatchers, every small bird of the trees 
are exploring bark and scanning upper and under leaf 
surfaces for eggs and tiny caterpillars, and if they escape 
these, dozens of larger birds are waiting for the half- 
grown caterpillars, for in almost all instances these lack 
enough of the hairy coat of most butterfly larvae to form 
any protection. Every season I watch my walnut trees 
to free them from the abominable "tent" caterpillars; 
with the single exception of Halesidota Caryse, I never 
have had enough caterpillars of any species attack my 
foliage to be noticeable, and these in only one instance. 
If you care for moths you need not fear to encourage 
them; the birds will keep them within proper limits. If 
only one person enjoys this book one tenth as much as I 
have loved the work of making it, then I am fully repaid. 





THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS 
GARDEN CITY, N. Y. 



