r-i^ 



y-v.-' 



<■-? -V 



IM 



^'■^ 



■^-^ ■ 







Return to 
LIBRARY OF MARINE BIOLOGICAL LABORftTORY 

WOODS HOLE, MASS. 



Loaned by American Museum of Natural History 



THE 



I 



TERRESTRIAL 



AIR-BEEATHING MOLLUSKS 



OF 



THE UNITED STATES, &c. 




v_< 






THE 



TERRESTRIAL 



AIE-BREATHING MOLLUSKS 



OF 



THE UNITED STATES 



AND THE 



ADJACENT TERRITORIES OF NORTH AMERICA: 



DESCEIBED AND ILLUSTKATED BY 



AMOS BINNEY. 



EDITED BY 

AUGUSTUS A. GOULD. 
VOL. L 



B OSTON: 
CHARLES C. LITTLE AND JAMES BROWN. 

MDCCCLI. 



■^ 



Au 



Cambridge: 
feinted by bolles and houghton. 



TO THE 

:2lcaiiemi) of J^'atural Bdtnas 

OF PHILADELPHIA; 

TO WHOSE FOUNDERS IS DUE THE FIKST EFFECTIVE IMPULSE GIVEN 

TO THE STUDY OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN NORTH AMERICA, 

AND WHOSE LABORS HAVE BEEN MAINLY INSTRUMENTAL IN 

DEVELOPING THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE COUNTRY, 

THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY 

THE AUTHOR. 



EVERY SPECIES OF ANIMAL IS POSSESSED OF BEAUTIES PECITLIAK TO IT- 
SELF. THE MORE MAN CONSIDERS THEM, THE MORE THEY EXCITE HIS 
ADMIRATION, AND THE MORE THEY ENGAGE HIM TO ADORE THE AUTHOR 
OF NATURE, WHO HAS MADE EVERY THING IN WISDOM, WHO HAS SUB- 
JECTED EVERY THING TO HIS POWER, AND WHOSE GOODNESS GOVERNS THE 

WHOLE. St. An^zistin. 



IS NOT THE SMALLEST WORM THE WORK OF THE SUPREME BEING, AS 
WELL AS THE MOST PERFECT ANIMAL? AND IF GOD HAS JUDGED IT NOT 
BELOW HIM TO CREATE IT, WHY SHOULD IT BE THOUGHT A WEAKNESS IN A 
REASONABLE MAN TO MAKE IT THE OBJECT OF HIS RESEARCH? LeSser. 



CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 



PAGE 

Editor's notice, ix 

Biographical memoir, xi 

Alphabetical catalogue op authors whose 

WORKS are referred TO IN THIS VOIiUME, 

American authors, 9 

Foreign authors, 13 

Author's preface, 19 

Introduction, 29 

I. Op the rise of scientific zoologt in the united 

states, with notices of naturalists, particularly 

connected with the subject of this work, . . 31 

II. Op the IGNOlliNCE AND NEGLECT OP AMERICAN LABORS 

IN ZOOLOGY EXHIBITED BY EUROPEAN NATURALISTS, 56 
III. Of SOME OP THE OBSTACLES IMPEDING THE STUDY OF 

ZOOLOGY, AND THE MEANS OF OVERTHROWING THEM, 63 

IV. Of classification, 84 

V. Of THE geographical distribution of genera and 

species, and the existing causes influencing it, 99 
Geographical Features of the Countiy, . . .100 

Climate, 110 

Geological Structure, Il2 

Vegetation, 113 

Humidity and Dryness, 113 

Elevation, 115 

Sudden and Extreme Vicissitudes of Temperature, 1 27 

Inundations of Rivers, 130 

Fires, 131 

Agriculture, 132 

Destruction by Animals, 133 

Proximity to the Sea, 135 

Local Causes, 138 



J 



viii CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

VI. Of zoological foci, or points of oeigin whence 

GENEKA AND SPECIES AEE DERIVED, . . . 141 

VII. Of the introduction op foreign species into the 

UNITED ^ATES, . 150 

Table of Foreign Species recorded by Authors as 
^ observed in the United States, . . . .159 

\ Table of the Distribution of Species inhabiting the 

United States, in other parts of America, . .162 
) VIII. Of the distribution of genera and species in the 

UNITED states, COMPARED WITH THAT IN EUROPE 
AND SOUTH AMERICA, 163 

IX. Geological relations, 176 

X. Habits and faculties, 187 

XI. Special anatomy of the terrestrial gasteropoda 
of the united states, by JOSEPH leidy, m. d., of 

PHILADELPHIA, 198 

Introduction, 198 

Chap. I. General Remarks upon the exterior form 
and Structure of the Terrestrial naked Gastero- 
poda, 199 

Chap. II. General Remarks on the Terrestrial Tes- 
taceous Gasteropoda,) 201 

Chap. III. On the Tegumentary Covering of the 
Terrestrial Gasteropoda, . . *' . . . 203 

Chap IV. Of the Digestive Apparatus, . . 206 

Chap. V. Observations on the Tissues of the Diges- 
tive Apparatus, 216 

Chap. VI. Of the Generative Apparatus, . . 217 

Chap. VII. General Remarks upon the Junction of 
different portions of the Generative Apparatus, 
and the Structure of its Tissues, . . . 232 

Chap. VIII. Of the Respiratory and Circulatory 
Apparatus, 235 

Chap. IX. On the Nervous Centres and the Distri- 
bution of the Nerves, 239 

Chap. X. On the Organs of Especial Sense, . 243 
References to the plates, 249 



NOTICE. 



In the last "Will of Dr. Binney is the following clause : 
" Having, for several years past, been collecting mate- 
rials at my leisure for the publication of a -work concern- 
ing the Terrestrial INIollusca of the United States of 
America, a large portion of which is ready for the press, 
and for wliich numerous engravings have been prepared, 
my will is, that in case of my decease before the same 
shall be published and distributed, my executors shall 
employ some competent person or persons to prepare 
the same for the press, and shall publish the same at the 
expense of my estate." 

At the request of the executors, I have endeavored to 
fulfil the wish above expressed. The plan laid out by 
him has been strictly followed, though in some in- 
stances contrary to my own opinions, and it has been 
departed from only where observations since his decease 
have rendered it imperative. The consequence is, that 
there are a few discrepancies between the first and 
second volumes. The work was found to be less com- 

VOL. I. B 



X NOTICE. 

plete than had been anticipated, very few descriptions 
having been finished except in the genus Helix, and 
none of the generic descriptions except those of the 
Limacida3. Many new species have also been added 
from the collections which he had caused to be made 
in the South-western States and Texas, but which 
his health had not permitted him to examine. The 
passages for Avhich I am responsible are indicated 
by the annexation of the letter " g." A number of the 
plates also remained to be designed or engraved. It 
was the intention to have had the work issued very soon 
after the decease of Dr. Binney ; but the scattered state 
of the materials, at various places in this country and in 
Europe, and the difficulty of procuring suitable artists, 
have caused most perplexing delays. 

I cannot hope to have produced the work such as he 
would have made it. My comparative ignorance of a 
subject to which he had given so much of the attention of 
a mind deeply in love with his subject, and thoroughly 
prepared for a full and philosophical treatment of it, 
would forbid this. Nor can I pride myself on possessing 
that delicate artistical taste with which he was so well 
endowed, and which is so necessary in the details of 
such a publication. But so far as a general knowledge 
of his design, together with a sincere wish to do justice 
to the memory of a friend, could avail, they have been 
given to the work. 

A. A. GOULD. 
BosTOX, 1850. 



M E M I E . 



Amos Binney was born in Boston, October 18, 
1803. At the age of ten years, he was sent to 
the Academy at Hingham, where he received his 
education preparatory to entering college. At 
the age of fourteen, he entered Brown Univer- 
sity, and was graduated in 1821. He then en- 
gaged in the study of medicine, under Dr. George 
C. Shattuck, of this city, and attended medical 
lectures at Dartmouth College. At this time his 
health failed him. He had urgent cough, pain 
in the side, and other alarming pulmonary symp- 
toms, and was obliged to suspend his studies. 
By the advice of his medical attendants, he un- 
dertook a journey on horseback, which he accom- 
plished in the summer of 1823, proceeding in 
this way to Cincinnati and home. At Cin- 
cinnati he had an attack of fever which wellnigh 
proved fatal. No relief was gained from this 



xii MEMOIR. 

journey ; and in the following May he fled, as it 
were in despair, to Europe. He there visited 
England, France, Italy, and Germany, directing 
his attention principally to the Hospitals and to 
the great collections of science and art, and re- 
turned home in December, 1825, greatly relieved 
of his disease; though he ever afterwards felt 
the relics of it, and had one or two violent parox- 
ysms of palpitation of the heart, threatening to 
be fatal. He then resumed his medical studies, 
and took the degree of Doctor in Medicine at 
Harvard University, 1826. 

Though intensely interested in the study of 
medicine on account of its bearing upon natural 
science, the practice of the profession he had cho- 
sen was by no means congenial to his taste -, and 
as he deemed the past history of his health ad- 
verse to a professional life, and, still further, as 
Providence seemed at that time to present to 
him prospects of an advantageous connection in 
business, he forthwith abandoned the medical 
profession for mercantile pursuits. His earlier 
enterprises in trade were not encouraging. The 
consequence was, that he was led to direct his 
attention to real estate and mining operations, in 
which his father was also extensively engaged, 



MEMOIR. jjjjj 



and all of wliicli soon devoh^ed upon him by the 
death of his father. In these operations he was 
eminently successful, and rapidly accumulated a 
fortune. 

In the midst of his extensive business he was 
never unmindful of science. This was his pas- 
sion ; and all his leisure moments were devoted 
to it, in preference to mingling in general society, 
for which he had very little taste ; and he always 
looked forward to the time when he should retire 
from business, become a patron of science and art, 
and make science his occupation. In the winter 
of 1836-7, having accumulated what he re- 
garded as a competence, and having invested it 
profitably as he supposed, he counted that the 
anticipated era had thus early arrived. But the 
well-remembered business disasters of 1837 came; 
and so far from being able to retire from business, 
he was obliged to give himself exclusively to it, 
and with redoubled zeal, for the next five years, 
in order to meet the crisis and save his estates 
from the general ruin. Having successfully ac- 
complished this and much more, he again felt 
that, with a competence before him, he could with- 
draw from business cares, and devote himself 
more especially to science and art; and, next 



xiv MEMOIR. 

after his own family, to make the Boston Society 
of Natural History and the Boston Athenseum 
the objects of his solicitude and bounty. But 
alas ! his long-cherished anticipations were not to 
be realized. His health soon began to decline. 
Intermittent headache of a severe and unmanage- 
able character, had already robbed him of half the 
enjoyment of life ; and other difficulties now su- 
pervened. He retired for relief to the country, 
hoping that quiet would restore him. Finding 
this unavailing, he resolved to try what had once 
before proved so salutary to him, — the effect of a 
sea voyage, and a visit to Europe, which he had 
many years designed, for the purpose of becoming 
acquainted with the scientific men and scientific 
collections of the old world, and of purchasing a 
well-appointed scientific library, — all of which 
was to be subservient to the cause of science in 
general, in America, rather than to his individual 
gratification. With these ends in view, and with 
every facility for accomplishing his scientific 
designs, he sailed from New York for Havre in 
October, 1846. He obtained no relief during the 
voyage ; and after stopping a few days at Rouen 
and a short time in Paris, during which his bodily 
sufferings and his nervous irritability increased, 



MEMOIR. Xy 

he urged onward for Italy. He tarried a short 
time at Florence, but became still more ill. In 
passing the Apennines, the chilly and penetrat- 
ing "mistral" which prevailed, and the bleak- 
ness of the lodging-houses, were too much for 
him, in his sensitive condition; and the conse- 
quence was a violent attack of pleurisy. Con- 
vinced that it would be certain death to remain 
under such exposure, he made a desperate effort 
to reach Rome ; and, though every jolt of the 
carriage caused a groan, he arrived there on the 
third day. The most energetic treatment was 
here employed, and at first with marked relief; 
but a relapse took place, and he suffered in- 
tensely. Again the disease seemed to have been 
subdued, and he was encouraged that he would 
recover ; suddenly and unexpectedly, however, 
he sunk, and died, February 18, 1847. His 
earthly remains, in accordance with his wishes, 
Avere brought home, and committed to their des- 
tined resting place at Mount Auburn. 

In person. Dr. Binney was above the middle 
stature, erect, robust, and well-formed. His com- 
plexion was dark, with very dark hair and eyes. 
His features were full and well-formed. His dress 
was elegant and scrupulously neat ; his manners 



xvi MEMOIR. 

were dignified, and bespoke the gentleman. His 
voice was deep-toned, full, and melodious, and 
his enunciation was remarkably distinct. His 
imposing mien, and the grave and positive tones 
of his voice, conveyed a first impression that he 
was haughty and inaccessible. He was himself 
at a loss to know why he had acquired this repu- 
tation, inasmuch as he felt entirely unconscious 
of indulging any thing corresponding to it in his 
heart. In his opinions he was decided, but not 
obstinate. Though naturally indolent, according 
to his own confession, he was ever busy, as it is 
evident he must have been to have accomplished 
so much at so early an age. He was elegant and 
refined in his tastes, and passionately fond of the 
fine arts. His discrimination as a connoisseur is 
well evinced by his numerous and well-selected 
books, pictures, engravings, sculptures, and other 
specimens of the fine arts. He was most happy 
in his domestic relations ; an excellent father, 
unspeakably anxious to train up his children, 
both by example and precept, in all their duties 
to God and man. An extract from his journal 
will exhibit the burden of his mind on this point. 
He says, "May my children especially imbibe 
principles of honor and religion, and may it 



MEMOIR. xvii 



be their high aim to acquire and deserve the 
name of christian gentlemen. May it be said of 
my house, not that ^ all the sons "were brave and 
all the daughters virtuous,' but that all the sons 
were upright and honorable, and all the daugh- 
ters good 1" 

Dr. Binney loved the works of nature, not 
as objects of scientific interest only, but as 
the beautiful manifestations of Divine Wisdom, 
adapted, at the same time, to afford the well- 
disposed mind gratification of the purest and 
deepest kind. As a lover of nature, he viewed 
with delight the whole landscape ; as a natural- 
ist, he loved to study the relations of individual 
objects. And he loved art, because it is the 
nearest material approach which man makes to- 
wards the handiwork of the Creator. His love 
for Natural History was early manifested. When 
quite a child, his chamber was garnished with 
stones, shells, strings of birds' eggs, and such other 
objects as are likely to attract juvenile observa- 
tion. He commenced a collection of shells while 
in college. The interest of his father in mining 
tended early to direct his attention to the study 
of minerals ; but perhaps nothing contributed so 
much to enkindle his interest in the wonders 



VOL. I. 



xviii MEMOIR. 

of nature as his visit to Cincinnati, soon after 
leaving college. The fossiliferoiis rocks of that 
region could not but attract his attention ; and 
during his stay there, he spent most of his hours, 
so far as his strength admitted, in lying upon the 
rocks, and in chiselling out the fossil remains. 
Most of the Silurian fossils now belonging to the 
Natural History Society, were obtained by him at 
that time. His first visit to Europe contributed 
greatly to foster and enlarge the taste already 
formed for Natural Science ; and he availed him- 
self of the opportunity to procure many shells 
from the Mediterranean, and many valuable min- 
erals. 

In February, 1830, there was a meeting of 
gentlemen, which resulted in the formation of the 
Boston Society of Natural History. Dr. Binney 
was one of the number, and was appointed one 
of a committee of five to recommend measures 
for its organization, and the best means of inter- 
esting the public in its favor. In connection 
with the late Simon E. Greene, Esq., he under- 
took to call on gentlemen likely to be favorable 
to the proposed objects of the Society, and 
obtain their cooperation. At a subsequent 
naeeting, he was appointed on the committee to 



MEMOIR. ^ 

draft a Constitution; and it is understood to 
have been mainly done by him. His name is one 
of those mentioned in the act of incorporation. 
At the first meeting for the choice of ofiicers he 
was elected one of the Curators, and has held 
some office in the Society ever since. He was 
Treasurer, 1832-45 Corresponding Secretary, 
1834-7; Vice President from 1837-43, when 
he was elected President. 

The nucleus of the Society's Museum was con- 
tributed by him. In Juty, 1831, he gave two 
hundred specimens of minerals, one hundred spe- 
cimens of foreign organic remains, and two hun- 
dred specimens of fossils from Ohio. He also 
deposited his collection of shells, consisting of 
about fifteen hundred species, and at that time 
by far the most complete collection in this country. 
In 1840, these shells were given to the Society, 
together Avith about one hundred specimens of 
mounted American birds, on certain conditions) 
which were at once complied with. 

The Journal of the Society had his special 
regard. It was modelled by him ; and the first 
paper printed, was written by him. Besides this, 
which was upon the Fusus Aruanus of Chemnitz, 
he contributed several others ; all of them upon 



XX MEMOIR. 

the Terrestrial Mollusks of the United States, 
which he made a special study. As long ago 
as 1835, he commenced a monograph of this 
group of animals, and published it, from time to 
time, in the Journal. Besides his papers pub- 
lished in the Journal, he read others to the 
Society, of no less interest and importance, on 
various subjects, in which he displayed most just 
and discriminating views of the claims of Natural 
Science, and of the spirit and aim with which it 
should be prosecuted.^ 

> The followiag are some of the papers found on his files : — '• 

Report oa the Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Vol. VII. 
Part 2, 1837. 

Remarks on the Reports on the Birds, Fishes, and Reptiles of Massachu- 
setts. November, 1839. 

Observations on the Appearance of the so-called Sea Serpent at Nahant, 
as seen by himself, August, 1839, with sundry Documents. 

Criticism on Schlegel's Notice of Dr. Holbrook's Herpetology, Vol. I. 
September, 1840. 

Remarks on two Paleontological Works of Michelotti. October, 1842. 

Observations, during two successive summers at Nahant, on the Habits of 
the short Sun-fish, ( Onhagoriscus mola.) December, 1842. 

Remarlcs on the American Species of Pupa. April, 1843. 

Remarks on the Descriptions of New Fresh Water and Land Shells, by 
Isaac Lea. 

On the Hydrarchos and the Mastodon, (published in the Daily Advertiser, 
September, 1845.) 

Remarks at the Annual Meetings of the Boston Society of Natural His- 
tory. 1844 and 1845. 

Remarks on the Fossils from the Strata of the Bluffs at Natchez, on the 
Mississippi River. April, 1846. 



MEMOIR. xxi 



The great work, however, to which he chiefly 
devoted himself, was the one which follows, being 
an amplification of his Monograph on the Ter- 
restrial Mollusks of the United States. It was 
his intention to publish something that, in com- 
pleteness and in the style of its mechanical ex- 
ecution, should be unsurpassed by any similar 
work. He therefore spared no pains and no 
expense to render it as perfect as possible. He 
obtained characteristic and living shells of every 
species and variety ; he procured the best artists 
to figure and engrave both the animal and the 
shell J many of which were repeatedly drawn or 
engraved before he was quite satisfied with the 
result; — he had thorough and accurate dissec- 
tions made of all their anatomical minutise, by 
the skilful hands of Drs. Wyman and Leidy ; and 
he kept most of the species in captivity for 
months, that he niight be able to observe their 
habits, the variations they exhibited, and the 
changes they underwent by age, food, etc. To 
carry out fully his design, he employed an expe- 
rienced collector to spend one winter in Florida 
and the adjacent Keys, and another in the South- 
western States, including Texas ; and thus he was 
prepared to give not only the descriptive charac- 



Xxii MEMOIR. 

ters of the whole group, but its geographical and 
geological relations, and many other generaliza- 
tions of much interest and importance. He car- 
ried the manuscript with him to Europe, intend- 
ing to have some of the unfinished plates exe- 
cuted there. This most valuable work was left 
so nearly complete that it may be regarded 
as essentially his work. 

His last and his greatest effort in behalf of 
science was, to carry into effect a purpose, long 
since formed, of obtaining, through the liberality 
of the Boston public, a building for the Society 
of Natural History, which should amply accom- 
modate its present and prospective collections. 
In his anniversary Address, in 1846, he set forth 
in the most lucid and convincing manner, the 
wants of the Society, the absolute uselessness of 
adding to its collections in consequence of a 
want of the means for their preservation and dis- 
play, and the claims which the objects and labors 
of the Society had upon the public. By a vote 
of the Society, this address was afterwards 
printed and circulated, as an appeal to an en- 
lightened and liberal public; and it will ever 
stand as an enduring memorial of his just 
appreciation of the claims of science, of his 



MEMOIR. ^^ili 

clear and unafTectecl style of writing, and of 
his devotedness to the interests of the Society. 
Not only did he do this, but voluntarily under- 
took to solicit the necessary subscriptions, in 
which he had so far succeeded as to put his 
final success beyond a doubt, when disease 
arrested him. 

He was a member of all the scientific bodies 
in this country; — the American Philosophical 
Society ; the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences ; the Academy of Natural Sciences of 
Philadelphia ; the New Yovk Lyceum ; the Na- 
tural History Societies of Hartford, Salem, Port- 
land, and many others. 

He was also one of the prominent members of 
the American Association of Geologists and Na- 
turalists. He had read several very interesting 
papers at its sessions, most of which were des- 
tined to form a part of his work on the Terres- 
trial Mollusks. When, at the session of the 
Association in Boston, in 1844, it was proposed 
by several of our most intelligent citizens, that 
the valuable papers which had been read should 
be printed, and liberal contributions were A'olun- 
teered by them for the purpose. Dr. Binney 
was made chairman of the publishing committee. 



Xxiv MEMOIR. 

In conformity to his wishes, the work was carried 
out in a style far superior to what was contem- 
plated, and proved also much more voluminous, 
while the sales were very limited. The cost, of 
course, far exceeded the means of publication; 
and the residue, amounting to a large proportion 
of the whole, was contributed by him. 

At the session held in Boston in September, 
1848, he was to have presided over that distin- 
guished body, and expected much gratification 
to himself on that occasion, in the anticipation 
that the citizens of Boston would, by their hos- 
pitality and energy, render it a profitable and 
happy occasion to those who might favor them 
with their presence. 

It was not, however, for his direct, actual scien- 
tific labors and acquirements that Dr. Binney 
stood in his most important relations to science. 
Others have, probably, labored more constantly, 
more zealously, and have made more progress 
than he. But he held a position which very few 
occupy. He stood between science and the pub- 
lic to whom it must look for countenance and 
support. Fully alive to its claims, having a 
clear, philosophical appreciation of the difference 
between true and false science, and having him- 



MEMOIR. XXV 

self made respectable attainments in the funda- 
mental principles of natural science, and even in 
all its separate branches, he was at the same 
time the man of business, the man of fortune, the 
man of prospective leisure, and the man who had 
consecrated that leisure to the interests of science 
and art. 

Not the least among the items for which science 
is indebted to Dr. Binney, must we reckon his 
superb library. It numbers many hundred vol- 
umes, and at his death was undoubtedly the most 
important library of works on zoology in America. 
It was by no means the largest ; but it contained 
more of the modern works, on those topics which 
are essential to the study of natural history in its 
present state, than any other one library in the 
country. Many of the books are splendid, rare, 
and very costly works; and all are in elegant 
binding. These he granted free use of, to all 
who desired it ; and indeed it had become indis- 
pensable, in the investigation of any important 
topic in zoology, to consult his library ; and for 
this purpose it was visited by gentlemen from all 
parts of the Union. 

Having frequent occasion to travel, and thus 
visiting every quarter of the Union, he formed 

VOL. I. D 



xxvi MEMOIR. 

an acquaintance with almost every man who had 
any pretensions to science ; and he did much to 
encourage them, and to bring them in contact 
with each other. At the same time, his eye was 
always open, and on the watch for any thing that 
might be of importance to the Museum or to the 
Journal of the Natural History Society. 

While a member of the Legislature, in 1836-7, 
he used his endeavors to sustain the State Geo- 
logical Survey, then in process by Prof Hitch- 
cock, and was jorincipally instrumental in having 
attached to it the Commission for the Zoological 
Survey also, the results of which have been so 
important. He also secured for the Natural His- 
tory Society an appropriation from the Legisla- 
ture, which, small as it was, was infinitely import- 
ant at that time. 

To the Natural History Society, he was, at the 
same time, the patron, the fellow-laborer, the Pre- 
sident. He stood with it, and yet with the world, 
a link to bring them in contact. Having been 
instrumental in its organization, having watched 
and fostered it through its days of feebleness and 
small things, and having passed through its vari- 
ous offices till he had become its head, — his 
name, his fame, his labors, and his fortune were 



MEMOIR. ^^ii 



identified with the Society ; and in its social rela- 
tions he was in a position to render services which 
no survivor has the power of rendering. He had 
hoped that by his visit to Europe he should be 
enabled to form acquaintances with scientific men, 
and their modes and facilities for investigation ; 
to learn the best arrangement for a cabinet, and 
the best modes of preserving objects ; to negotiate 
exchanges, and make large additions to his li- 
brary; by which his future connection with the 
Society, especially at the juncture when plans 
for the permanent arrangement and preservation 
of the Cabinet were likely to be needed, might 
become of the greatest possible advantage. 

Nor was he less qualified, or less disposed, to 
promote the interests of art among us. Ill as lie 
was in Europe, he never lost sight of the two 
institutions which he had determined to foster ; 
and he was daily seeking to obtain collections 
for the one, and rare books and paintings for the 
other. Several arrangements with this view had 
been entered into, which were interrupted by his 
illness, and more or less defeated by his death. 

It is due both to him and to the history of 
American Art to record, that with a view to the 
encouragement of American Artists, he had pro- 



xxviil MEMOIR. 

posed to four of the most prominent painters of 
his native country to execute for him two pictures 
each, at generous prices. They were to choose 
their own subjects, and not be limited for time ; 
the only stipulations being, that the pictures 
should be of certain dimensions, and the subject 
of one of each was to be from history, either 
American, or written by an American ; and they 
were requested to produce such works as would 
give to the world a pledge of their ability, and on 
which they might hope to rest a reputation with 
posterity. The four artists selected were Hunt- 
ington, E-othermel, Leutze, and Terry. The fol- 
lowing pictures have resulted; namely, "Henry 
VHI. and Catherine Parr," by Huntington ; 
"Noche Triste," from Prescott's Conquest of 
Mexico, by Rothermel; "Spaniards storming a 
Mexican Teocalli," also from Prescott's Mexico, 
by Leutze ; and " I think," from Prescott's Fer- 
dinand and Isabella, by Terry. 

Similar propositions were made to the Ameri- 
can sculptors. Powers and Crawford, and also to 
other artists, for statuary in bronze. 

Such was his life, his attainments, his aims. 
And when, with his generation, the memory of 
Dr. Binney, as a man, an enterprising citizen, a 



MEMOIR. 



XXIX 



father, and a friend, shall have passed away, his 
name must ever appear among the pioneers of 
Science in America, as one of its most substantial 
supporters, and as having contributed materially 
to the enlargement of its boundaries. 



"=— j-^^- " 




CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 



ALPHABETICAL 

CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS 

WHOSE WORKS ARE REFERRED TO IN THIS VOLUME. 

WITH THE TITLE AND DATE OF PUBLICATION. 



N. B. The leading words only of the title of each worlt, and those often abbreviated, are pVen in the 
references in the text. When the author's name alone is given, it is to be understood to refer lo the single 
work in this list. 



AMERICAN AUTHORS. 

Adams, C. B. Professor of Natural History in Middlebury Col- 
lege, Vermont. Catalogue of the Mollusca of Middlebury, 
Vt., and vicinity. American Journal of Science, Vol. xl., 
pp. 266— 277. April, 184L 

Fresh-Water and Land Shells of Vermont, with figures, con- 
tained in Thompson's History of Vermont ; also published 
separately, pp. 20, 8vo. 1842. 

Anthony, John G. Cincinnati, Ohio. Description of Bulimus 
vermetus. On the cover of Haldeman's Monograph of the 
Limniades, No. 3. July, 1831. 

BiNNEY, Amos. Boston, Mass. A Monograph of the Helices 
inhabiting the United States, with figures. Boston Journal 
of Natural History, Vol. i. pp. 466 — 495. May, 1837. 
Vol. iii. pp. 353 — 394, July, 1840, and pp. 405 — 438, 
November, 1840. 
Descriptions of some of the species of naked air-breathing Mol- 
Itisca inhabiting the United States. Same Journal, Vol. iv. 
pp. 163 — 175. Same in pamphlet form, January, 1842. 

VOL. I. 2 



10 CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

Description of a species of Helix newly discovered in the United 
States. In the same Journal. Vol. iv. p. 241. 

Conrad, Timothy A. Philadelphia, Penn. American Marine 
Conchology, or descriptions and colored figures of the Shells 
of the Atlantic coast of North America. 8vo. pp. 72, 16 plates. 
Philadelphia, 1831. 
New Fresh- Water Shells of the United States, with colored 
illustrations, and a Monograph of the genus Anculotus of Say, 
also a Synopsis of the American Naiades. 12mo. pp. 76, 
8 plates. Philadelphia, 1834. 

DeKay, James E., M. D. New York. A Report on the Zoology 
of New York, containing a Catalogue of the Animals of that 
State, being a part of the Annual Report on the Geological 
Survey for 1840, pp. 7 — 36. Document of the Assembly of 
New York, No. 50. Albany, January, 1840, 

Zoology of Neio York ; or the New York Fauna. Part V. Mol- 
lusca. 4to. pp. 270, 40 plates. Albany, 1843. Published by 
order of the Legislature of New York. 
Gould, Augustus A., M. D. Boston, Massachusetts. A Mon- 
ograph of the species of Pupa found in the United States, 
with figures. Boston Journal of Natural History, Vol. iii. 
pp. 395 — 404. July, 1840, and Vol. iv. pp. 351 — 360. 
Jan. 1841. Same in pamphlet form. 

Results of an Examination of the Shells of Massachusetts, and 
their Geographical Distribution. Same Journal. Vol. iii. pp. 
483—494. November, 1840. 

A Report on the Invertebrata of Massachusetts, comprising the 
Mollusca, Crustacea, Annelida, and Radiata, pp. 373, 8vo. 
with figures. Boston and Cambridge, 1841. Published by 
order of the Legislature of Massachusetts. 

Green, Jacob, M. D. Professor of Chemistry in Jefferson Col- 
lege, Pennsylvania. Note annexed to a Memoir, containing 
a description of Helix Pennsylvanica. Contributions of Mac- 
lurian Lyceum, No. 1, p. S. Philadelphia. January, 1827. 
Notes of a Naturalist. Doughty's Cabinet of Natural History, 
Vol. ii. p. 291, and Vol. iii. p. 35. Philadelphia, 1833. 

Haldeman, S. Stehman. Columbia, Pennsylvania. A Mono- 
graph of the Limniades and other Fresh- Water Univalve Shells 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. Jl 

of North America. With colored figures, 8vo. Pliiladelphia, 
1840 — 1843. Eiglit numbers have been published. 
Enumeration of the fnsh-water MoUusca common to North 
America and Europe, with Observations on Spccirs and their dis- 
tribution. In the Boston Journal of Natural History, Vol. 
iv. pp. 468 — 484. 1844. 

KiRTLAND, J. p., M. D. Cleveland, Ohio. Report on the Zoology 
of Ohio, contained in the Second Annual Report on the Geo- 
logical Survey of the State of Ohio, pp. 157 — 200. 8vo. 
Legislative Document. Columbus, Ohio, 1838. 

Lea, Isaac. Philadelphia. Observations on the Naiades, and 
Descriptions of new species of that and other Families : with 
colored figures. Transactions of American Philosophical 
Society, Philadelphia, Vol. iv. pp. 63 — 121. 1834; and 
Vol. V. pp. 23 — 120. 1837. 
Descriptions of new Fresh- Water and Land Shells. Same 
Transactions, Vol. vi. pp. 1—111, vi^ith colored figures, 
1838. Also Papers under the same title in the Proceedings 
of the same Society, viz. : No. 13, October, 1840; No. 17, 
March, 1841 ; No. 19, July, 1841. 

LiNSLEY, Rev. James H. Stratford, Con. Catalogue of the Shells 
of Connecticut, pp. 16. In American Journal of Science, Vol. 
xlvii. No. 2. Same in pamphlet form. New Haven, 1844. 

MiGHELs, J. W., M. D. Portland, Maine. Catalogue of the 
Marine, Fluviatile and Terrestrial Shells of the Slate of Maine 
and adjacent Ocean. Boston Journal of Natural History, 
Vol. iv. pp. 308 — 345. April, 1843. 

Phillips, John S. Philadelphia. Description of a neio Ameri- 
can species of the genus Helix. Journal of the Academy of 
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. viii. p. 182. Also in 
Proceedings of the same, No. 3, June, 1841. 

Plummer, John T., M. D. Scraps in Natural History. Shells 
about Richmond, Wayne County, Indiana. In American 
Journal of Science, Vol. xlviii. pp. 92, 94. 

Say, Thomas. Philadelphia. Conchology. The Article under 
that name in the American editions of Nicholson's Encyclo- 
pedia. The references are to the 2d edition. Philadelphia. 
1818. Vol. iv. With figures. 



12 CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

Say, Thomas. Description of seven species of American Fresh- 
Water and Land Shells not noticed in the Si/stems. Journal 
of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. i. 
pp. 13 — 18. May, 1817. 
. Descriptions of neio species of Land and Fresh-Water Shells. 
Same Journal. Vol. i. pp. 123 — 125. October, 1817. 

Account of tioo new Genera, and several new species of Fresh- 
Water and Land Shells. Same Journal. Vol. i. pp. 276 — 
284. May, 1818. 

Descriptions of Univalve Shells of the United States. Same 
Journal. Vol. ii. pp. 149 — 179. January, 1821. 

Descriptions of Univalve terrestrial and fluviatile Shells of the 
United States. Same Journal. Vol. ii. pp. 370 — 381. De- 
cember, 1822. 

Descriptions of some new species of Fresh-Water and Land 
Shells. Same Journal. Vol. v. pp. 119 — 131. August, 
1825. 

Expedition to the Source of St. Peter^s River, Lake Winnepeck, 
(Sfc, performed in the year 1823, by order of John C. Cal- 
houn, Secretary of War, under the command of Stephen H. 
Long, Major U. S. T. E. Appendix. Zoology. Vol. ii. pp. 
253 — 378. With figures. 8vo. Philadelphia, 1824. 

American Conchology, or Descriptions of the Shells of North 
America, illustrated hy colored figures. Six numbers. 8vo. 
New Harmony, Indiana. 1830 — 1834. A posthumous num- 
ber has been published in Philadelphia, by Mrs. Say. 

Descriptions of some new terrestrial and fluviatile Shells of North 
America. Disseminator of Useful Knowledge. New Har- 
mony, Ind. 1829 — 1831. And Transylvania Journal of 
Medicine, vol. ii. 1832. Collected and published in pam- 
phlet form, under the same title, pp. 26. 8vo. New Har- 
mony, 1840. 

Sager, Abm., M. D. Detroit, Michigan. Catalogue of Animals 
observed in the State of Michigan. Contained in the Second 
Annual Report of the State Geologist ; Document of the Sen- 
ate of Michigan. No. 13. Detroit, Mich., Feb. 1839. 

Transactions of Societies devoted wholly or in part to Natural 
History, viz. : 
Annals of the Lyceum of Natural History of New York, 4 vols. 
8vo. 1823 to 1826. 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 



13 



Contributions of the Madurian Lyceum to the Arts and Sciences, 

8vo. three numbers, Philadelphia, 1827 to 1829. 
Journal of the Acadcmij of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, 

8 vols. 8vo. 1817 to 1826. Proceedings of the same, 1843 

to 1846. 
Journal of the Boston Society of Natural History, 5 vols. 8vo. 

1834 to 1846. Proceedings of the same, 1843 to 1846. 
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society ; First Series, 

6 vols. 4to ; Second Series, 8 vols. 4to. Proceedings of the 

same. 

Wyman, Jeffries, M. D. On the Anatomy of Tebcnnophorus 
Caroliniensis. Journal of Boston Society of Natural History, 
vol. iv. p. 410. 
On the Anatomical Structure of Glandina truncata. Same Jour- 
nal, vol. iv. p. 416. 



FOREIGN AUTHORS. 

Benson, W. H. Mollusca of Chusan, in Dr. Cantor's Fauna of 
Chusan. Annals and Magazine of Natural History, vol. ix. 
p. 485. 1842. 

Bosc, L. A. G. Histoire Naturelle des Coquilles, contenant leur 
Description, Ics Mceurs des Animaux qui les habitent, et leurs 
Usages. Paris, 1802. 5 vols. 18mo. — Being a part of 
Deterville's edition of Buffon's Works. 

Blainville, H. M. Ducrotay de. Manuel de Malacologie et 
de Conchyliologie. pp. 664. 87 plates. 8vo. Paris, 1825. 

Bouchard-Chanteraux. Catalogue des Mollusques terrestres et 
fuviatiles, observes jusqu'it ce jour, <i P^tat vivant, dans le 
Departement du Pas de Calais. 8vo. pp. 94, one plate. Bou- 
logne-sur-Mer, 1838. 

BouiLLET, J. B. Catalogue des Especes et Varietes de Mollusques 
terrestres et fluviatiles de la Haute et de la Basse-Auvcrgne, 
8vo. pp. 166. Clermont-Ferrand, 1836. 



14 CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

BRUGUiiiRE, J. G. Histoire Naturelle des Vers, torn. i. In the 

Encyclop6die M6thodique, 4to. Paris, 1792. 
CoLLARD DES Cherres. Catalogue des Testaces tcrrestres etfluvia- 

tiles des enviroTis de Brest et Quimper, Departement du Finis- 

terre. In the Bulletin d'Histoire Naturelle de la Societ6 

Linn^enne de Bordeaux, vol. iv. 
Deshayes, G. p. Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans Vertebres 

de Lamarck. Deuxieme idition revue et augmentie de Notes, 

<5fc. 4"C. Svo. Paris. Les Mollusques. Tome vii. 1836, 

tome viii. 1838. 
Histoire Naturelle des Vers, dans V Encydopidie Methodique, 

Continuee par Deshayes. 4to. tome ii. 1830, tome iii. 1832. 
Histoire Naturelle Generale et Particuliere des Mollusques, <SfC. 

<Sfc. de Ferussac. Continuee par G. P. Deshayes. 4to. 1839 

— 1841. Several livraisons published ; unfinished. 
Traife Elementaire de Conchyliologie, avec V application de cette 

Science d, la Geognosie. Svo. Paris, 1839 — 1840. Seven 

livraisons published. 

Des Moulins, Ch. Notice sur la Repartition des Especes dans 
les Genres Solen, Solecurte, Sanguinolaire, et Soletelline. 
Actes de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux, tome v. p. 92. 

DiLLvsTYN, Louis Weston. A descriptive Catalogue of Recent 
Shells, arranged according to the Linnean Method. 2 vols. 
Svo. London, 1817. 

D'Orbigny, Alcide. Voyage dans VAmcrique Meridionale. 
Execute dans le cours des annees 1826 ^ 1833. Les Mol- 
lusques, 4to. Paris. Not complete. 
Les Mollusques, dans U Histoire Physique, Politique, et Natu- 
relle de risle de Cuba, de M. De La Sagra. 4to. Paris. Not 
completed. 

Draparnaud, Jaques Philippe Raymond. Histoire Naturelle 
des Mollusques ierrestres et fluviatiles de la France. 4to 
pp. 134. 13 plates. Paris, an 13. (1805.) 

Ferussac, D'Audebard de. Histoire Naturelle Gltnerale et Par- 
ticuliere des Mollusques terrestres et fluviatiles. 4to. Nu- 
merous plates. 1819 — 1832. Unfinished. 
Tableaux Systematiques des Animaux Mollusques classes en fa- 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. ^^ 

millrs naturclks; — suivis d^un Prodrome General pour tous 
Ics Mollusques tcrrestres oufluviatiles. 4to. Paris, Jane, 1822. 

Forbes, Edward. Report on the Distrihution of Piilmoniferous 
MoUusca in the British Isles. Report of British Association 
for 1839, pp. 127—147. 8vo. London. 1840. 

Grateloup, S. Tableau Melhodique des Mollusques tcrrestres et 
Jluviatiles observes dans V Arrondissemcnt de Dax, Departe- 
ment des Landes. In the Bulletin d'Histoire Naturelle de la 
Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux. Vol. iii. 1829. 

Gray, John Edward. Manual of the Land and Fresh-Water 
Shells of the British Islands, by William Turton, M. D. A 
new edition, thoroughly revised and much enlarged. l2mo. 
pp. 324. Colored plates. London, 1840. 

Humboldt et Bonpland. Rccueil d^ Observations de Zoologie et 
d^ Anatomie Comparee. 4to. tome ii. Paris. 1833. 

Lamarck, J. B. P. A. de, Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans 
Vertebres. 7 vols. 8vo. tome vi., 2d part. Paris, April, 1822. 
2d edit. 11 vols, 8vo. 

Leuchs, J. C. Vollstdndige Naturgcschichte der Acker schnecJce. 
8vo. pp. 288. Niirmburg, 1820. 

LiNNE, Carolus a. Fauna Suecica, sistens Animalia Sueciee 
Eegni, <Sfc. Editio altera auctior. pp. 578. 8vo. Holmise. 
1761. 
Systema Naturm. Editio duodecima reformata. 4 vols in 3. 8vo, 
Holmiae, 1766 — 1768. 

Menke, C. T. Synopsis methodica Molluscorum generum om- 
nium et specierum earum qua in Museo Menkeano adservantur. 
Editio altera, pp. 168. 8vo. Pyrmonti, 1830. 

MicHAUD, A. L. G. Complement de V Histoire Naturelle des Mol- 
lusques tcrrestres et fluviatiles de la France de J. P. R. Dra- 
parnaud. 4to. pp. 116. 16 plates. Verdun, 1831. 

MoRELET, M. A. Description des Mollusques tcrrestres et fluvia- 
tiles du Portugal. 8vo. Paris. 1846. 

MoRiCAND, Stefano. Note sur quelques Especes nouvelles de 
Coejuilles tcrrestres. Memoires de la Societe dc Physique et 
d'Histoire Naturelle de Geneve. Tom. vi. 1833, pp. 537 — 
543. 



IQ CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

MiJLLER, Otho F. Vcrmium terrestrium et fluviatilium, seu 
Animalium infusoriorum, hclminthicorum et testaceorum, non 
marinorum, succincta Historia. 2 vols. 4to. Havnias et 
Lipsise, 1773 — 1774. 

NiLSSON, S. Historia Mollusconim Succia terrestrium et fluvia- 
tilium hreviter delineata, 8vo. London, 1822. 

Pennant, Thomas. British Zoology. A new edition in 4 vols. 
8vo. London, 1812. 

Pfeiffer, Lud. Symhola, ad Historiam Heliceorum. 8vo. Casselis, 
1841. Sectio altera, 1842. 
Ahsicht der in Jan. Feb. und Marz, 1839, auf Cuba gesammelter 
MoUuskcn. In Wiegmann's Archiv for 1839, p. 346, and 
for 1840, p. 250. 

Philippi, Rudolph A. Enumeratio Molluscorum Sicilim. 4to. 
pp. 269. 12 plates. Berlin, 1836. 
Ahbildungen und Beschreibungen ncuer oder wenig geJcannter 
Conchylien. 4to. Cassel, 1842 — 1845. 

PoRRO, Carlo. Malacologia terrestre et fluviale delta Provincia 
Comasca. 8vo. pp. 132. 2 plates. Milano, 1838. 

Rackett, Thomas. Description of some Shells found in Can- 
ada. Transactions of the Linnean Society of London. Vol. 
xiii. pp. 42 — 43. 1819. 

Rafinesque, Constantine Schmaltz. Prodrome de soixante 
nouvcaux Genres d'Animaux decouverts dans Pinterieur des 
Etats Unis d'Amirique durant Vannee, 1818. Journal de 
Physique. Tome Ixxxviii. p. 417. Paris, June, 1819. 

Annals of Nature, or Annual Synopsis of new Genera and Species 
of Animals, Plants, Sfc, discoi^ered in North America. First 
Annual Number, for 1820. 8vo. pp. 16. Lexington, Kentucky. 
1821. 

Enumeration and Account of some remarkable Natural Objects in 
the Cabinet of Professor Rafinesque. 8vo.pp. 8. Philadelphia, 
1831. 

Rang, Sander. Manuel de VHistoire Naturelle des Mollusques 
et de leurs Coquilles. 18mo. pp. 390. Paris, 1829. 

RoissY, F. DE. Histoire Naturelle des Mollusques. Vols. v. and 
vi. of Louvini's edition of the vporks of BufFon. 8vo. Paris. 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. ^7 

RossMASSLER, E. A. Icono graphic <Irr Land und Sussicas- 
ser-MoUuskcn, mit vorzuglicher Beruchskhtigung der Euro- 
pdischen noch nicht ahgeUldcten Artcn. 11 parts, 8vo. Dres- 
den und Leipzig. 1835 — 1841. 

SoWERBY, G. B., JuN. Thesaurus Conchjliorum, or Figures 

and Descriptions of Recent Shells. Parts 1 to 5, royal 8vo. 

London, 1842 — 1845. 
Studer. System Verzeichniss der Schweizer-Conchylien. Bern, 

1820. Gartner's Naturwis. Anzeiger, 3ter. Jahrgung, No. 

11 und 12. 
Terver, M. Catalogue des Mollusqucs terrestres et fluviatiles 

observes dans les Possessions Frangaises au Nord de VAfrique. 

8vo. pp. 40. 4 plates. Paris, 1839. 
Thompson, W. Catalogue of the Land and Fresh-Water Molluscn 

of Ireland. In the Annals and Magazine of Natural History. 

Vol. vi. p. 16. 

Wood, W. Index Testaceologicus, or a Catalogue of Shells, 
British and Foreign, arranged according to the Linnean Sys- 
tem. Illustrated with 2300 figures. 2d edition, 8vo. Lon- 
don, 1828. 

Supplement to the Index Testaceologicus. Illustrated with 480 
figures. 8vo. London, 1828. 



VOL. 1, 



P EE F A C E. 



The following pages, prepared during intervals 
of leisure, have served to occupy the attention 
of the author, and have constituted his amuse- 
ment amid the active engagements of business. 
He has esteemed himself fortunate in being able 
to find, in the study of Natural History, a relief 
to the over-burthened mind, a solace in trouble, 
and a protection from the all-absorbing cares 
"which are incidental to mercantile pursuits. If 
to the healthful exercise of body and mind 
which he has himself enjoyed in their prepara- 
tion, he shall be able to add the approbation of 
those who are engaged in similar investigations, 
it will be as ample a recompense as he has ever 
proposed to himself He offers them to the nat- 
uralists of the United States without any other 



20 PREFACE. 

pretension than that of being actuated by a sin- 
cere desire of rendering them accurate and faith- 
ful, in every particular, and, so far, worthy of 
acceptance. 

In bringing together and reviewing the labors 
of others in the same department of science, he 
has endeavored to do strict justice to all, to ac- 
knowledge his obligation for information received 
from each, and to indicate the source from which 
it is derived. If there are any omissions, in this 
respect, they have arisen from inadvertence and 
not from design. It will be noticed that in sev- 
eral instances he differs in opinion from those 
who have preceded him, and that he considers 
several species, described by them, to be merely 
varieties of, or even identical with, animals before 
known. In thus exercising his own judgment 
in opposition to that of persons for whose opinions 
he entertains the highest respect, he trusts that 
he has done it in a manner which cannot give 
just ground of offence. He has no regard for 
his own views, except so far as they shall be 
found consistent with truth, and he expects 
that they will be controverted by others with the 
same freedom, whenever they are supposed to be 
erroneous. 



PREFACE. 21 

The work contains descriptions of all the air- 
breathing mollusks of the United States, living 
upon the land, including both the aboriginal and 
those foreign species which, having been from time 
to time introduced, have now become naturalized 
to the soil ; and of such species belonging to the 
countries adjacent as are known to the author. 
Our knowledge of these animals is brought down 
to the date of publication ; and it is hoped that 
the work will be found to be as complete as any 
record of an actively progressive science can be. 
In its preparation, all the American authorities 
have been consulted, and for the benefit of Euro- 
pean naturalists, some of whom appear to be 
inexcusably ignorant or wilfully neglectful of 
what has been done for Natural History in this 
country, a catalogue of American authors, whose 
works have been used in compiling these pages, 
is given ; a catalogue of the foreign works, 
referred to, is also added. A full synonomy of 
the native species is attempted, and it will pro- 
bably be found to be pretty complete ; but for 
the introduced species a few references only to 
well known works are given. 

Great care has been taken to investigate the 



22 PREFACE. 

history of each species in order to designate it 
hy the name applied to it by its first discoverer. 
The rule adopted is to give priority to tJie fird 
published description or to the first published name 
accompanied by a recognisable figure, and to reject 
all claims based upon the publication of a name 
only, as these, if allowed, would inevitably lead 
to doubt and inconvenience, and in the end 
would afford opportunity for unfairness and 
fraud. The date of the first publication of the 
species is appended to the name of the work in 
which it appeared. The operation of the rule 
will restore to American authors many species 
which were first described by them, but which 
have long had a place in the works of MM. 
Ferussac, Lamarck and Deshayes under the names 
of foreigners who did not know them until after 
they had been described in this country. 

It is one of the aims of this work to point out 
the errors, and to supply the omissions, of those 
and other distinguished naturalists ; but although 
the author hopes to make his own work more 
useful thereby, he is far from presuming that it 
can bear a favorable comparison with theirs in 
any other respect than in giving a more fuU and 



PREFACE. op, 



correct account of the species belonging to liis 
own country. 

It is proper to state here, that when the work 
was nearly ready for publication the annexation 
of the republic of Texas to the United States 
enlarged the area of the author's investigations, 
by the addition of a region of many thousand 
square miles in extent to the vast territory already 
included in the field of his inquiry. He endeav- 
ored to meet the exigency by employing a com- 
petent naturalist to explore the accessible parts 
of that State during the early part of 1846 ; l)ut 
it cannot be expected that the results of that ex- 
ploration can exhibit more than an incomplete 
view of the species living there. A wide field 
of investigation is left for the future naturalist, 
both in Texas and in the whole extensive and 
but partially-explored region west of the Missis- 
sippi river. 

The author takes pleasure in maldng this 
public acknowledgment of his obligations to those 
gentlemen who have kindly furnished him with 
materials used in the preparation of the work. 
To R. E. Grifiith, M. D., late of the University 
of Virginia, a cotemporary of, and fellow-la])<)ror 



24 PREFACE. 

with Mr. Say, he is indebted for much valuable 
information respecting this class of animals, which 
has been the especial object of his attention. It 
is a cause of regret that he should not have per- 
severed in a design, conceived several years since, 
of publishing a work on the same general plan 
as the present, for the judicious execution of 
which he is peculiarly well qualified, both by 
study and observation. To Professor C. B. Ad- 
ams, of Middlebury College, Vermont, he owes 
the loan of his entire collection of his American 
terrestrial mollusks, which have been of impor- 
tant service in the comparison and diagnosis of 
species, and for many facts concerning these ob- 
served by him in Vermont. To S. S. Haldeman, 
of Columbia, Penn., he is under obligations for 
specimens collected by him during a journey 
through the southern and south-western States, 
and for much information respecting the distribu- 
tion of species. To John G. Anthony, Esq., of 
Cincinnati, Ohio, for valuable aid and many facts, 
derived from his own observation, concerning the 
species found in the neighborhood of that city. 
To J. Hamilton Couper, Esq., of Hopeton, near 
Darien, Georgia, for his obliging attention in 



PREFACE 26 

transmitting his observations on the habits of 
Glandina, together with the living animal, and a 
beautiful drawing of it ; and also for the species 
common in the lower parts of Georgia. To Prof 
Jeffries Wyman, for information on the anatomy 
and habits of the animals ; and to Prof J. P. 
Kirtland, of Cleveland, Ohio ; Dr. J. W. Mighels, 
of Portland, Me. ; Dr. Edmund Ravenel and Prof 
Lewis K Gibbes, of Charleston, S. C. ; Prof W. B. 
Rogers, of the University of Virginia ; Isaac Lea, 
Esq., of Philadelphia ; John C. Jay, Esq. and B. 
W. Budd, M. D., of the city of New York ; Dr. 
T. B. Ingalls, of Greenwich, N. Y. ; Dr. W. New- 
comb, of Troy, N. Y. ; Prof G. W. Benedict, of 
Burlington, Vt. ; and T. J. Whittemore, Esq., of 
Cambridge, Mass., for their active kindness in 
affording the opportunity of examining species 
which, without their aid, would not have been 
procurable. 

To Dr. A. A. Gould, of Boston, he presents 
his thanks, for frequent and various aid and ad- 
vice, often asked for, and always bestowed with 
alacrity and liberality ; and to John S. Phillips, 
Esq., of Philadelphia, for his unremitting atten- 
tions in superintending the preparation of the 



VDL. I. 



26 PREFACE. 

plates, mostly engraved and colored in that city 
— a labor of good will, •which has required 
time and patience that no one except a gen- 
tleman thoroughly imbued with a desire to pro- 
mote the cause of Natural History could have 
performed, and without which, the work could 
not have appeared. 

To the venerable Alexander Lawson, the en- 
graver of the Birds of Wilson, the author's 
acknowledgments are due for his efforts to ren- 
der the illustrations, mostly engraved by him, 
worthy of his own reputation as an accurate 
zoological engraver, and worthy of the confidence 
of naturalists. 

The author is gratified in announcing that the 
anatomical details of the species, together with 
the dissections and drawings, are exclusively due 
to the labors of Joseph Leidy, M. D., of Philadel- 
phia. They constitute the most novel and impor- 
tant accessions to science contained in the work, 
and are an honorable evidence of a skill and 
industry which entitle him to a high rank among 
philosophical zoologists. 

Before commencing the descriptive part of the 
work, the author has found it convenient to enter 



PKEFACE. 27 

upon some general considerations connected with 
the suhject, for the purpose of tracing the rela- 
tions of the animals he is about to describe, but 
more especially of recording those facts and ob- 
servations, connected with the general subject, 
which he has derived from the study of the spe- 
cies belonging to this country. These are ar- 
ranged under distinct heads, and are treated of 
in the following chapters of the Introduction. 



INTRODUCTION. 



" NOTITIAM AUTEM NATURALItJM, TEER^ ALICUJTJS INDIGENAEUM, (ECONO- 
MIC MELIORI EJUS INSXITUENDC NONNIHIL SUPPEDITARE, CEETUM EST." 

O. Fabricius. 

"MODO AD AUGMENTUM SCIENTLE NATURALIS QUCDAM NOTATU NON 
INDIGNA, NEQUE LECTU INJUCUNDA, CONTULISSE DICAR." 



OF THE RISE OF SCIENTIFIC ZOOLOGY IN THE UNITED 
STATES, WITH NOTICES OF NATURALISTS PARTICU- 
LARLY CONNECTED WITH THE SUBJECT OF THIS WORK. 



The impulse given to the study of Natural History 
in Europe, at the close of the last and the commence- 
ment of the present century, by that emment school of 
naturalists and philosophers which arose in France, 
contemporaneously with its great political Kevolution, 
imparted to the Natural Sciences an importance which 
they never before possessed. A crowd of gifted and 
ambitious minds, freed by that event from the shackles 
of established opinion, and thus enabled to direct their 
energies to such ends as suited their respective inclina- 
tions, entered upon a new career of intellectual exer- 
tion. With untu'ing perseverance, they investigated 
the past and present conditions of all organized exist- 
ences, and interrogating nature in the very recesses of 
her temple, drew from her responses a philosophy which 
swept away the received theories of that day, as com- 
pletely as the new pohtical institutions took the place of 
the anti(|uatcd government to which they succeeded. 



32 INTRODUCTION. 

The earth, which had been to man a sealed book, was open- 
ed, and, read by the light of the new philosophy,, disclosed 
tlie history of its own creation. The order of events, 
in the production and succession of animal life upon its 
surface, began to be understood. The relations of 
different bemgs to each other were studied, and all 
were seen to be mutually dependent. Order and sys- 
tem were thus substituted for confusion, and philosophi- 
cal zoology became one of the prominent subjects which 
claimed the attention of the speculative and the learned. 

The active interest in this science, originating in 
France, gradually extended to such parts of the conti- 
nent of Europe as were influenced by the French 
language and hterature, or were occupied by her armies, 
which were often attended by commissions of scientific 
men, and sometimes numbered, among their officers, 
naturalists of the highest merit. In England, when in 
consequence of the wars growing out of the French 
Revolution, and continmng imtil the dethronement of 
Napoleon, a state of non-intercourse with France existed, 
the new impulse was not felt until a later date. When 
it was received, however, it produced a decided impres- 
sion, and Avas soon followed by a rapid advance in this 
department of knowledge. Its results have been the 
training of a numerous body of scientific natiu-ahsts, 
among whom are some of the most distinguished men of 
the present age. 

At the period first alluded to, the United States, then 
not long emerged from colonial subjection, was engaged 



INTRODITCTTON. 






in organizing and estal)lishing new political institutions. 
The people, tliinly spread over a vast territory, -were 
busied in developing its resources, or were engrossed by 
the excitements resulting from the unsettled condition of 
pubhc affairs, and the frequent collisions mth foreign 
powers, which disturbed the peace of the country for 
twenty-five years, until the termination of the war with 
England, in 1815. At the close of that conflict, which 
finally established for the country a rank among nations, 
and left it in repose, the movement which had sometime 
before been communicated from Europe, began to pro- 
duce sensible effects here. 

The state of society was not, at that time, suited to 
the favorable reception, much less to the rapid diffusion 
of science. Wealth was so equally distributed, that few 
were rich ; and, although a respectable degree of intel- 
ligence was common, all the energies of the people 
were spent in pursuits immediately connected with the 
practical utilities of business. As a consequence of this 
condition of things, few were willing to cultivate science 
for its o-wTi sake, and most of these were persons who 
had not yet become engaged in the serious labors of 
life. It was by the young men of that period, therefore, 
that the Zoology of the modern school was welcomed to 
North America, and the earliest efforts made to promote 
its study. Their exertions were at first of the most 
unpretending character, but they sufficed to attract the 
attention of those possessing similar tastes, and led to 
the establishment of institutions in our principal cities. 



34 INTRODUCTION. 

between the years 1812 and 1820, devoted to the cul- 
tivation of Natural History. Some of these could not 
sustain themselves, and became extinct ; but others 
were more successful, and have continued, with various 
prosperity, to the present time. These, together with 
societies estabhshed in the interval, have exercised, and 
yet maintain, an important influence on the public mind. 
Throvigh their efforts, scientific infonnation is no longer 
confined to the professedly scientific, but has become 
familiar to the intelligent part of the commmiity, and 
leisure is found by many to cultivate its various branches. 
The public, ceasing to condemn that, the immediate util- 
ity of which it cannot understand, now cheers, with its 
approbation and aid, undertakings of a purely scientific 
character ; and the government extends to them, occa- 
sionally, an imcertain and hesitating patronage. 

The institutions referred to served as nuclei, around 
which gathered those who were interested m zoological 
studies ; and the investigation of the zoology of the 
country, then but imperfectly known through the works 
of Europeans, was soon commenced by the young 
natiu-alists who composed them. Beyond their limits 
there appears to have been but little enconragement for 
such pursuits, and hence the names of nearly aU the 
early natm-alists of the United States may be fomid 
connected with the history of these associations. As 
the materials collected by them acquired importance, it 
became desirable to make them known, and the pubHca- 
tion of their respective transactions was undertaken. 



INTRODUCTION. 35 

The Academy of Natural Sciences of riiiladolphia 
issued the first number of its Journal in 1817. The' 
Annals of the New York Lyceum of Natural History 
appeared in 1823. The Contributions of the Maclurian 
Lyceum in 1827, and the Journal of the Boston Society 
of Natural History in 1834. Besides these, which arc 
exclusively appropriated to Natural History, there are 
others of a mLxed character, in which considerable 
prominence has latterly been given to the same class of 
su])jects ; such are the Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society, and the Memoirs of the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences. Several private Jour- 
nals also in the same interest, have from time to time 
appeared ; none of which, however, have obtauied a 
permanent establishment, except the American Journal 
of Science and Arts, edited by Professor Silliman, 
which commenced its career in 1819, and yet enjoys a 
vigorous existence. This work contains numerous and 
valuable contributions to zoology, and has always exer- 
cised a wholesome and effective influence in diffusing 
correct ideas of the value of all the Natural Sciences. 
It is in these publications alone, that we must look for 
the great mass of original materials available in the 
compilation of any work on the zoology of the United 
States ; and they are the sources often resorted to in the 
preparation of these volumes. 

During the last ten years, however, several important 
works of a different character have appeared. A gen- 
eral and growing comiction, in the public mind, that the 



36 INTRODUCTION. 

application of scientific knowledge to the investigation 
of the natural resources of the country woiild hasten 
the discovery of new sources of prosperity, and disclose 
the best and most economical mode of developing and 
improving those already known, induced the Legislatures 
of more than half the States of the Union, to establish 
scientific Commissions for the examination of the Geology 
and Mineralogy of those States respectively. In some 
of them the Commissions Avere directed to collect infor- 
mation respecting Zoology and Botany. In accordance 
with this authority, extensive and elaborate works on the 
Zoology of Massachusetts and of New York have been 
given to the pubhc, at the expense of those States, and 
catalogues of the species, with short notices of the 
animals of other States, have also been prepared. These 
have contributed much to elucidate the general subject, 
and, especially, have added largely to what was before 
known of the geographical distribution of species. 

The two classes of publications Avhich have been men- 
tioned, are believed to comprise all the materials, of any 
importance, relating to the particular department of 
Zoology here treated of, except the article entitled Con- 
cliology in the third American edition of Nicholson's 
Encyclopedia, wliich bore the date of 1819, and con- 
tained descriptions, by Mr. Say, of several native land- 
shells. In this exception must also be included the 
papers of Mr. Rafinesque, which Avill be presentl}'- 
noticed, but which, for reasons hereafter given, are not 
deemed worthy of any consideration. The next paper 



INTRODUCTION. g-j' 

succeeding the article on Conchology, also by Mr. Say, 
published in the Journal of the Philadelphia Academy, 
is dated in January, 1821. These are the two earliest 
pubhcations relatmg to this subject ; and, although their 
date is so recent, they anticipated all foreign pubhca- 
tions, and secured the priority of the descriptions and 
names contauied in them. The same good fortune has 
attended the later pubhcations here, so that it may be 
said, that with a few exceptions, American species 
have been first described by American naturalists. The 
exceptions are, descriptions by MM. Mliller, Ferussac, 
and others, of species common to the Antilles, and some 
parts of the shores of the Gulf of Mexico, as well as to 
the United States ; and by ]Mr. Rackett, of a smgle 
species from Canada, pubhshed in the Linngean Transac- 
tions in 1822. It seems remarkable, considering the 
frequent intercoui'se between this country and Europe, 
and the activity that already prevailed among European 
naturahsts in procuring new objects from foreign coun- 
tries, that so few American species fell into their hands 
previous to the time when the American publications 
commenced. Indeed, they seem to have been better 
known to JNIr. Lister in 1770, than to M. Lamarck in 
1822, the former having given figures of nine or ten of 
them, against descriptions of only five by the latter. 

The titles of the various papers, memoirs, catalogues, 
and more elaborate works, relatuig to the terrestrial 
mollusks, may be found in the catalogue of American 
authors contained m the preceding pages. On reference 



38 iNTRODUcrrioN. 

to it, it will be seen that the laborers in this branch of 
Natural Ilistorj have been numerous, and that a respect- 
able amount of materials has been accumulated. No 
attempt has hitherto been made to combine these into 
a work upon American Conchology, or upon the partic- 
ular branch of it which is now presented. In bringing 
together these materials for the first time, it would be 
interesting and proper to give some history of them and 
of their authors, and thus to trace the science from its 
first dawnings in this country to the present time ; but 
there are circumstances which render it inexpedient to 
do so. It is only within a few years that any considera- 
ble attention has been given to such subjects, and con- 
sequently, these pubhcations are so recent, that with 
few exceptions, their authors are yet upon the stage, 
and have not yet passed the active period of life. Such 
an account would almost necessarily partake of a critical 
character, and would therefore place the author in the 
position of a self-appointed judge of the labors of his 
contemporaries and friends, an office which he would 
not willmgly assume, and for which he is but \R qualified. 
There are, however, two names, both connected with the 
rise of Natural History in the United States, and both 
having exercised an influence in its promotion, but with 
far diflbrent results in usefulness to science, and in honor 
to themselves, about wliich it is necessary to make some 
remarks, and to which the objections above indicated do 
not apply. These are the names of Thomas Say, and 
of CoNSTANTiNE ScHMALTZ Rafinesque. The latter 



LNTKODUCTION. ^q 

indeed, not an American, but for a quarter of a ccnturj 
a resident in the United States. 

Mr. Sat, a native of Philadelphia, the son of a phy- 
sician, but himself for some years a merchant, seems to 
have been the earliest scientific naturalist, of the modem 
school, which the country has produced. He possessed 
a well-balanced mind, powers of accm-ate observation and 
discruninating perception, and a facility of expressing his 
thoughts in a brief and condensed style. He was trained 
to habits of industry and perseverance ; his temper was 
mild and equable ; and liis manners were so modest and 
retirmg as to excite remark. His acquii-ements as a 
naturahst were due to his private studies alone ; for at 
the period when Ms character was foruung, there were 
few or none engaged in kindred pursuits, — no associa- 
tions of naturalists, in the bosom of which he could find 
sympathy and support, and few libraries to which he 
could resort for knowledge and assistance. The gi-eat 
zoological names which have illustrated the nineteenth 
century had not then appeared, or, in consequence of 
the disturbed relations of this government with European 
powers, their works were mostly unknown here. But, 
notwithstanding the deficiency of his means and oppor- 
tunities, he possessed himself of the learning and accom- 
phshments of the day, in a much greater degree than 
could have been expected in his position ; and was ready 
and prepared, at the commencement of the new career 
of science on which his country entered soon after the 
termination of the European wars, to make that advance 



40 INTRODUCTION. 

in the branch of knowledge to Avhich he had devoted 
hunself, which has forever associated his name with the 
history of Zoology in the United States, and which ought 
to entitle him to the honor of bemg styled its fomider. 
His pubHshed works, commencing about the year 1817, 
continue through a period of eighteen years untU liis 
death in 1834 ; and embrace descriptions of a vast num- 
ber of animals until then entirely imknown, or but 
imperfectly miderstood. The invertebrated classes 
received the greater part of liis attention, and his con- 
tributions to their history must, necessarily, form an 
important portion of the means of any writer who shall 
seek more fully to elucidate them. The major part of 
the subjects described in this volume were first described 
by him ; and so fully had he occupied the groimd, that 
the additions to our knowledge of species made during 
the twelve years, since his decease, have not exceeded 
the number contributed by him, although within that 
time many new mquirers have commenced their investi- 
gations, and large districts of country, which he never 
examined, have been explored. His descriptions are for 
the most part so accurate, and his observations so just, 
that there is httle left to his successor except to brmg 
them together in their proper order. Some obscuiity, 
indeed, attends several of his species, in consequence of 
his not having uniformly placed specimens in a pubhc 
depository for reference ; for, when objects resemble each 
other so closely as do several species of the genera Helix 
and Pupa, it is very difficult to distinguish them T)y 



INTRODUCTION. 



41 



description alone ; and differences of opinion will arise 
as to -which, among analogous species, corresponds with 
a particular description. As, however, American natu- 
ralists have felt it to be a pleasure, as well as a duty, to 
render full justice to the merits of Mr. Say, by verifying 
and confiramig his discoveries, nearly all the species 
described by liim, though some of them were for a time 
lost, have been re-discovered and restored ; and with a 
few exceptions only, they are retained as well defined 
and authenticated. A particular account of the contri- 
butions made by him, and also by other authors, to each 
genus, will be given in the remarks on the respective 
genera. 

The character and career of M. Rafinesque, though 
offering points of resemblance to those of Mr. Say, are 
in most; respects strongly contrasted with them. He 
was of French origin, but born in a suburb of Constan- 
tinople, and bred to the mercantile profession. He early 
imbibed a taste for the study of natural objects, which 
grew with his years, and finally so far absorbed his 
thoughts as to unfit liim for other pursuits. He visited 
the United States on a tradmg voyage m 1803, and 
remained untU 1805. He was known at that time as a 
botanist, and made the acquaintance of the few botanists 
and naturalists then existing in the coimtry. On return- 
ing to Europe, he estabhshed himself as a merchant in 
Sicily, Avhere he continued until his final departure for 
the United States in 1815. During this interval, he 
was industriously employed in mvestigatmg the natural 

VOL. I. 5 



42 INTKODUCTION. 

history of that island, and pubHshed numerous works on 
botany and various branches of zoology, the most impor- 
tant of the latter relating to ichthyology. There is no 
published evidence that he had at this time much ac- 
quaintance with the mollusks, although by his own state- 
ment, his collection of shells amounted at the period of 
his embarkation from Sicily, to the mcredible number of 
600,000 specimens ! On reaching the coast of the 
United States he suffered shipAvreck, by which his col- 
lections, manuscripts and library, the fruits of the labor 
of years, were lost, and his property was so much im- 
paired, that he never recovered from the blow, but sunk 
into a state of poverty and even of destitution, in which 
he continued until his death in 1840. 

It is conceded on all hands, that the wi'itings of M. 
Rafinesque, previous to liis departure from Sicily, indi- 
cate the possession of considerable talent, and a degree 
of sagacity which placed him in some respects m advance 
of his contemporaries. It is stated indeed by one of his 
partial friends, that he anticipated by ten years, a large 
proportion of the generic and sub-generic ichthyological 
distinctions which were subsequently taken up in the 
Regne Animal.^ But it is at the same time evident, 
that his judgment was even then unsound, his discrimi- 
native perceptions of uncertain force, and that his mind 
was too easily captivated by new and original views, 
without sufficiently establishing the facts on which they 

' Swainson. Cabinet Cyclopedia. Fishes, Amphibians and Reptiles, 
Vol. i. pp. 60 — 62. 



INTRODUCTION. 43 

were based. The leadmg fault of his character as a 
naturahst was, a behef in the specific difference of all 
natural objects which present any variations among them- 
selves, even of the most unimportant characters ; and a 
passion for combining mto new groups, according to real 
and ob\'ious affinities, when such existed, or to fancied or 
trifling ones in their absence, all the objects which came 
witlun his observation. His gi-oups consequently were 
of very mieqvial value ; and Avhile some of them were 
combined according to their natural and fixed relations, 
others were brought together by resemblances perceived 
only by himself. He possessed, however, a peculiar 
facility m the formation of the language of nomenclatm'e, 
and liis generic and specific terms might, with advantage 
to science, be imitated by some of the naturalists of the 
present day. The adoption in one of his works of this 
motto, 

" De Linne le genie il a choisi pour guitle," 

shows that he imitated the brief and comprehensive style 
of Linnajus ; but in his hands it often became obscure, 
and rendered it difficult to recognise the subjects of his 
descriptions. 

M. Rafinesque appears to have been well received in 
the United States. His claims to a standing as a natu- 
ralist were at once admitted, and he immediately com- 
menced taking an active part among the few who were 
investigating its natural history. His name fre(piently 
appears in the record of the early proceedings of the 
Lyceum of Natural History in New York, and many 



44 INTRODUCTION. 

papers on botanical and zoological subjects were published 
by him in the journals of the day. In 1818 he visited 
the country west of the Alleghany mountauis, and was 
soon after appointed Professor of Natural History in 
Transylvania University, at Lexmgton, in Kentucky. 
The residts of liis visit to the "West were exhibited in 
several memoirs sent to Europe for publication, and in 
others which appeared in tliis country. About this time 
the faulty quaUties of his character began to increase, 
and gradually overshadowed the more useful ones.* He 

' His personal habits and manners were at this time very peculiar and 
eccentric, and indicated that diseased state of the mind, which, at a later 
period, became more marked and decided. Mr. Audubon, in one of those 
graphic episodes which relieve the scientific monotony of the early volumes 
of liis Ornithological Biograjihy, has given a very amusing account of a 
\asit made to him by M. Rafiuesque, at his residence on the banks of the 
Oliio river, in Kentucky. He entitles his episode, the "Eccentric Natu- 
ralist," and mentions Mr. R. under the fictitious name of M. de T — . It 
may be interesting to make a few extracts. 

" ' What an odd-looking fellow ! ' said I to myself, as, wliile wallong by 
the river, I observed a man landing from a boat, with what I thought a 
bimdle of dried clover on his back. 'How the boatmen stare at him! 
Surely he must be an original.' He ascended with rapid step, and, ap- 
proacliing me, asked if I could pouat out tlie house in wliich Mx. Audubon 
resided ? ' Why, I am the man,' said I, ' and will gladly lead you to my 
dwelhng.' The traveller rubbed his hands together with dehght, and draw- 
ing a letter from his pocket, handed it to me without any remark. I broke 
the seal and read as follows : ' My dear Audubon — I send you an odd fish, 
which you may prove to be imdescribed, and hope you will do so in your 
next letter. Beheve me always yorn- friend, B.' 

" With all the simphcity of a woodsman, I asked the bearer where the 
odd fish was ; when M. de T. smiled, rubbed his eyes, and with tlie greatest 
good humor said, ' I am that odd fish, I presume, Mr. Audubon.' 

" Clean clothes were offered, bij.t he would not accept them, and it was 



INTRODUCTION. 45 

became entirely neglectful of what had been accomplished 
by other naturalists, rarely mentioning their names or 

with evident reluctance that he performed the lavations usual on such occa- 
sioas, before he sat down to dinner." 

"He chanced to turn over the drawing of a plant quite new to him. 
After inspecting' it closely, he shook his head, and told me no such plant 
existed in nature. I told my guest that the plant was common in the im- 
mediate neighborhood, and that I would show it to liim on the morrow. 
' And why to-morrow, Mr. Audubon ? Let us go now.' We did so ; and 
on reacliing the bank of the river, I pointed to the plant. I thought M. de 
T. had gone mad. He plucked the plants one after another, danced, hugged 
me to his arms, and exultingly told me that he had got, ' not merely a new 
species, but a new genus.' 

" Wlien it waxed late, I showed him to the apartment intended for him 
during liis stay, and endeavored to render him comfortable, leaving hun 
writing materials in abimdance. I was indeed heartily glad to have a 
naturahst under my roof We had all retired to rest. Every person I 
imagined was in deep slmnber, save myself, when of a sudden I heard 
a great uproar in the natvu-alist's room. I got up, reached the place ui-a 
few moments, and opened the door, when, to my astonislunent, I saw my 
guest running about the room naked, hokling the handle of my favorite 
violin, the body of which he had battered to pieces against the walls in 
attempting to kill the bats, which had entered by the open window, proba- 
bly attracted by the insects flying around his candle. I stood amazed, but 
he continued ruiming round and round, mitil he was fairly exhausted ; 
when he begged me to procure one of the animals for liim, as he felt con- 
vinced tliey belonged to a ' new species.' 

" M. de T. remained with us for three weeks, and collected multitudes 
of plants, shells, bats, and fishes." "We were perfectly reconciled to his 
oddities, and finding him a most agreeable and intelligent companion, hoped 
that Ills sojourn might be of long dm-ation. But one evening, when tea was 
prepared, and we expected him to join the family, he was nowhere to be 
foimd. His grasses and other valuables were all removed from liis room. 
The night was spent in searching for him in the neighborhood. No eccen- 
tric naturalist could be discovered. Whether he had perished in a swamp, 
or had been devovu-ed by a bear or a gar-fi.sh, or had taken to his heels, were 
matters of conjecture ; nor was it until some weeks after, that a letter from 
him, thanking us for our attention, assured me of his safety." 



46 INTRODUCTION. 

quoting their works, and he treated every object which 
he met with, even the most familiar and best known, as 
if then for the first time discovered. His passion for 
constituting new genera and species increased to a 
confirmed monomania, under the influence of which, old 
genera were divided and subdivided, the number of 
species prodigiously enlarged, and new animals, never 
seen except by himself, Avere announced. To provide 
materials for liis creations, he relied not solely on his 
o-\vn observation, but resorted to the vague accounts 
of travellers, and the still more uncertain authority of 
vulgar rumor, in both of which he credulously con- 
fided ; and however extraordinary it may seem, some 
of his species and even genera have no better foundation. 
He adopted also, the practice of sending to naturalists 
in Europe, with his own specific names appended, ob- 
jects which had been already characterized here, and 
were knoAvn and recently published by American natu- 
rahsts. It was in tliis way, undoubtedly, that M. Fe- 
russac was induced to apply M. Rafinesque's names to 
several species of Helix previously described by Mr. 
Say ; an unfortunate compliance with M. Rafinesque's 
pretensions, which has caused much confusion. 

These proceedings of M. Rafinesque very soon caused 
other naturalists to withdraw their confidence, and, 
sooner or later, to rehnquish all intercourse with him. 
As his opinions no longer possessed authority, his writ- 
ings, now become very numerous, were refused admis- 
sion into the journals. The same reasons prevented 



INTRODUCTION. 47 

his success as a teacher. He rapidly lost the position 
which he had held, and was thus compelled to retire into 
obscurity. But, he was not the less devoted to his 
favorite science, nor less industrious, and he poured 
forth from his retreat a multitude of fl}ang leaves in 
which, with harmless egotism, he magnified the impor- 
tance of his o^^Ti discoveries. He ascribed his reverses 
to the machinations of secret foes, and to the disposition 
among mankind to " compel genius to slumber or to 
crawl ; " and, to the end, considered himself to be a 
most deserving, though unrequited laborer for the pro- 
motion of human knowledge.' 

1 The character and works of M. Rafiiiesque have been here considered 
only as connected with zoology. His whole life might however be cited 
as a continuous example of per\-erted talent, and would afford materials for 
a very amusing- and interesting' biography. In his last years he became a 
dreaming schemer, and projector of various joint-stock iinanciEd, mercan- 
tile, and literary undertakings. Li his retu-ement he meditated gigantic 
labors, and projected voluminous works in various, branches of hterature 
and science, which he had neither the intellectual ability, nor other means 
to accomplish. He appears to have been entirely satisfied with himself, 
and characterizes the younger men, who were puttmg themselves in ad- 
vance, and bearing away the honors of science, as a " crowd of yoimg, un- 
skilled, inexperienced or incompetent candidates, who push forward and 
are preferred to the modest and able men who have labored for years with 
skill and zeal." He entertained hopes that some of the various State sur- 
veys which were commenced about the time he pubhshed his autobiography, 
would, as he expresses it, " call him to another field of utihty," but in this 
he was again doomed to disappointment, and to find that he was entirely 
forgotten. The closing paragraph of his Life of Travels is an amusing 
in-stance of his vanity, and presents a summary view of his own acquire- 
ments and powers as imderstood by himself. " Versatility of talents and 
of professions is not imcommon in America," says he ; " but those which 
I have exhibited in these few pages may appear to exceed belief; and yet 



48 INTRODUCTION. 

As, for reasons which may be gathered from the pre- 
ceding remarks, the genera and species of the pneumo- 
brancliiate mollusks proposed by M. Rafinesque, are 
considered to be destitute of authority, and entirely 
imworthy of notice, no mention will be made of them 
in the text. But, to sliield the author from a charge, 
from any quarter, of having designedly suppressed them, 
a brief account of all of them known to him, is here 
added. In a memoir published in the Journal de Phy- 
sique, Paris, June, 1819, M. Rafinesque proposed no 
less than seventy new genera of North American ani- 
mals, among which eight were formed out of the genus 
HelLx. These are founded, upon only slight variations 
of the aperture of the shell, and so similar are some of 
them to each other, that where he saw reasons to create 
generic distinctions, others, at the present day, can see 
only such diflFerences as belong to varieties of species. 
The genera proposed by him at that time, were the 
followmg : — 

Odotropis. " Lip reflected, umbilicus covered, tooth upon 
columella. 

it is a positive fact, that in knowledge I have been a Botani-st, Natnrahst, 
Geologist, Geographer, Historian, Poet, Pliilosopher, Philologist, Economist, 
Pliilanthropist. — By profession a Traveller, Merchant, Manufacturer, Col- 
lector, Improver, Professor, Teacher, Lawyer, Draftsman, Architect, En- 
gineer, Pulnaist, Author, Editor, Bookseller, Librarian, Secretary, . . . and 
I hardly know myself what I may not become as yet ; siiice whenever I 
apply myself to anything ivJdch lUle, I never fail to succeed if depending 
on me alone, unless impeded and prevented by lack of means, or tlie hos- 
tility of the foes of manlcind."' 



INTRODUCTION. 49 

Mesomphix. " Umbilicus expanded, exhibiting the volu- 
tions. 

Tkiodopsis. "Umbilicus large, lip thick, aperture nar- 
rowed by three teeth, one upon each lip and one upon 
the columella. 

XoLOTREMA. " Differs from the preceding by absence of 
umbilicus ; or, it is small and covered by the reflected 
lip ; aperture transversal, linear ; the inferior tooth a 
lamellar carina. 

Chimotrema. " Aperture transverse, extremely curved, 
resembling a simple fissure. 

ToxoTREMA. " Differs from the preceding by the emargi- 
nate lip. 

Stenotrema. " Differing from the two preceding by a 
thick emarginate lip, and a second lip flattened to the 
spire and uniting with the true lip ; a transversal carina 
above. 

Aplodon. " Aperture rounded, columella with a single 
tooth; umbilicated. 

In his Enumeration and Account of Remarhable 
Objects in his cwn cabinet, published at Philadelphia in 
1831, Toxotrema and Stenotrema were changed to Tox- 
ostoma and Stenostoma; two new genera, Trophodon 
and Odomphium, and one sub-genus, jMenomphis, were 
indicated by name, and the two following genera were 
characterized : — 

Mesodon. " Differs from Helix by lower lip with a tooth. 
Omphalina. " Differs from Helix by no lips, l)ut an 
umbilicus. 

VOL. I. 6 



50 INTRODUCTION. 

In tlie last-named papei-, M. Rafincsque describes 
two species of Agatina, for such was the orthography 
he adopted for Achatma. 

^^ Agatina variegata. Baf. 1820. Six spires, smooth, yel- 
lowish, variegated with brown spots near the sutures, first 
spire with some narrow colored strias, concentric. Nearly 
two inches ; from Louisiana. 

" A -fuscata. Raf. 1822. Eight spires, smooth, reddish 

brown, with broad longitudinal black bands on the spires, 
of a lanceolate flexuose shape. Over two inches ; from 
Texas." 

Persons acquamted with our Hehces, will readily 
distinguish nearly all the species on which M. Rafin- 
esque founded the above genera, for it is apparent that 
he had actually before him American specimens, and 
did not depend upon liis memory or imagination. It is 
singular, however, that with his fondness for publisliing 
species with the contraction " i^a/." appended, he 
nowhere described these Helices. Descriptions may, 
indeed, exist unnoticed in some of the loose fragments 
which heralded his pretended discoveries ; but this is 
not hkely. The probable explanation of the fact is, that 
he became acquainted with most of the species in Phila- 
delpliia, (m the Aviuter of 1818 and 1819, after his 
return from his first visit to the West,) where they had 
already been announced by Mr. Say: a supposition 
which is supported by the fact, that in two letters from 
him to the New York Lyceum, pubhshed in the Ameri- 
can Monthly Magazine and Critical Review, in Septem- 



IXTRODUCTION. §]_ 

bcr ancT October, 1818, -wliicli were intended as a sort 
of prodi'omus of his discoveries in the West, he nowhere 
speaks of havmg collected land shells, although the flu- 
viatile species, divided as usual into several genera and 
sub-genera, occupy considerable space. As he could 
not, without a- gross infraction of that comity practised 
among natui-ahsts, which secures to each his own discov- 
eries, and which even he was not prepared, at that time, 
entirely to disregard, openly assume the species described 
or made known by Mr. Say, he could publicly gratify 
his mania for genera-makuig only by the construction of 
these new genera. But, he gave to the specimens in 
his own cabinet, specific names wliich he thought more 
appropriate than those of Mr. Say, and they gradually 
found their way to his correspondents abroad, and par- 
ticularly to M. Ferussac, with these names attached. 

In his Annals of Nature for 1820, M. Rafinesque 
proposed three new genera and several species, viz. : — 

GENUS PHILOMYCUS. 

Philomycus. " Differs from Limax by no visible mantle, 
the longer pair of tentacula terminal and club-shaped, 
the shorter tentacula lateral and oblong. The name 
means, friend of fungi, on which they feed. 

" Philomycus quadrilus. Gray, back smooth, with four longi- 
tudinal rows of black spots, long tentacula black and ap- 
proximated; rather attenuated behind, tail obtuse. On the 
banks of the Hudson, length over half an inch. 



(( 



(( 



52 INTRODUCTION. 

"P . oxurus. Fulvous gray, slender, back wrinkled 

longitudinally ; tentacula brown, the lateral ones very small ; 
tail acute, carinated above. Length two thirds of an inch, 
in New York. 

P . fuscus. Entirely brown, tentacula thick, back 

smooth, tail compressed, acute. In Ohio, length one fourth 
of an inch. 

P .fiexuolaris. Fulvous, back variegated, with flexu- 

ose brown lines, slightly wrinkled transversely ; attenuated 
behind, tail obtuse. Length from one to two inches, it 
may change its shape. Found on the Catskill mountains. 
There are many other species of this genus in the United 
States. 

GENUS EUMELUS. 

EiTMELTJS. " Differs from Limax by no visible mantle, the 
four tentacula almost in one row in front and cylindrical, 
nearly equal, the smallest pair between the larger ones. 
Name mythological. 

" Eumelus nehulosus. Body nearly cylindrical, rounded at both 
ends ; back smooth, crowded with gray and fulvous spots 
intermixed of the same tinge, without spots beneath ; tenta- 
cula brown. Length about one inch, in Ohio and Kentucky, 

" E . lividus. Livid brown above, grayish beneath, anten- 
nae black, obtuse beliind, back smooth and convex. Length 
one inch, in Ohio, Indiana, and Kentucky. 

GENUS HEMILOMA. 

Hemiloma. (Univalve Land Shell.) " Spire raised and 
smooth : opening obliqual elliptic, with an anterior raised 
half margin on the inside lip, a little twisted ; columella 



INTRODUCTION. 



53 



dccurrent on the whorl obliquely and with a very small 
umbilicus. The name means half margin. 

"Hemiloma ovata. Ovate, very obtuse, smooth, six spires, 
breadth two thirds of the length. Found near Lexington 
in a nearly fossil state ; whitish, length three sixteenths of 
an inch. 

In the same paper lie also describes a species of 
Limax, viz. : 

"Limax gracilis. Body slender, head and lower tentacula 
fulvous, neck gray, upper tentacula brownish, mantle dark 
fulvous, back smooth brown, beneath dirty white ; tail brown, 
obtuse above, mucronate and acute beneath ; probably a real 
Limax. Yet it has the two long tentacula inserted above the 
neck, while the small ones are terminal and all slightly club- 
shaped. It may, perhaps, form a sub-genus Deroceras. 
Length over one inch. Kentucky, in the woods. 

The shell upon which the genus Hemilonia was found- 
ed has not been recognized ; it was probably a fossil. 
There is reason to beheve, that Philomycus and Eumelus 
origmated in the defective and careless observation of 
M. Rafinesque. Certain it is, that no other observer 
has yet found naked slugs with the four tentacles in one 
row and nearly equal, with the two long ones inserted 
above the neck, or without a more or less developed 
mantle. A hasty examination of small individuals of 
the animal, which in this work is included in a genus for 
which the author has proposed the name of Tebennopho- 
rus, might readily deceive any one who did not suspect 
their peculiar characteristics, as the mantle is often so 



54 INTRODUCTION. 

closely pressed to the body, that the line of separation 
is not visible. Such an error would account for the 
principal characteristic of these two genera. But, 
"whether M. Rafinesque was deceived in this way or not, 
it is apprehended that under the circumstances, these 
genera cannot be received, although endorsed by the 
adoption of M. Fdrussac. Whenever animals with the 
characteristics which he records, shall be discovered, it 
will be time enough to renew his names. ^ 

Havmg thus briefly reviewed the character of these 
two authors, and criticized the works of one of them, it 
remains only to repeat, that the result of the labors of 
each, upon tliis branch of natural history at least, has 

' M. Rafinesque seems to have been conscious, that he might be ob- 
noxious to tlie charge of pubhsliing, as his own, discoveries that were 
already well knov^m, and he pleads liis defence, in anticipation. He says, " The 
ditficulty of ascertaining sometimes, whether my discoveries are totally 
new, will not prevent me from offering those which I consider such. If a 
few shall afterwards prove otherwise, the blame, if any, must lay with those 
European compilers who give us now and then, theii' buUcy, costly, and 
learned Cyclopedias, Dictionaries of Natm-al History, and Systems, without 
following the wise linnean plan of detailing all the former discoveries." " In 
such a state of science I shall not be prevented from pubhsliing my new 
species, because it may happen that one out of fifty may be pre\aously 
noticed in some costly and inaccessible work." Having thus easily disem- 
barrassed liimself of one of the chief obligations of a zoological writer, to 
wit, that of fully investigating the works of his predecessors, he thus defines 
the principles which guided lumself. " The priuciples of these tracts shall 
belong to the true linnean school of improvement. I shall follow all the im- 
provements that the worthy Linnaeus would have adopted, if he had lived 
in tliis age ; but I shall carefully avoid any deviation from the fundamental, 
rational and everlasting niles of nomenclature, and descriptive liistory." 
Aiuicds of Nature. 



INTRODUCTION. 55 

been very different. The one has left a favorable record 
of liimself throughout ; -vvhilc of the other, only traces 
enough rem am, to mark his errors. 

The other principal contributors to the elucidation of 
this branch of zoology mil be named in the general 
remarks on the respective genera, and a particular 
account of their contributions to the history of the genus 
will be given. 



II. 



OF THE IGNORANCE AND NEGLECT OF AMERICAN LABORS 
IN ZOOLOGY EXHIBITED BY EUROPEAN NATURALISTS. 



The discovery and description of animals before 
unknown, is one of the evidences of the zeal and in- 
dustry of a naturalist ; and to be known among the 
few persons engaged in tliis branch of science as pos- 
sessing these qualifications, is unfortunately, in tliis 
country at least, his only reward. To perpetuate tliis 
evidence, the right of naming the species has been 
conceded to the discoverer by common consent; and 
in all systematic and descriptive works on Natural 
History, his name is, by universal practice, appended to 
that of the species, and in this manner becomes as 
extensively known as the animal itself. He who omits 
the name of the discoverer, and still more, he who 
substitutes the name of another in its place, does the 
former a manifest injustice, as it deprives him of a right 
which is the only recompense of his labor. He also 
does an injury to science by adding a new name to an 
object already named, thus increasing the multitude of 



INTRODUCTION. g-y 

temis, and enlarging a synonymy wliich is already bur- 
thensome and inconvenient. Some of the most dis- 
tinguished European concliyliologists are obnoxious to 
the charge of forgetting these wholesome rules, and 
not only of neglecting the rights of American naturalists, 
but of taking from them, and transferring to others, the 
little credit they might derive from a just appreciation of 
their efforts. To show that tliis assertion is not without 
foundation, and that the labors of our naturalists in this 
department have been so frequently overlooked as to 
indicate a design to neglect them, or an indifference to 
their rights, and then to prove that there is good reason. 
for complaint, it will be sufficient to review the species 
of Helix which were first described by ]\Ir. Say, and 
which were published by him antecedent to the appear- 
ance of the works of jMM. Lamarck and Fdrussac. Mr. 
Say published, in the Journal of the Academy of Phila- 
delphia, previously to, and in the month of, January, 

1821, descriptions of twenty-three well-ascertained spe- 
cies. In 1822, M. Ferussac published his Tableau Sys- 
tematique de la Famille des Limacons, in which he indi- 
cated by name only, without descriptions or figures, 
seventeen of the same species ; of these, ten appeared 
under Mr. Say's names, two under new names ascribed 
to M. Rafinesque, and five were assumed by M. Ferus- 
sac himself, and his own names appended. In April, 

1822, appeared the second part of the sixth volume of 
the Ayiimaux sans Vertebres of M. Lamarck. This 
work was, in point of fact, published before the above- 

VOL. I. 7 



58 INTRODUCTION. 

named work of M. Ferussac, and its author referred to 
the contents of that work in anticipation of its actual 
appearance. In it, jive onlj, out of the twenty-three 
species are described, and all of them under names dif- 
ferent from INIr. Say's, two of them being adopted from 
M. Ferussac, and three altered arbitrarily from Mr. 
Say's names, which M. Lamarck's own references proved 
that he should have been acquainted with. In 1830, 
M. Deshayes pubUshed a continuation of Bruguiere's 
JSistoire Naturelle des Vers, in the Encyclojjedie Me- 
thodique. Here, under the article HeHx, ten of the 
same species are described. For three of them only, 
Mr. Say's names are retained, (one of these being 
ascribed to M. Ferussac, and another to M. Rafinesque,) 
two appear imder names of M. Ferussac, two under 
those of M. Lamarck, and one under that of M. Rafin- 
esque ; one name is changed arbitrarily, and one is 
given as a new species, under a new name. In 1838, in 
the second edition of the Animaux sans Vertebres, 
M. Deshayes noticed twelve of the same species, five of 
which are under Mr. Say's names and ascribed to him, 
three under those of M. Lamarck, three under those of 
M. Ferussac, and one under that of M. Rafinesque. 
The annexed table will exhibit, at one view, the species 
described by ]Mr. Say, and the names applied to them 
by the other authors referred to. 



INTRODUCTION. 



59 



TABLE OF TWENTY-THREE SPECIES OF HELIX, 

DESCRIBED BY THOMAS SAY, ANTERIOR TO, AND DURING THE EARLY 

PART OF THE YEAR 1821, 

SHOWING THE SYNONYMS SUBSEQUENTLY APPLIED TO THEM BY 
EUROPEAN AUTHORS. 



No. 
1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 


Mr. Say. 

Specific names. 

1821. 


M. Ferussac. 

Prodrome Geu. 

1822. 


M. Lamarck. 

Anim, sans. Vert. 

1822. 


M. Deshayes. 

Encyc. Method. 

1830. 


M. Desliayes. 

Lamarck, 2d cdil. 

1838. 


HELIX. 

albolabris. 

tridentata. 

altemata. 

thyroidus. 

labyriutliica. 

liirsuta. 

perspectiva. 

lineata. 

auriculata. 

septemvolva. 

multiliiieata. 

appressa. 

palliata. 

inflecta. 

clausa. 

elevata. 

interna. 

chersina. 

gularis. 

hgera. 

solitaria. 

concava. 

profmida. 


HELIX. 

albolabris. 

tridentata. 

altemata. 

thyroidus. 

labyriiithica. 

liirsuta. 

perspectiva. 

lineata. 

auriculata. 

septemvolva. 


HELIX. 

bonplandi ? 


HELIX. 


HELIX. 

bonplandi ? 
tridentata. 
scabra. 
thyroidus. 


tridentata. 

scabra. 

thyroidus. 


scabra. 






lursiita. 
nafiila 


liirsuta. 
perspectiva. 












auriculata. 
planorbula. 


planorbula. 


planorbiila. 


linguifera. 

denotata. 

clau.sa. 


linguifera. 


lin^fera. 


linguifera. 

denotata. 

clausa. 




clausa. 




luioxviUina. 


1 


























ratinesquea. 














planorboides. 
richardi. 








richardi. 


richardi. 


richardi. 



It would be wrong to impute to either of the distm- 
guished gentlemen who have been named, any inten- 
tional injustice to Mr. Say. M. Ferussac indeed, as- 
cribed to him all the species whose descriptions he had 
seen, previous to the publication of his own work, and 
those only, although it was in Ids power to have pro- 
cured all of them. M. Lamarck had no definite no- 



GO INTRODUCTION. 

tion of the wrong he was doing, and his practice was 
in tliis particular very loose. M. Deshayes, in the 
Encydoijedle^ seems to have been careless in looking 
up his authorities, and had not awakened to the impor- 
tance of reforming the nomenclature bj restoring origi- 
nal names, for which he has since proved himself to be 
an able and zealous advocate. But it may be said, 
without justly incurring reproach, that neither of them 
seems to have considered it to be necessary, to pro- 
vide himself with the means of makins; such references 
to American authors, as was proper and essential in 
order to render his own works more accurate, and to 
guard against injustice to others. Indeed, so late as 
1839, M. Deshayes, in liis continuation of M. F^rus- 
sac's work, in giving the synonymy of Helix septem- 
volva ascribes the specific name to M. Ferussac, over- 
looking entirely the fact that Mr. Say had pubhshed 
the species four years in advance of M. Ferussac, as 
plainly appeared from the dates of the respective works 
to which M. Deshayes referred in his own description. 
It may be said, in excuse, that the writings of Ameri- 
can naturalists, scattered as they are through various 
periodical pubhcations, are procured with difficulty in 
Europe. This is probably true, to a considerable ex- 
tent, but it is no more true than that similar European 
publications can hardly be obtained here. They can 
be obtained by those who deem them sufficiently im- 
portant to warrant some trouble in procuring them ; 
and the author who undertakes a general work, like 



INTRODUCTION. 



61 



those named, -without having the means of knowing 
what progress has been made in the science in every 
country, is but ill prepared for his task. His work 
cannot be either accurate, or complete, and must be 
destitute of that full authority, which a thorough in- 
vestigation of aU existing information on the same sub- 
ject alone can give. In this way the utility of the 
works of MM. Ferussac, Lamarck, and Deshayes is 
very much impaired ; all of them being exceedingly 
incomplete and unsatisfactory in American species. 

Besides the species which were published by Mr. 
Say at the distant period before mentioned, numerous 
others have, in the interval of twenty years, been 
estabhshed by him and other American authors, very 
few of which, it is believed, have found a place in any 
foreign systematic work. The result of this omission 
has been what might be expected ; insulated natural- 
ists in various parts of Europe, obtaining from time to 
time, through travellers and friends, some of the com- 
mon moUusks of this country, and finding them to be 
unnoticed in the standard works of reference, have 
considered them to be miknoAni. It seems never to 
have occurred to them, that these shells might have 
been described on the spot where they exist, or, in- 
deed, that there could be native naturahsts to describe 
them. They have therefore pubhshed the species, with 
as httle apprehension of having been anticipated, as 
if they had been brought from the most remote and 
uncivilized countries. In this manner, well-kno-wii spe- 



62 INTRODUCTION. 

cies have been named anew, varieties have been erected 
into species, and localities which have been carefully 
explored for twenty years, and whose productions are 
as well known as those of the neighborhood of London, 
have been considered as fertile of novelties as a 
newly discovered land. The errors which have thus 
arisen are so nutnerous, that it would be impossible, 
and useless if it were possible, to notice them all ; 
but the writings of MM. Rossmassler, Menke, and Des 
Moulins, where treating of American species, afford in- 
stances sufficient to confirm the remark. This iimorance 
of American authorities appears to have continued to the 
present time. M. Pfeiffer, in his Symholce, pubHshed 
at Cassel in 1841 and 1842, gives descriptions of about 
twenty of Mr. Say's species, some of them, as he 
seems to suppose, for the first time. They were origin- 
ally described in this country twenty-five years ago, and 
of nearly all of them several other descriptions, with 
figures, have been pubHshed from time to time. This 
evil is hkely to increase, until a systematic effort is made 
on the part of American naturalists to correct it. The 
remedy is, to rely more upon themselves, and less 
upon the savans of other countries ; to assume that 
they are as likely to understand the things before and 
around them as those who are so far removed ; and 
to claun the same notice and respect for what is done 
in the United States, as is accorded to the labors of nat- 
urahsts in Europe. If these volumes should aid in excit- 
ing tliis spirit they -will not have been entirely useless. 



in. 



OF SOME OF THE OBSTACLES BIPEDING THE STUDY OF 
ZOOLOGY, AND THE LIEANS OF OVERCOMING THEM. 



One of the opprobria of zoology, at the present day, 
is the great number of nommal species, of almost 
every class of animals which have been described and 
published, and which have been brought forward with- 
out sufficient attention to the relative importance of the 
characters on which specific distinctions should be based. 
Hence it happens that, ra approaching the study of this 
science, we are compelled to possess ourselves, at the 
outset, of a mass of useless and cumbersome learning, 
which, under the name of syno7iymy, consists of Utile 
else than the accumulated misapprehensions of preced- 
ing writers as to the value of specific difierences, and 
the record of the errors which they have thereby been 
induced to coromit. We cannot pass this shapeless mass 
without notice, for its very bulk challenges attention ; 
nor can we avoid it, for it obtrudes itself at every point. 
The very necessity that exists, of investigating the 
errors of others, m order to render our o^vn labors more 



64 INTRODUCTION. 

correct, condemns us to examine thoroughly all they 
have done ; and the more carelessness and haste then* 
works exhibit, the more imperious in this respect is our 
duty. The unwelcome and growing burden of synon- 
ymy is thus imposed upon Natural History, there 
to remain, until it shall be cast off by some much 
needed reform in the artificial arrangements of the 
present system. Perhaps there is no branch of zoo- 
logy in which this evil has already become so un- 
manageable as in that of the testaceous moUusks ; 
and for this reason, we have thought that a few 
remarks on the subject, tending to explain the causes 
which have led to its existence, and pointing out 
the manner in which they may be avoided, might, 
in some degree, prevent its increase in this partic- 
ular department, and among the naturalists of the 
United States. 

We do not intend to discuss the question, what con- 
stitutes a species ? for that would lead us too far from 
the end we propose ; but, in common with most natu- 
ralists, we shall take it for granted, that certain indi- 
viduals, possessing a common organization and simi- 
lar external characters, derived from a common and 
similarly endowed source, and propagating other indi- 
viduals identical in structure with themselves, do now 
exist, and will continue to exhibit the same characters 
until they and their posterity become extinct. It is to 
these individuals, considered collectively, that we apply 
the name of species. Every species may be considered 



INl'RODUCTION. 



65 



to possess two kinds of characters, one essential and 
depending upon organization, the other contingent, and 
modified bj the external cu-cumstances under the influ- 
ence of which it exists ; and while the type of the 
species, or the unity resulting from the totality of its 
characters, remams constantly the same, nature permits 
a great amount of variation in the subordinate par- 
ticulars, which radiate, as it were, in every du'cction, 
and at greater or less distance, from the specific cen- 
tre. If we consider the physical condition of the ter- 
restrial mollusks, we are prepared to find in them the 
maximum development of such variations ; for, owing 
to their limited locomotive powers, individuals are con- 
fined to a very narrow range, and during their whole 
lives, and often during a succession of generations, are 
subjected to absolutely the same influences. Yet, in the 
course of time, they have spread to gi-eat distances from 
each other, and now occupy very different localities. 
Hence, while one set of individuals is exposed to the con- 
tinued action of one agent, other sets, occupying other 
localities, may be acted upon by other and very different 
ones, and in each locality a considerable but different 
modification of the specific character may consequently 
take place. We have only to suppose the existence 
of a certain number of localities, each distinguished by 
the presence of different causes, operating through a 
period of some duration on the species occupying it, 
and the result Avill almost necessarily be the production 
of as many well-marked varieties. Such is in fact 

VOL. I. 8 



6(3 INTRODUCTION. 

our experience in respect to many of our native spe- 
cies ; for individuals from various and distant localities, 
especially from those differing in climate, soil, or geo- 
logical structure, are rarely identical in external char- 
acter, but almost always present striking differences in 
the size, thickness, or weight of the shell ; the eleva- 
tion or depression of the spire ; the smoothness or rough- 
ness of the epidermis ; the prominence and number 
of the striae of increase ; the diameter of the open axis 
of the shell, known as the umbihcus ; and in the number 
and magnitude of the tubercles, folds, and other tes- 
taceous deposits wliich are often formed in the aperture, 
and upon the columella of the shell. These modifica- 
tions are so constant, in some species, that the practised 
eye can thereby distinguish the stations, or rather the 
section of country, from which individuals exhibiting them 
are respectively derived. The same remark is true 
as regards the marine moUusks used for food. The 
dealers recognize the localities of some of them hy 
variations which often escape the naturalist ; and they 
sometimes know that distinctions wliich he considers 
structural and constant, are due only to physical influ- 
ences. It is well known that there is a tendency in 
nature to continue, to successive generations, those mod- 
ifications of form which have, in the first place, been 
introduced by accidental causes, and thus to continue, 
for a time, what have been called permanent varieties. 
But these, it is behoved, return, sooner or later, to their 
original type. 



INTRODUCTION. 



67 



Now the ricaturalist, occupying perhaps an msiilated 
position, and familiar Avith a given species only as it 
exists in a single section, where its characters are uni- 
formly the same, cannot a 'priori suppose it to assume 
other appearances elsewhere ; and when a strongly- 
marked variety is presented to him, he of course con- 
siders it to be a new species, closely allied indeed to 
the one with which he is acquainted, but yet distinct. 
He hastens to make it known by publication, and thus 
falls into an error similar to those which have given 
occasion for these remarks. It is the local naturahst 
especially, who is most likely to commit this kmd of 
mistake ; for in the paucity of materials for comparison 
usually at his command, he cannot have the means of 
arriving at a more correct judgment. 

These remarks lead to certain inferences, which, if 
well founded, are worthy of serious attention, and which, 
combined with other considerations, ought to govern 
the conduct of naturahsts. In the first place, we see 
that the diagnosis of species wliich rests exclusively upon 
external characters is, from their mere uncertamty, not 
wholly to be rehed upon. The sheU is an extraneous 
product of the animal, a svibstance foreign to it in 
some respects, and formed only for shelter in times of 
danger, and the protection of the soft parts from ex- 
ternal injuries. It possesses no vitaUty, and its charac- 
ters are, therefore, as we have seen, subject to change 
and even to obliteration, to a degree that never happens 
to organs partaking of the vitahty of the animal. Sci- 



(58 INTRODUCTION. 

entific certainty and exactness require characters which 
are not liable to change, and which we can seek only 
in the organization of the animal. This alone remains 
always the same ; for notwithstanding the speculations 
of M. Lamarck and his followers, there is not a shadow 
of evidence tending to prove the slightest permanent 
change, in the structure of a single animal, since the 
creation of the world. Species, genera, and even whole 
groups of animals have been created, and have be- 
come extinct ; but, so far as we know, the organization of 
the most insignificant species has undergone no change. 
The permanent characters drawn from this source, 
combined with those of the shell, wiU enable us success- 
fully to discriminate between species, and we may ob- 
tain collateral aid from the observation of their struc- 
tural functions, their uistincts, and their habits ; and 
thus, while seeking to exliibit their distinctions alone, 
may do much towards completing their natural history. 
The requirements of science can no longer be satisfied 
by a single Linngean phrase ; the characteristics of the 
whole organized being are needed ; and the description 
of the shell alone, ought never to be admitted, except 
when that of the animal itself cannot be obtained. The 
naturalist who has it in his power to acquire a know- 
ledge of the animal, as well as of the shell, should be 
held in every case so to do, and to make both known 
together. 

Conchology, considered as the study of the imper- 
ishable portions of a class of animals, has been, and 



INTRODUCTION. gg 

will continue to be, a most important auxiliary to the 
elucidation of geology ; but without the reform we have 
indicated, it cannot be much longer considered as a 
branch of zoology. It must give way to the more philo- 
sophical investigation of the mollusks as living beings, 
whose organization and relations must occupy the atten- 
tion which has hitherto been given to minute and com- 
paratively unimportant particulars of the shell alone. A 
pursuit which, under the name of a science, has often 
served to give dignity to trifles, and which has caused 
a false estimate of the character and importance of 
all zoological studies, in the minds of many, will thus 
fall to its proper level, and take its rank as one of 
the scientific nugse which, in times past, have amused 
the minds and occupied the learned leisure of its adepts. 
Our successors will look back with astonishment to 
the period when persons, busied with the collection, 
arrangement, and classification of these external envel- 
opes, often without the ability of distinguishing the 
animal of one genus from that of another, and some of 
whom, in a long career, never saw a single one of the 
animals whose products they were so famiUar with, 
were considered to be naturalists, when they were in 
fact mere collectors. 

There is one excuse, however, which may be urged 
for the very general reliance which has been placed 
upon characteristics foimded on variations of the shell, 
and that is, the prevalent idea, sanctioned by some 
leading names, that every difference in the shell is 



70 INTRODUCTION. 

necessarilj produced by a corresponding difference in 
the structure of the animal. This principle, which 
is exceedingly plausible at first sight, ought, if true, to 
be followed by another axiom which depends upon it, 
namely, that great diversities of the animal structure 
are attended by great differences in the shell ; and both 
ought to be confirmed by well-known facts. But, in 
truth, neither of these principles is practically of 
much value in the diagnosis of species, and every one 
famihar with shells, knows, that very considerable dif- 
ferences occur in all the particulars we have named, 
while the animal remains unchanged ; and on the other 
hand, it is equally well understood that considerable 
modifications of the animal structure may exist, without 
anything hke a corresponding amount of variation in 
the shell. A remarkable instance of this occurs in the 
marine genera Lottia and Patella, in which the shells 
resemble each other very nearly, but in which a separa- 
tion of the two genera has been justified by important 
differences in the animal structure alone. In the branch 
which we are considering, though not particularly among 
the species of this country, the naturahst can find no 
differences of animal structure to sustain the generic 
distinctions which, if he relied upon variations of the 
shell, he often would found upon these external char- 
acters. 

The second remark which we make, as resulting 
from the preceding observations, is, that no one is in 
a position to estabUsh species with confidence, even 



INTRODUCTION 71 

as now practised on external characters alone, until he 
has thoroughly investigated each of them under all its 
different aspects. In order to do this, he Avho pro- 
poses additions to the hst of our species should pos- 
sess, or have the opportunity of examining, complete 
series of specimens embracing those of every age, from 
the egg to maturity, and from every section of the 
comitry in which they occur. He should ascertain to 
what circumstances they are subjected m different lo- 
calities, and be able to mark the different modifica- 
tions which correspond to differences of temperature, 
soil, elevation, humidity, and to the kind and quantity 
of food. He should be acquainted with their retreats, 
and their habits, so far as these are likely to affect 
their external characters. It is only after he shall have 
made a careful comparison of aU the variations which 
he notices, that he will be able fully to vmderstand the 
species, and to decide definitively and correctly upon 
its varieties. If he finds the characters of his proposed 
species melting gradually mto those of one already well 
estabhshed ; or, in other words, if the interval between 
them is filled up step by step, by variations which, 
though differing but little from each other, serve to con- 
nect the extremes, he ought to consider the two to be 
specifically identical ; for if any other practice should be 
adopted, there would be absolutely no hmit to the num- 
ber of species, and every department of zoology would 
consist only of the history of well-marked individuals. 
And besides all this labor, he should furthermore be 



72 INTllODUCTION. 

able to refer to the works treating of American species, 
so that he may ascertain whether his results have not 
been anticipated bj others. And, if he would be worthy 
of entire confidence, he must not confine his observation 
to the cabinet. One who knows species only as they 
appear in his own drawers, can have but an imperfect 
idea of the innumerable deviations, from every type, 
that nature permits. Specimens in cabinets are usually 
selected for their size, beauty, and perfection, or for 
some remarkable peculiarity about them, — those whose 
characters are strong and well defined, being always 
preferred, while the intermediate forms, a thousand 
times more numerous than the others, but presenting 
nothing notable, are neglected. The tendency to order 
and classification, which the study of Natural History 
creates, induces the in-door collector to separate and 
arrange his specimens according to their resemblances. 
With Ms materials he finds that distinctions are easily 
established, that the bounds of species and varieties are 
well defined, and that groups are marked by determinate 
and fixed characters. The limits of each division seem to 
him to be constant and not to encroach upon each other. 
As it is in his cabinet, so he supposes it to be in nature* 
He accordingly speculates, refines, and generalizes, and 
ends by estabhshing a system wliich, because consistent 
with his own experience, he thinks equally supported 
throughout. When the same person changes the scene 
of his observation from his own cabinet to the field and 
the forest, and becomes acquainted with numerous 



IjMTKODUCTION. 73 

living individuals, he soon perceives that the divisions 
are much less abrupt than he had supposed. He finds 
that the changes of type are gradual and almost insensi- 
ble, and that some of the forms that had appeared to 
him definite and fixed, blend by degrees with others 
■which he had considered to be distinct. He necessarily 
abandons many of his preconceived views as to spe- 
cific distuictions, and is obliged to modify all of them 
more or less by his new experience. Every naturahst 
should therefore test his opmions by an intimate ac- 
quaintance "v\ith livmg species existing m their natural 
conditions. It is true that but few of our naturalists 
could heretofore comply with these prehminary requisi- 
tions, and perhaps the most complete collections in the 
country, public or private, have not been sufiiciently 
ample to afibrd the means of making so thorough a 
comparison as we consider to be necessary ; yet the 
rules we lay down are good ones, and, if observed so 
far as circumstances will permit, will be of great ser- 
vice to science. K our naturalists had been guided 
by them during the short career of American zoology, 
we should now be free from an amomit of error in re- 
spect to our own species, which, in the period of twenty- 
five years, has created a synonymy well nigh as con- 
fused as that which in Europe has been accumulating 
more than t^vice that length of time. The excuse for 
error which formerly existed, in the want of means for 
learning what is correct, can no longer be received, for 
the facihties arising from ample collections of shells and 

VOL. I. 9 



74 INTRODUCTION. 

books, and from intercourse with a numerous and well- 
informed body of naturalists, are now nearly as great 
in this comitry as in Europe. 

There are, however, other causes tending to the 
continual introduction of spurious species, independent 
of the selection of a secondary class of characters 
on which to establish them, and these arise from the 
usages of the science itself, and from opinions which 
are held by some of its authors. We shall briefly 
mention two of them. The custom of appending the 
name of the carhest describer of a species to that of 
the species itself, although it is, in the present state of 
zoology, necessary and proper, has in this connection 
inconvenient results. It is certainly a standing evidence 
of progress, but the working zoologist is apt to attach 
too much importance to it, and to imagine that his 
own dihgence, and perhaps his scientific reputation, 
are measured by the number of species which he dis- 
covers and describes. At the present time, when 
every subject of science is attracting the attention of 
many minds, and the competition is particularly active 
in zoology, he is justified in supposing that delay may 
deprive him of the priority of his discovery. Influ- 
enced at once by a praiseworthy desire of estabhshing 
his own claims, and by the fear of being anticipated, 
he hastens to bring forward his description, often with- 
out giving himself sufiicient time to verify the certainty 
of his discovery. The result in such a case is fre- 
quently a supposititious species. The proper correctioa 



INTRODUCTION. ^5 

of this procedure must arise from the reflection, that 
an ill-estabhshed species cannot stand, that sooner or 
later the error must be discovered, and that a false 
judgment in this respect will be held to betray inac- 
curacj, or insufficient powers of discrimination. He 
should furthermore be encoui'aged to keep back his 
discoveries until he is fully satisfied of their accuracy, 
by the assurance that, in the final opinion which is to 
fix his reputation, a single species well estabhshed, 
with its place and relations ascertained, will redound 
more to his honor than a thousand erroneous ones. 
These remarks are intended only for the ingenuous 
and well-meaning naturalist, but it is greatly to be 
feared that there have been others ayIio, for the sake of 
a little temporary reputation, have thrust themselves 
without qualification among the laborers of Natural 
History, and have deluded themselves with the idea, 
that because they could write nobis after false species, 
others would be blmd to their demerits. The career 
of such persons must always be short ; they are the 
false coin of science, and will sooner or later be 
stamped as uncurrent. The other of the causes alluded 
to is, the hypothesis, held by some persons, that the ani- 
mals of the respective continents, however near their 
affinities may be, are in every case specifically distinct 
from each other ; and hence, as there are animals of cer- 
tain famiUes on both continents which cannot be dis- 
tinguished from each other by any well-marked char- 
acters, it has resulted, that species possessing apparent 



76 INTRODUCTION. 

identity of external form and of organization, have 
been recorded as different animals. As every rational 
basis for the distinction of living beings is thus taken 
away, the advocates of this theory have been driven 
to seek extra-zoological foundations on which to es- 
tabhsh it. In one instance the tone of voice has been 
considered sufficient to separate the well-known bird 
Corvus Corone of the United States from the same bird 
in Great Britain. In a zoological family intimately 
allied to that of which we treat, to wit, the air-breath- 
ing fresh-water mollusks, or Lim7ieadce, much difficulty 
has arisen from this source. In this family, both ge- 
neric and specific forms seem to be almost entirely 
independent of climatal and other common influences, 
and the amount of variation among the species is so 
small that many forms, occurring on both continents, 
present an uniformity of characters, that would cause 
them to be considered identical, if confined to one 
continent only. Hence different names have been im- 
posed on what we cannot but consider to be the same 
thing. The terrestrial genus Suceinea, bearing in many 
respects a strong resemblance to the Limneadoe, is, like 
them, everywhere very uniform in its external charac- 
ters, and it is almost impossible to define from them 
alone, in what our species differ from those of Europe. 
The question of the identity of these closely allied spe- 
cies must eventually be decided by their anatomy, but 
in the mean time we believe it to be perfectly safe to 
adopt this axiom, that species, whencesoever derived, 



INTRODUCTION. 77 

possessing the same cliaractcrs, are identical. We view 
tliis to be a more rational course than to consider them 
to be the analocjues of each other, a convenient but 
indefinite mode of expression, which may be used to 
cover everj degree of similitude from a general analogy 
to a close affinity hardly admitting of distinction. 

Closely connected with this subject is that of a pro- 
per selection of specific terms for new objects ; for next 
in importance to a good description and figure, is an 
appropriate and characteristic name. The use of spe- 
cific names was adopted as a substitute for the charac- 
teristic phrase, consistmg often of many words, which, 
before the time of Limii^us, naturahsts were obliged 
to cite whenever they alluded to a species. As one 
word thus took the place of an entire sentence, it was 
desirable to select one that expressed some prominent 
trait of the object named, and, if possible, that trait 
by which it was distinguished from all others of the 
same genus. Such a word aids the memory by re- 
calling the characters of the species, and being in the 
Latin language, conveys its meaning in every coun- 
try where that language is understood. This practice, 
so obviously consistent with good taste, good sense, 
and utility, was received with general approbation, 
and almost immediately adopted among the rules of 
nomenclature. In process of time, however, iimova- 
tion commenced, and distinguished natui'alists were oc- 
casionally complimented by the attachment of their names 
to particular species. There seemed at first to be no 



78 INTRODUCTION. 

impropriety in this usage ; for the naturahst who had 
labored for years in elucidating the history of a particu- 
lar class of animals, without any other reward than 
that arising from the gratification which the pursuit 
itself furnished, might well deserve to have his name 
connected with that department of knowledge which 
he had promoted. Indeed, there was acknowledged 
to be a beautiful propriety in distinguishing a genus 
of plants by the name of Lmnteus, the great reformer 
of botany, or a species of birds by that of Wilson, 
their eloquent and graceful historian ; and in other 
similar examples. Names derived from persons even 
of much less celebrity as naturalists might not be pro- 
ductive of any practical inconvenience, and the custom 
was therefore so far sanctioned as to be admitted as an 
occasional exception to a general rule.* It was, how- 
ever, a great error to permit any departure from the 
original rule, and its infraction has been followed by 
consequences very much to be regretted. In our 
own country, where there is but little of that con- 
servative feehng which tends to the preservation of 
those usages and principles which past experience has 
proved to be wise and useful, and where innovations 
of all kinds are entered upon rashly, and often, as it 
would seem, from a mere love of change, and where 
the influence of the personal example of the most 

' The exception is thus stated by Mr. Swainson, in his System of No- 
menclature : " Species may be occasionally named after persons, provided 
they have been distinguished in that branch of zoology." 



INTRODUCTION. 79 

distlngmshcd leaders of science is very feeble, the 
■wholesome restraints of zoological nomenclature have 
been broken down, and naturalists have created rules 
for themselves. A multitude of barbarous terms, de- 
rived from the names of persons and places, have been 
introduced, outraging in their composition both pro- 
priety and good taste, inconsistent with the object pro- 
posed by the establishment of specific names, and sub- 
versive of the best interests of science. Among the 
names selected for this distmction are those of some 
of our most able zoologists, who are worthy of this or 
of any other honor, but there are many more of col- 
lectors and amateurs, and of persons totally uncon- 
nected "with any branch of zoology, who have no claims, 
except that of the partiahty of friends, to be placed 
in such association. The temple has even been dese- 
crated by the money-changers, and the names of shell- 
dealers and petty hucksters have been admitted to the 
same honors as those of Wilson and of Say. The 
indiscrimmate use of these names defeats the intentions 
of those who apply them. An honor which is so com- 
mon as to be borne by every one, ceases to be an honor, 
and persons of general celebrity as naturahsts, can- 
not feel themselves flattered by being classed in the 
same rank with the numerous unloiown persons with 
whom they are thus associated. Besides, to give the 
intended compliment any value, the reader must be told 
to whom the author intends to offer it ; and thus spe- 
cific descriptions, besides comprising the characters 



80 INTRODUCTION. 

of the object described, must be burtliened by an ad- 
ditional clause establishing the identity of the person 
commemorated. 

Another evil, of a still more grave character, in- 
asmuch as it aifects the reputation of those concern- 
ed, has resulted ; the motive of these friendly compU- 
ments has been questioned, and they have been sup- 
posed to arise more from a desire to gratify a certain 
small vanity than from any expectation of promoting 
thereby the advance of zoology. We do not ourselves 
coincide in this last opinion, because we know too 
well the honorable sentiments of some who have fallen 
into the practice which we condemn, to suppose that 
they are actuated by motives so unworthy. We be- 
lieve, on the contrary, that they have adopted it from 
an amiable wish to gratify their friends, without hav- 
ing sufficiently reflected upon the abuses of which it is 
susceptible, or upon the serious objections to which it 
is hable. But we cannot approve the practice or pass 
it by without reprehension, because the motives of 
those who have adopted it are correct. We are con- 
vinced that it is itself erroneous ; we know that its 
abuses have become intolerable, and we think that 
they ought forthwith to be abated.^ To effect this, 

1 We do not wish to be understood to imply, that American zoologists 
alone are obnoxious to tliis charge, but only that tliis reprehensible custom 
has been adopted in a more wholesale manner in this coimtry than in 
Europe. In proof of this we will mention some of the most remarkable 
examples. In a series of memoirs by one author, pubLshed in the 5th, 



INTRODUCTION. 3j^ 

the practice itself must be ivholly abandoned. We 
invoke the attention of zoologists to the subject, and 
ask their aid in endeavorin"; to eflfect a chan2:e. 

Havmg spoken thus freely of some of the evils 
which impede the progress of zoology, alluded to 
their causes, and suggested such remedies as are 
practicable in the department "which we have under- 
taken, — having, moreover, condemned certain prac- 
tices -which prominent zoologists of the time receive 
with favor, — we are quite prepared to be subjected 
to the test of our own rules. It may be, that we have 
not been governed by the prmciples which we recom- 
mend to others. Of this we leave others to judge. 
If it should be so, however, it will not detract from 
their utility, but only show that we have erred with 
the best intentions, and that instances often arise in 
which not only ourselves, but the best-informed zoolo- 
gists may form incorrect conclusions. We do not 

6th, 7tli, and Sth vol mines of the Transactions of the American Philosoplii- 
cal Society, more than one hundred instances occur of the use of specific 
terms derived from the names of the author's friends and correspondents, 
and these mostly applied to the species of one family of mollusks. In a 
memoir in the seventh volume of the Journal of the Pliiladelphia Academy 
of Natural Sciences, the name of an English botanist is applied in the 
same manner no less than twelve tunes in as many different genera of 
shells. The geologists, we fear, have been seduced by these bad exam- 
ples, for one of the most distinguished of them, in a memoir in the Trans- 
actions of the American Geological Association, having occa.sion to pro- 
pose five new species, has " dedicated " four of them to other geologists. 
Names derived from countries, moimtams, rivers, &c., which are also 
objectionable, are used with great freedom, and numerous examples of 
them occur in the same memoirs. 
VOL. 1. 10 



82 INTRODUCTION. 

expect to cause a reform, but we hope that, among 
the numerous young zoologists who are now coming 
forward, there may be some who may concur in the 
justice of our opinions, and whose career may be, 
either through conviction or unconsciously, influenced 
thereby ; and we shall be happy if in a single mstance 
we shall prevent a repetition of the evils which we 
have mentioned. 

As to the application of our own principles to the 
species treated of in this work, we would remark, that 
among our generally acknowledged species, there are 
some which seem to us to be separated from others 
on insuflicient grounds, and that our inclination is 
in every such case to reunite them. In some of these 
instances our opinion is confirmed by the opinion of 
gentlemen whom we consider to be better qualified 
than ourselves to decide ; in such, of course, there is 
no doubt. In others, that sanction is wanting or doubt- 
fully yielded ; yet our own convictions are too strong 
to permit us to hesitate. But in another class of 
cases, we are opposed by the unanimous opinion of 
all those zoologists who are familiar with the subject. 
Here, we yield our own belief to the common senti- 
ment. We do it the more willingly, because time 
cannot fail to develop further facts which will estab- 
lish the truth ; and because multiplied observations on 
the characters and habits of species are necessary, 
and investigations must be made in some unexplored 
parts of our country before we shall possess the ma- 



INTIIODUCTION. 



83 



terials for funning a final opinion on all doubtful points. 
\Ye sliaU express our own opinion on these species, 
■when treating of the different genera, and shall give 
a list of those nearly alhed, Avhich seem to us to 
need further examination. 




IV. 



OF CLASSIFICATION. 



The Animal Kingdom, a term intended to embrace 
tlie infinite multitude of living beings that people and 
animate the globe, that fill the air, the earth, and the 
waters Tvith life, is, by the original laws of its organi- 
zation, separated into several distinct divisions. In 
each of these, there prevails a common principle of 
structure, or unity of composition, variously modified 
and complicated, wliich pervades all the animals con- 
tamed within it, and which is independent of, and distinct 
from, that which governs the composition of the others. 
The limits and boundaries of the different divisions have 
not been so thoroughly investigated, as to determine 
the exact relations wliich obtain among them, or their 
comparative rank according to the perfection of their 
organization and functions. Indeed of many of the lower 
animals very httle is yet known ; but, the constant acces- 
sions which are daily made to our knowledge of their 
intimate structure render it certain, that very import- 
ant modifications of the received opinions in regard to 



CLASSIFICATION. gg 

some of them, m\\ hereafter be adopted. Two primary 
divisions have been, for half a century, generally recog- 
nized by naturahsts, viz. 

1. Tliat including the Vertebrate Animals, or those 
endowed with an internal bony skeleton, the con- 
stant feature of wliich, is the vertebral column ; and 
possessing a brain, spinal marrow, and a system of 
nerves connected with them. 

2. That including the Invertebrate Animals, or 
those destitute of the structure belonging to the pre- 
ceding ; the nervous system being only cjmiglionary. 

These great primary divisions are founded, essen- 
tially, upon differences in the conformation of the ner- 
vous system, and separate the animals possessing a com- 
mon sensorium or brain, and cerebral nerves, together 
with a ganglionary system, from those wliich possess a 
ganglionary system only. The first is characterized 
in the most definite manner, and the animals included 
in it, are constituted on the same general plan of organ- 
ization. It has usually been subdivided into four 
great classes. Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, and Fishes. 
But there are indications from the recent investigations 
into the structure of the Marsupial animals, which may 
lead to their establishment as a class between the Mam- 
mals and Birds ; and there are not wanting reasons 
for the division of the Reptiles mto two independent 
classes. But whatever changes may take place in the 
grouping of the component parts of the division, the 
division itself must be retained with nearly its present 



86 ESriRODUCTION. 

limits. The second division is cliaractemed in a much 
less positive manner. It embraces beings of very vari- 
ous structure, possessing but few characteristics in com- 
mon, and created on plans of organization so widely 
different, that nothing brings them together in the same 
group except the negative quality of wanting those 
properties which distinguish the first. In some of 
them, the nervous system remains undiscovered, and 
if it exists, is less developed than in the ganglionary 
animals. This classification, wliich is not altogether 
philosophical, is therefore liable to be re-modelled, as 
the progress of knowledge shall require it, and may be 
said to be, at present, in a rather unsettled state. 
Various propositions have been made by different 
naturalists, each influenced by his peculiar theoretical 
views, for its subdivision into natural classes, but none 
of these have met with general acceptation. It is 
certain, however, that the Invertehrata vrill be recognized 
to contain several distinct divisions, each holding a rank 
equally as independent as the vertebrate animals, dis- 
tinguished by a principle of conformation equally definite, 
and removed to a greater or less distance from them, 
according to the perfection of the structure and func- 
tions of the animals contained in it. 

The order and system impressed by the Divine Will 
on all created thuigs, indicated to the early philosophers, 
as clearly as to those of our own time, that some princi- 
ple of arrangement must prevail in the constitution of 
animated beings ; and hence their attention was given 



CLASSIFICATION. g^ 

to its investigation. Guided hj only a very limited 
knowledge of their structure, and observing, -what is 
very obvious, that there is a superior and an infe- 
rior extreme in their organization, and a gradation 
from the one point to the other, it was inferred that 
they are all arranged in a regularly descending series, 
and constitute an unbroken chain from the highest to 
the lowest. It was seen after a time, however, that 
this is true only in a very general sense, and that it 
regards the great classes rather than inferior gi'oups, 
the degrees of the scale being very irregular, and the 
intervals between some of them of vast extent. Such 
a hiatus occurs between the two great divisions we have 
just named, the distance between the animals lowest in 
rank in the vertebral classes, and the most highly or- 
ganized invertebral animals being almost infinite. In 
passing from one to the other the transition is immediate 
from beings possessing a brain and highly developed nerv- 
ous system, distinct organs of sense, an internal bony 
skeleton which is a part of the hving structure, renewed, 
from time to time, like the other tissues of the body, 
and extensive powers of locomotion, and endowed, more- 
over, with intelligence, to those in which there is neither 
a brain nor cerebral nerves, where the organs of sense 
are for the most part wanting or singly or doubtfully 
developed, the body composed of a soft and flaccid sub- 
stance protected in some classes by an external cover- 
ing of hard and dense structure, but distinguished from 
bone by its want of vitality, and the power of locomo- 



88 INTRODUCTION. 

tion restricted commonly within very narrow limits, and 
in Avliicli intelligence is replaced by instinct. 

The impossibility of arranging animals in an unin- 
terrupted Linnean series being now acknowledged, and 
every practical attempt to construct such an one having 
failed, the attention of naturalists has been turned in 
another direction, and much time has been given to the 
investigation of the structural and functional relations 
of the several groups and species to each other, with a 
view of deducing from them the true principle of natu- 
ral arrangement. For tliis purpose their affinities and 
analogies have been studied, their external appearance 
and nnnute internal anatomy have been examined, and 
the whole economy of their lives has been sought out. 
A comparison of these, aided by acute observation and 
ingenious reasoning, has resulted in the promulgation of 
several hypotheses which have been put forth, each as 
illustrating the plan followed by nature in the creation 
of living beings, and which should therefore be adopted 
as the basis of zoological classification. The authors of 
some of these, though admitting a generally descenduig 
series, have supposed that there are collateral lines, 
more or less numerous, diverging from the maui series, 
but continuing parallel to, and after an interval of 
greater or less extent, merging again with it. 

Others, and the most numerous class, have conceived 
that, at whatever point we commence, we shall, by 
tracing the gradations of organization and the connect- 
ing affinities of groups, arrive at the same pomt again ; 



CLASSIFICATION. 89 

that the natural arrangement therefore is represented 
bj a series of circles, constituting together a net-work, 
of which the meshes or subordinate circles touch at 
their circumference other circles, having near relations 
with them ; the whole uniting to form a great circle. 
According to this idea, the animal kingdom consists of a 
certain number of grand divisions arranged in a cir- 
cular form, each of these circles consisting again of the 
same number of classes forming another circular series 
within the preceding. These again are divided and sub- 
divided into others representmg orders, families and 
genera. The number of parts constituting each of 
these circles is supposed to be the same. Thus, for 
instance, in one of these systems five genera are 
included in each famUj, five families in each order, and 
so on to the grand divisions, which are also five. The 
authors and advocates of the systems are by no means 
agreed as to the governing number adopted by nature, 
three, four, five, and seven, having been respectively 
proposed. They are all known as circular systems, and 
receive their peculiar designation from the number pro- 
posed, as ternary, quinary, &c. 

It cannot be denied that every animal has other 
animals clustered around it by various relations, and 
that any system of grouping founded on these relations, 
tends apparently to a circular arrangement. But it is 
equally true that every attempt to discover the governing 
principle which presides in the arrangement has been 
hitherto unsuccessful. Notwithstanding that much learn- 

VOL. I. 11 



90 INTRODUCTION. 

ing and ability have been devoted to tbe subject, the 
analogies relied on, in all these systems, are of very 
unequal value, being oftentimes remote and almost 
imperceptible, and not infrequently fanciful and absurd. 
The reasoning is fallacious, sometimes transcendental, 
and in the main unsatisfactory, and the general opinion 
of naturahsts is adverse to the theories themselves. 

Of the animals composing the great invertebrate 
division, those known by the name of Mollusca,^ the 
mollusks, or soft-bodied animals, decidedly out-rank the 
others by the perfection of their respiratory, circulatory, 
assimilating, and reproductive functions, while the func- 
tions of animal life, excepting those of locomotion, 
are as liighly developed as in either of the other 
departments. They have consequently been usually 
placed, in the order of arrangement, next after the verte- 
brate animals, and they are formed according to a pecu- 
liar type or system of organization. 

From the time of ]M. Cuvier, who was the first to 
demonstrate the leading modifications of structure pre- 
vailing among the Mollusks, and to found thereon a 
truly philosophical classification, showing their several 
distinctions and relations, many other methods have 
been brought forward by distinguished naturahsts. 
Some of these display great learning and mgenuity, 
in the formation of the terms apphed to the various 
subdivisions, and if mere words could become a substi- 

' The word is derived from the Latin moUuscus, signilying soft. 



CLASSIFICATION. 9;|_ 

tutc for knowledge, might eclipse tlic claims of tliat 
great man. But, when analyzed, they are found to be, 
in their general outlines, essentially the same as the 
method proposed by him, the new one being merely a 
new nomenclature, with changes in the arrangement 
of the subordinate parts, and such new grouping of 
genera, as more recent anatomical investigations have 
rendered necessary.^ Some difference there is, also, 
in the opinions held concerning the comparative rank 
and value of the different sections, and the limits of 
the division itself, some authors including among the 
Mollusks one or more classes of animals which are 
excluded by others, and elevating to the rank of dis- 
tinct classes groups which, by others, are placed in the 
subordinate position of orders and families. AVith these 
changes and limitations, the primary subdivisions re- 
main as proposed by M. Cuvier in 1798, the minor 
parts having been from time to time modified by the 
labor of himself and other authors who have treated of 
these animals as a class. 

It is not intended, here, to give a particular account 
of the classification of the Mollusks as at present re- 
ceived, but it is essential to the correct understanding 
of our subject, so far to exhibit it, as to show the 
position which the animals described in this work 
hold, the peculiarities which characterize them as a 
body, and the relations which they bear to each other, 
and to the other famihes of the same type of organi- 
zation. No method of classification hitherto published, 



92 INTRODUCTION. 

indicates correctly in all its details, the present state 
of this science, and hence, no one of them is followed 
in full, in this work ; but, such of the views of dif- 
ferent authors as are acceptable to us, are with some 
alteration adopted here. The Mollusks are thus de- 
fined by M. de BlamvOle : 

MoLLUSCA. Animals with two> equal, symmetrieal 
halves; the body with its appendages soft, not articu- 
lated, enveloped in a shin or muscular membrane 
(mantle) of various form, upon or within which is de- 
veloped a calcareous shell of one or more pieces. Cir- 
culation complete, with white blood; heart essentially 
aortic and above the intestinal canal. Respiration 
aquatic, or aerial. Nervous system composed of a cere- 
Iriform ganglion above the oesophagus, communicat- 
ing with the ganglia of the different functions, those 
of locomotion being lateral. 

They were divided by M. Cuvier into three Classes. 

Class I. Cephalopoda. In which the locomotive organs are 

attached to the head. 
Class II. Gasteropoda. In which locomotion is performed 

by an expansion of the ventral disk forming a 

sort of foot. 
Class III. AcEPHALA. In which a distinct head is wanting. 

The second class, which includes the animals herein 
described, is characterized by M. Rang, as follows ; 



CLASSIFICATION 93 



CLASS II. 
GASTEROPODA. 

Animal. Body free, without Umhs to aid progres- 
sion; hut with an abdominal expansion or foot 
suitable for craivling, and in a small number for 
swimming ; head distinct, bearing commonly one 
or more pairs of tentacles, and almost always eyes 
variously situated upon or near the tentacles ; res- 
piratory organs branchial, very variable in their 
form and position. 

Shell. External, internal, or wanting, almost al- 
ways a single piece, conical or spiral when exter- 
nal, and more or less rudimentary when internal, 
sometimes operculated. Inhabiting the sea, fresh 
water, and land. 

The subdivisions of tHs class, or the Orders, have, 
in nearly all the methods, been founded upon differ- 
ences in the structure of the respiratory apparatus, and 
the genera are grouped into them, according to their 
supposed relations ia this particular, and without ref- 
erence to their other characters. But, the arrange- 
ment of the genera is not the same in any two of 
them, and the same terms being used by different au- 



94 INTRODUCTION. 

thors "with a different practical application, considera- 
ble confusion prevails in this part of tlie classification. 
Many of them being imperfectly known, their places 
must remain uncertain and subject to change, until 
more accurate knowledge of their structure shall be 
obtained; and it wUl not be until all of them have 
been investigated, that any system can be proposed, 
which, so far as these sub-divisions are concerned, wiU 
have any chance of permanence. The following ar- 
rangement, used in the sense of the authors whose 
names are appended, is therefore to be considered as 
merely a provisional one, to be varied from time to 
time, and possibly to be entirely abandoned, by sub- 
stituting another founded upon a different organ or 
organs, and expressing, perhaps, more correctly, their 
natural relations. Recent observations render it cer- 
tain, indeed, that much error prevails relative to the 
mode of respiration, and to the organs by which it is 
performed in tliis class. The number of orders might 
be, even now, reduced by combining two or more 
together. 



ORDERS. 

1. Pneumobranchiata. Lamarck, and Gray. Organs of res- 
piration consisting of branchial vessels spread like a net- 
work over the internal parietes of a cavity in the anterior 
part of the body, communicating with the air by a small 
orifice on the right side. Respiring air. 



CLASSIFICATION. 



95 



2. Cervicobranchiata. Blainville. Organs of respiration 
situated in a large cavity above the neck, opening largely 
forwards. 

3. SiPHoNOBRANCHiATA. Blainville. Organs of respiration 
consisting of one or two pectiniform branchiae, contained in 
a cavity in the anterior part of the back, and communicating 
with the surrounding medium by a tubular canal attached 
to the columella. 

4. AsiPHONOBRANCHiATA. Blainville and Deshayes. Organs 
of respiration the same as in the preceding, except that 
they are not prolonged into a tube, but have sometimes an 
appendix or inferior lobe performing the same office. 

5. ScuTiBRANCHiATA. Blainville. Organs of respiration pro- 
tected by a sub-spiral or simply covering shell. 

6. Inferobranchiata. Cuvier. Organs of respiration in form 
of lamellae or folds, under the projecting border of the 
mantle. 

7. Cirrhobranchiata. Blainville. Organs of respiration in 
form of numerous long filaments borne by two radical lobes 
above the neck. 

8. Monopleurobranchiata. Blainville. Organs of respira- 
tion on one side only. 

9. NuDiBRANCHiATA. Cuvier. Organs of respiration consist- 
ing of naked arborescent tufts arranged symmetrically on 
the side and back. 

10. NucLEOBRANCHiATA. Blainville. Organs of respiration in 
form of symmetrical tufts grouped with the digestive or- 
gans into a mass or nucleus on the upper and posterior 
part of the back. 

11. Cryptobranchiata. Deshayes. Organs of respiration 
often not apparent. 



9G 



INTRODUCTION. 



This classification is better exLibitecl in tlie following 
tabular form : 



TYPE. 


CLASSES. 

r I- 

Cephalopoda . . < 


OKDEES. 

f 
[ 

Pneumobranchiata. 
Cerv'icobrancliiata . 
Siphonobranchiata. 
Asiphonobrancliiata. 




11. 


Scutibranchiata. 


MOT.r-USCA. ^ 


Gasteropoda . . < 

m. 


Iiiferobrancliiata. 
Cirrhobrancliiata. 
Monopleurobrancliiata. 
Nudibranchiata. 
Nucloobranchiata. 
^ Cryptobranchiata. 

r 




ACEPHALA . . . < 


L 



As the immediate subjects of this work are com- 
prised within one section of the pneumo-branchiate 
mollusks, namely, that contauiing the species living 
upon the land, it will not be necessary to give any ac- 
count of the order as a whole, beyond that contained 
in the preceding definition, except to indicate such of 
our native genera, as are by the best authorities ad- 
mitted into it, and their natural groupings into fami- 
lies. Tliis is done in the following tabular view. It 
is proper, however, to notice, that there is much reason 
to doubt whether the family of Auriculadce is truly 
pneumo-brancliiate, and that the characters of the 



CLASSIFICATION. 



97 



genus Ancylus have not been dctcrmmcd by anatomi- 
cal investigation. The other genera are well kno"\yn, 
with the exception of one proposed by the author. 







FAMILIES. 


GENERA. 






r 


Vaginulus. 






Limacidae . < 


Tebennophoru-s. 
Arioa. 








Limax. 




SECT. I. 

Terrestrial. , 
Living upon 
the land. 


Helicidte < 


■ Vitrina. 
Suceinea. 
HelLx. 
Bulimus. 
Glandina. 


Pneumobranchiate 
Mollasca. 




Pupadae . . < 


' Cylindrella. 
Pupa, 






Vertigo. 






Helicinadce . 


Helicina. 
Cyclostoma. 






r 


' Limnea. 




SECT. II. 

Aquatic. ^ 
Inhabiting 


Limneadae . , 


Planorbis. 
Physa. 






Ancylus. 




the waters. 


Auriculadae . 


Auricula. 



The characters by which the families are distinguish- 
ed, differ in importance, but the genera contained in 
them respectively, are so nearly allied by a common 
peculiarity as to afford obvious and convenient di- 
\isions. 

The impossibility of arranging animals in an unin- 
terrupted Linnean series, descending from the most per- 
fect to those of the simplest organization, has long smce 
been acknowledged, and every practical attempt to 



VOL. I. 



12 



98 INTRODUCTION. 

construct such a series has been a faikire. Of late 
years, the attention of naturahsts has been turned in 
another direction, and much time has been given 
to the investigation of the structural and functional 
relations of the several groups and species to each 
other, with a view of deducing from them the true prin- 
ciple of natural arrangement. For this purpose their 
affinities and analogies have been studied ; their exter- 
nal appearances and their minute internal anatomy have 
been examined ; and the whole economy of their hves has 
been sought out. A comparison of these, aided by 
acute observation and ingenious reasoning, has resulted 
in the promulgation of several hypotheses, which are 
put forth, each as the true plan or system followed 
by nature in the creation of hving beings, and which 
should therefore be adopted as the basis of zoological 
classification. The authors of some of these, though 
admitting a generally descending series, have supposed 
that there are collateral lines, more or less numerous, 
diverging from the main series, but continuing par- 
allel to it, and, after an interval of greater or less extent, 
merging again with it. 




OF THE GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF GENERA AND 
SPECIES, AND THE EXISTING CAUSES INFLUENCING 
IT. 



The causes affecting, and the laws regulating the 
distribution of species upon the earth, together with 
the modifications of character produced by their influ- 
ence, have been much discussed of late ; but the facts 
hitherto recorded are too few in number, and the field 
of observation is too restricted, to permit any except 
very general inferences to be dra^vn from them. In 
the United States especially, it would be premature to 
attempt to define even the hmits of species, so long as 
extensive portions of the country remain unexplored 
by natui'alists, and so little attention is given to this 
subject; .but, a few remarks based upon the present 
state of our information may be hazarded, although at 
the risk of bemg proved to be m part erroneous by fu- 
ture investigation. We proceed, therefore, to mention 
various causes which have been supposed to exercise 
an influence upon the diffusion of genera and spe- 
cies, and upon the multiplication and perfection of 



100 INTRODUCTION. 

individuals ; and to consider their respective impor- 
tance, as shown by their effects upon the mdigenous 
species of land mollusks. It is necessary to pre- 
mise, however, that our remarks on these causes are 
derived solely from observation in this country, and 
relate only to their influence on the species existing 
here. 

Greograpldcal features of the country. The effect 
of the combined influences which determine the range 
of these animals is, to confine each species to a cer- 
tain natural station or habitation ; in other words, to 
restrict it witliin geographical Hmits more or less defi- 
nite, beyond which it never extends ; and hence their 
range ap])ears to be very closely dependent upon the 
geographical character of the country. It is proper 
therefore to inquire in the first place, how far they are 
in reality restrained by merely geographical causes, 
and whether the geographical features of the country 
exercise of themselves a positive influence on their 
distribution; and in order to a correct understanding 
of the subject it seems to be necessary to give a brief 
sketch of the principal geographical outlines of the 
region to wliich our notice is Hmited. 

The territory of the United States is bounded on 
the north by the Great Lakes and British America, on 
the east by the Atlantic Ocean, on the south by the 
Gulf of ]\Iexico and the Eepublic of IMexico, and on 
the west by that State and the Pacific Ocean. It 
extends from 67° W. to 125° W. from Greenwich, 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. IQ\ 

tlirough fifty-eiglit degrees of longitude ; and on the 
Atlantic coast from 25° N. to 45° N. tlirough twenty 
degrees of latitude, and on tlie Pacific coast from 42° 
N. to 49° N. through seven degrees of latitude. The 
distance from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, through 
this tract, is estimated at 2500 miles, and between 
the extreme north and south points at 1400 miles. 
It has a maritime frontier of more than 4000 miles, 
and a lake coast of 1200 miles. Its superficial con- 
tents are supposed to exceed 2,200,000 square miles, 
only one half of which is included within the bounda- 
ries of the organized State and Territorial govern- 
ments. The whole country east of the IMississippi, 
and for a considerable distance west of that river 
was, with the exception of an inconsiderable portion 
of prau-ie, originally covered with a dense forest ; and 
the labors of two hundred years have cleared and 
opened for cultivation probably less than one-eighth 
part of it. The magnitude of the whole area will be 
more fully realized by reflecting that it is eleven times 
greater than the kingdom of France, and considerably 
exceeds that of the whole of Europe, with the excep- 
tion of the Russian empire.' 

Its great geographical features are derived from two 
principal systems of mountams which traverse it, and 
divide it into three distmct regions. The first system 

' For details respecting the physical features of the country, the author is 
indebted to a valuable work on the Climate of tJie United States, by 
Samud Forty, M. D., 8vo. New York, 1842. 



102 INTRODUCTION. 

consists of the ranges known as the Rocky Mountains, 
running nearly parallel with the coast of the Pacific 
Ocean, of various elevation, but the highest peaks 
rising beyond the limits of perpetual frost and snow. 
These separate the waters running into the Pacific 
Ocean from those flowing into the Mississippi River, 
and Gulf of Mexico. The second system consists of 
the Appalachian ranges, which rise from an elevated 
table-land that makes up nearly half of their whole 
elevation, the summits occasionally reaching an altitude 
of six thousand, or even six thousand five hundred feet 
above the sea, but presenting a mean height of from 
two thousand to two thousand five hundred feet. They 
extend in a north-east and south-west direction from near 
the St. Lawrence river to Alabama, and form a barrier 
between the waters that flow westward to the Missis- 
sippi river and the Gulf of Mexico, and those that 
flow directly into the Atlantic Ocean. At their south- 
ern extremity they incline towards the south-west, and 
terminate before reaching the Gulf of Mexico, thus 
permitting the low alluvial lands of the southern Atlan- 
tic coast to unite with the lands of the same character, 
which form the southern part of the valley of the 
Mississippi. The great regions formed by these par- 
allel systems are the followmg : 

1. The Pacific Region, extending between the 
coast of the Pacific Ocean and the Rocky Moun- 
tains. Of this, as well as of the elevated plat- 
form or table-land from which these mountains 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. ^QS 

rise, but little zoological information has been 
received. 

2. The Central Region, or vast plain extending from 
the Rocky ISIountams on the -west, to the Appala- 
chian Mountains on the east. Bemg watered by 
the JSIississippi River and its tributary streams, it 
is commonly known as the great valley or basin of 
the Mississippi. It is for the most part underlaid 
"with horizontal strata of secondary limestone, and 
in its eastern and northern parts contains coal 
formations of great extent. Its rivers are of great 
volume and length, and the Mississippi River, rismg 
near the western extremity of Lake Superior, and 
running southwards to the Gulf of Mexico, divides 
it into two parts. 

3. The Atlantic Region, extending from the Appa- 
lachian chain on the west, to the Atlantic Ocean. 
This is for the most part a gently sloping plain, ex- 
tending from the base of the mountains to the 
ocean. The northwestern, or more elevated portion, 
is based principally on primary strata, while the 
division nearer the sea is underlaid by horizontal 
cretaceous and tertiary, composed of marls, cal- 
careous clays, and sand. 

As the physical characteristics which we have indi- 
cated, rather than described, are very marked, and dis- 
tinguish a country of very great extent, they probably 
afford as many facts tending to show the influence of 
this class of causes, as are to be found elsewhere ; and 



104 INTRODUCTION. 

hence we may look upon any inference Avliich may be 
properly drawn from tliem here, as one of general 
application. 

Mountain ranges, and particularly systems of moun- 
tains, are of course among the most effective natural 
barriers to the extension of animals on the surface of 
the globe ; but the completeness of the effect is in pro- 
portion to their height and continuity, and is modified 
by the respective locomotive powers of the species 
"which they restrain. A low range of mountains which 
would completely intercept the progress of fishes, and 
other animals inhabiting the waters separated by them, 
would hardly place an obstacle in the way of quad- 
rupeds or birds, which have the means of surmounting 
them. A higher range, which would yet not impede the 
birds, would begin to limit the quadrupeds. It would 
define the range of the smaller species, and those of 
feeble locomotive powers, which are confined by their 
habits to the immediate neighborhood in which they 
are born ; while the larger and more powerful species, 
accustomed to roam over extensive tracts of country La 
search of food or for change of climate, would scarcely 
be checked in their migrations. It does not appear, 
from any circumstance noticed in the condition of the 
terrestrial moUusks, that any height of mountains which 
could be surmounted by quadrupeds, would oppose an 
insuperable boundary to them, or that there is anytliing 
in their organization to prevent their compassing the 
highest elevations, provided the other circumstances are 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTIUBUTION. ^Qr^ 

sucli as are consistent "with their economy. For, al- 
though their poAvers of progression are of a very low 
order, they are not by their instincts restricted to a 
particular local habitation, nor have they any regular 
places of breeding or of shelter, but on the contrary, 
seek such as may happen to suit their purposes, and be 
near when needed. Hence, although no individual 
animal can be supposed to have made any considera- 
ble progress, yet, as every one has receded further and 
further from the point of departure, it may be con- 
ceived that, in the course of the countless generations 
which have existed, they may have extended to vast 
distances from the original focus of the species, if indeed 
there was but one focus, a fact which is hkely to remain 
undetermmed. We might expect then, a very wide and 
almost unlimited distribution of these animals, if there 
were no other counteracting circumstances to restrict it ; 
and, if such did not exist, our expectations would proba- 
bly be realized. But, as wich the elevation of the ranges 
of mountains the atmospheric temperature is reduced, 
the character of the vegetation changes, and the geo- 
logical structm-e almost always assumes a new form, the 
conditions of life on high levels become very different 
from those existing below, and the influences resolve 
themselves mainly into those of climate. These operate 
in a very different manner from the obstacles we have 
before spoken of, and affect directly the means of 
procuring food, the power of reproduction, and the 
ability of sustaining life itself; and hence they are of 

VOL. I. 13 



106 INTRODUCTION. 

the utmost importance in the consideration of this sub- 
ject. The facts, in relation to the zoological influence 
of the two systems of mountains within the United 
States, accord fully with these views. The Rocky 
Mountains, rising through the level of vegetable bar- 
renness to that of perpetual snow, are, at their highest 
elevations, unsuitable to the existence and support of 
animal life ; and constitute a barrier impenetrable to 
nearly every class of animals. The country w^estward 
of those mountains is therefore separated zoologically, 
as well as geographically, from that eastward of them ; 
the species common in the more eastern divisions are 
there replaced by other and different forms ; and it is 
thus a distinct zoological region. The Appalachian 
ranges on the other hand, of moderate elevation, cov- 
ered for the most part to their summits with forests, 
and presenting no limit to the support of animal life, 
are easily penetrated at many points through their de- 
files, and present but few obstacles to the extension of 
species. They constitute no zoological barrier to the 
land-mollusks, although they do to some other animals ; 
and if, owing to their altitude and the consequent di- 
minution of temperature, individuals are less numerous 
upon their summits than in the valleys, this effect is 
climatic alone. Of the native species inhabiting the 
Atlantic Region, with the exception of those of the ter- 
tiary section in the south and south-eastern parts of it, 
nearly all have been noticed in the Central Region ; 
and, so far as observation extends, both species and 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. JQJ 

individuals are quite as numerous in the insulated val- 
leys among the mountains, and upon their slopes, as in 
the country on either side of them. This remark can- 
not of course apply to the introduced species, Avhich to 
this time, with one or t>yo exceptions, are confined to the 
Atlantic Region alone. There are, however, in the 
Central Region, several species which hitherto have not 
been detected in the Atlantic Region ; but this obser- 
vation, if it should continue to hold good after more 
extended investigation, may probably be explained by 
other than geographical causes. And there is at least 
one species, which, in its progress from the west east- 
ward, seems barely to have reached the confines of the 
Eastern Region. This is Helix prvfimda, common in 
the Central Region, but hitherto only found eastward 
of the Alleghany Mountains in a smgle locality, on the 
Juniata River, in Pennsylvania. Neither do our rivers 
and lakes appear to present any positive obstacle to the 
extension of species, for we do not know an instance 
where the two banks of a river exhibit any considerable 
difference in this respect, both species and individuals 
being in general equally numerous upon both sides of 
them. Even the Mssissippi River, separating the coun- 
try into eastern and western sections, and nearly insulat- 
ing the eastern section lying between the Great Lakes 
and the Gulf of Mexico, has no restraining effect, and 
the Great Lakes themselves have not prevented many, 
and perhaps all, of the species common to the country on 
their southern border from extending to their northern 



108 INTRODUCTION. 

shores ; they being nearly as abundant in some parts 
of Canada as in the United States. 

Leaving out of consideration the ocean, which of 
course confines whole tribes and orders of animals 
■within one area, it would seem necessarily to result, from 
the preceding facts and observations, that merely geo- 
grajthical features do not much affect the distribution of 
species ; and that their territorial range, under simi- 
lar and favorable conditions, is, irrespective of geo- 
graphical limits, very wide. The vast area between the 
Rocky Mountains and the Atlantic Ocean may, for 
these animals, be considered as one zoological district ; 
and it may be assumed that they are diffused through- 
out the whole of it, except where they are restrained by 
climate, or by other general or local causes. 

The followinGT tabular view exhibits the distribution 
of the species mentioned in this work, according to 
the geographical divisions before defined, so far as un- 
derstood at this time. The species believed to have 
been introduced from other countries are printed in 
italic letters. 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. 



109 



TABLE OF DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES IN THE SEVERAL 
GEOGRAPHICAL REGIONS. 



Species noticed in 
the Pacific Region S 
only. 



Species noticed in 

the Central Region ■■ 

only. 



Species noticed in i 

the Atlantic Region "^ 

only. 



Species noticed in 

both Central and At- < 

lantic Regions. 



Succinca nuttalliana, ru-sticana. 

Helix calilbrnienMs, colunibiana, labiosa, loricata, 
nickliiiiana, nuttalliana, sportella, .strigosa, towns- 
endiana, tudiculata, vancouverensis. 

Succinca luteola. 

Helix albocnicta, berlanderiana, buffoniana, clausa, 
cuniberlandiana, deniis><a, elevata, exoleta, gula- 
ris, interna, la.smodon, leporina, limatula, niaxil- 
lata, nuiltilincata, pennsylvanica, rotula, saxicola, 
solitaria, spinosa, sub-plana, texasiana. 

Buliiuus dealbatus, superastrus. 

Glandina vanuxemensis. 

Vertigo decora. 

Helicina occulta, chrysocheila. 

Vaginulus floridanus. 

Arion horlensis. 

Liniax agrestis, variegatus. 

Succinea campestris. 

Helix aspersa, cellaria, hortensis, jejuna, lucida, 

multidentata, ottonis, rhodocheila, f-elenina. 
Buliinu.? decoUatus, undatus, lasciatus, subula, vir- 

gulatus. 
Cyclo.stoma dentatum. 
Pupa incana, modica, pontifica. 
Cylindrclla campanulata, jejuna, lactaria. 
Achatina graciiliraa, pellucida. 

Tebennophorus caroliniensis. 

Limax campestris. 

Vitrina pellucida. 

Succinea avara, aurea, ovalis, obliqua, putris. 

Helix albolabri-s, ahernata, appressa, arborea, auri- 
culata, chersina, concava, dentifera, electrina, 
fatigiata, fuliginosa, hirsuta, inflecta, indentata^ 
inornata, intertexta, labyrinthica, ligera, lineata, 
lucubrata, major, minu.-scula, mobiliana, mono- 
don, palliata, perspectiva, profunda, pulchella, 
pustula, sayi, septemvolva, striatella, suppressa, 
thyroidus, tridentata. 

Bulinius lubricus, exiguus, fallax, harpa. 

Glandina truncata. 

Pupa armifera, badia, contracta, corticaria, nipicola. 

Vertigo gouldii, milium, ovata, pentodon. 

Helicina orbiculata. 



110 



INTRODUCTION. 



Climate. In a territory so extensive as that em- 
braced -witliin the United States, there is ample oppor- 
tunity to test the eflfect of climate ; and the topograph- 
ical character of the country aids in defining the 
bounds of this influence, and in enabling us the more 
readily to appreciate its amount. It may be said, in 
general, that the country presents a great diversity of 
climate, varying from that of the northern district, 
Avhere frost and snow prevail nearly six months in the 
year, and the alternations of temperatui-e are rapid and 
excessive, the extreme range of the thermometer ex- 
ceeding 130° of Fahrenlieit, to that of peninsular Florida, 
■where the seasons blend imperceptibly with each other, 
vegetation is never dormant, and flowers succeed each 
other without interval. 

The mean summer and Avinter temperature of the two 
most northern and the two most southern military posts, 
the last of these being an insular one, together with that 
of the most south-western post, taken from Dr. Ferry's 
w^ork, Avill illustrate the subject, and show that we have 
■within our limits a range of climate as excessive in its 
extremes as those of Moscow and of Cairo. 



PLACES. 


N. 
lat. 


w. 

Ion. 


IVtEAN TEMPEEATUEE. 


Extremes 


.Annual 
Range. 


Annual. 


Summer. 


Winter. 

-leg. m. 
21 07 


Difference. 


Mini- 
mum. 

deg. 

87 


.vii 1- 
nium. 

deg. 

-23 


Fort Brady, "Wis. 


ileg. tn. 

46 29 


dej. m. cleg. m. 

81 52 41 39 


ileg. m. 

63 lb 


deg. m. 

42 11 


deg. 
110 


Houlton, Me. 


46 10 67 50 


41 21 


62 93 


16 74 


49 16 


9 


-24 


118 


Tampa Bay, E. F. 


27 57!S2 35 


73 42 


81 25 


64 76 


16 49 


92 


35 


57 


Key West, £. F. 


24 33 81 52 


76 09 


81 39 


70 05 


11 34 


89 


52 


37 


Fori Jessup, La. 


31 30 93 47 


68 03 


82 48 


67 99 


29 29 


96 


19 


77 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. l\l 

The general effect of climate, irrespective of other 
influences, is imdoubtecUj a reduction of the number, 
both of genera and species, towards the north ; and a 
manifest diminution of the number, size, and perfection 
of individuals. Thus, while in the northern sections 
Criandina, Ilelicina, Cyclostoma^ and the poljgyral forms 
of Helix entirely disappear, and only one of the native 
species of true Bulimus remains, the single genus Vitrina 
begins to be observed. At the same time, although in 
the southern sections the genera are more numerous, 
and only two northern genera, TehenjiojjJiorus and Vi- 
trina, are knoA\Ti to disappear, yet, the great genus 
Helix becomes less numerous in species, thus indicating 
that its focus is in the more temperate portion of the 
central region. This result however, is affected b}- 
elevation and other causes as well as latitude, species 
being continued on the Appalachian table lands, as far 
south as Georgia and Alabama, when they have already 
disappeared on either side in the same latitude. And 
while the northern species show a tendency gradually 
to run out, towards the south, their places are supplied 
to some extent by other forms. Thus, the poh/c/p'al 
Selices, which form a very distinct division of this 
genus, and by some have been thought to possess char- 
acters sufficiently marked to constitute a genus by them- 
selves, occurring but rarely in the latitude of the Ohio 
river, become more common towards the south, until, on 
the borders of the Gulf of Mexico, they exist in vast 
numbers, to the exclusion of nearly all tlio species. 



112 INTRODUCTION. 

"which further north occupy the country. Helix fallax, 
if it be considered a legitimate species, is another simi- 
lar instance. It appears first, sparingly, north of the 
Ohio, where it can hardly be distmguished from the 
analogous Helix tridentata ; but in the sandy parts of 
the south it is greatly multiplied, and entirely takes the 
place of the latter species. 

But, although distribution is mainly influenced by 
climate, there are many other minor causes which 
gi-eatly modify its effect, and determine the number, 
both of genera and species, in particular localities, and 
even over large tracts of country. Among these are 
the following. 

Crcological Structure. The influence of this cause 
is very important, and admits of no doubt. The soils 
formed from the debris of calcareous strata are those 
which support the terrestrial mollusks in the greatest 
numbers, and on which individuals attain the greatest 
size and beauty. It would seem, therefore, that the 
calcareous matter of the soil is in some way essential 
to the perfection of the shell. Soils formed from pri- 
mary rocks, on the other hand, are those on which they 
are least numerous, and where the shell is in general 
smaller and less ponderous. We doubt not that indi- 
viduals brought from primitive and from calcareous 
regions may be respectively distinguished by the greater 
or less development of, and the amount of calcareous 
matter in, the shell. As to the other geological form- 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. W^ 

ations, we have not been able to perceive any ap- 
preciable differences in the influence which they exert, 
but from all of them it is less favorable. The coal 
formations have been said to be nearly as favorable to 
their multiplication as calcareous strata. "We are not 
prepared to deny this entirely, but certainly, in every 
part of the coal-field of the eastern part of Ohio which 
we have visited where limestone is wanting, these ani- 
mals are not more numerous than in the primary region 
of Vermont, other circumstances in both being appar- 
ently equal. The only inference therefore which seems 
to be justified is, that the presence of calcareous matter 
in the soil produces a positively favorable effect on the 
increase of the terrestrial mollusks ; the effect of the 
other geological formations being only negative, and, so 
far as observation goes in this country, not definite. 

Vegetation. A vegetation composed entirely of coni- 
ferous trees produces a positively unfavorable influence. 
Hence, in our pine forests, these animals are always 
comparatively rare, and in the northern primary sections 
may be said to be entirely wanting. In the Southern 
States, where extensive pine forests prevail, but with a 
favorable climate and a calcareous soil, neither species 
nor mdividuals are numerous, and the latter are reduced 
in size. It seems necessary, indeed, that deciduous 
trees and plants should predominate, in order to their 
considerable multiplication and extension. 

Humidity and Dryness. Humidity is one of the 
conditions necessary to their existence, and therefore it 

VOL. I. 14 



114 INTRODUCTION. 

is that they are more numerous in humid localities 
than elsewhere. For the same reason, they prefer the 
bottom of ravines, and the damp and shady recesses of 
the forest, and choose for their places of shelter strata 
of wet and decaying leaves, and the lower surfaces of 
wood and stones in contact with the soil, or even bury 
themselves in the soil. For though they have the ability 
to retire into their shells and of hermetically closing the 
aperture, yet this power seems to be provided as a de- 
fence against occasional or accidental changes, and not 
against constant or long-continued eifects. Hence, they 
are rarely found to occupy positions that are perma- 
nently arid ; and in regions subject to long-continued 
drought, and upon soils which easily give up their mois- 
ture, they are not met with except ia low situations, 
near the margins of streams, ponds and swamps. For 
the same reason they are not common on soils which 
become hard and impenetrable on drying, and are want- 
ing in sun-burnt wastes and in sandy deserts. The vicin- 
ity of waterfalls, within the influence of the spray and 
mist arising from them, is a favorite locality of many 
species. Excessive moisture, on the other hand, is very 
prejudicial, for they cannot exist in swamps, or upon 
grounds subject to be overflowed with water, and they 
are destroyed by inundations. The genera, however, and 
even the species, diSbr considerably in these partic- 
ulars. Glandina occupies habitually wet and swampy 
grounds, and Sacdnea and some species of Pupa are 
often fomid upon ground in the immediate vicinity of, 



GROGRArillCAL DISTRIBTTTION. JI5 

and saturated ^vith water, localities not habitable by 
other genera. Ildiv multilineata is one of the species 
said to inhabit wet meadows. 

Elevation. Although all our species, as has been 
said, may be supposed to have surmounted very consider- 
able elevations, yet they do not constantly inhabit the 
highest levels, such positions being, by reason of climatal 
influences, less favorable to them than less elevated 
situations. There are, however, some species which, 
although diffused throughout almost every part of the 
country, are found more commonly than others, in the 
higher regions of the mountains, and which appear to 
occupy them by choice. It would seem, therefore, that 
elevation exercises an influence independent of climate. 
We are not aware that many facts have been observed 
which support this opinion, and the only species which 
we can mention with confidence as being frequently 
noticed in such situations is Helix inornata, which, both 
in New York, Vermont, and Massachusetts, we have 
procured from the highest ridges. This native species 
bears some resemblance to Helix alUaria, which Mr. 
Forbes cites as an inhabitant of the highest elevations 
in Great Britain. 

But, notwithstanding these remarks, the general influ- 
ence of elevation corresponds with that of increasing 
northern latitude, and is decidedly climatal. The height 
of the most elevated mountains in the United States, 
eastward of the Rocky Mountams, however, is so incon- 
siderable, that they enjoy for a short period, at least 



116 INTRODUCTION. 

during the summer, a temperature which is sufficiently 
mild to permit any of the species to exercise their usual 
functions, and to reproduce their kind, although the 
length and severity of the winters retard their maturity 
and prevent a rapid increase of numbers. Hence, 
species are less numerous, and individuals are reduced 
in size and beauty, on the highest levels, in the same 
manner as they are in northern localities. A striking 
instance of this effect is seen in the mountainous region 
of New Hampshire and Vermont, where Helix triden- 
tata, and IT. sayi, although frequently met with, do not 
reach one half the magnitude which they attain in the 
lower levels of western New York and Ohio. 

The observations hitherto made on this interesting 
subject are few, and do not authorize any confident 
inference ; but so far as they go, they show that nearly 
all the species which inhabit the country on either side 
of the mountains, exist also on the high table-lands, 
and that if there are any species peculiar to the extreme 
high points, they must occupy very hmited locaUties on 
the few peaks which rise more than 5000 feet above the 
sea. It is not unlikely indeed, that the genus Vitrina, 
which has been found elsewhere at high elevations, may 
be discovered in these situations. 

The relations which the different levels of elevation 
bear to the parallels of latitude, although as interesting 
to the zoologist as to the botanist, have not yet been 
made the subject of examination in this country. But 
the Rocky IMountains, towards and beyond which the 



GEOGRAPHTCAL DISTRTBTTTION. Jj^^ 

tide of population is already rolling, offer, in the great 
extent of their table-land and in the height to Avhich they 
rise, a vast field of research to future naturalists, -where 
they "will be able to solve many of the most important 
questions connected with the geographical distribution 
of the terrestrial mollusks of our country ; and only a 
few years will elapse before these mountains will be 
accessible, with comparative ease, to those who may wish 
to explore them. 

Having thus noticed the most important agents which 
are supposed to influence the extension of these animals, 
it may be proper to give such general results respecting 
their actual distribution, as seem to be justified by our 
present scanty knowledge, and to be in accordance with 
the preceding principles. And if, as before observed, 
but httle confidence can be placed in such general infer- 
ences, they may nevertheless be useful by excitmg 
further investigation, and may lead the way to more 
certain mformation. The facts hitherto observed in re- 
lation to species, indicate the existence of several distinct 
zoological divisions or sections of country, of which the 
topographical characters are in general well marked, and 
in which, respectively, causes are seen to exist adapted, 
according to our views, to exercise the influences we have 
named. It is not pretended that the productions of each 
of these, even in the limited department of the terres- 
trial mollusks on which alone they are fomided, differ en- 
tirely from those of the others ; but, while they are more 
or less blended in general, there are certain species which 



118 INTRODUCTION. 

arc peculiar to cacli. And notwithstanding that these 
sections may he defined "with some particularity, their 
limits are necessarily in a considerable degree arbitrary ; 
and it Avill require many years of patient and indus- 
trious observation, and the accumulation of a great 
number of facts, before they can be laid down with cer- 
tainty. Beginning at the southern extremity and pro- 
ceeding northwards, they occur in the follow^ing order. 

Section 1. Tlte Peninsula of Florida, and the 
adjacent islands, extending from 24° 30^ to 30° north 
latitude, and at the nearest pomt being about one hun- 
dred and tliirty miles distant from the northern shore of 
the island of Cuba. This section, surrounded by the 
ocean on every side except the north, is but little raised 
above it, no part rising more than one hundred and fifty 
feet above its level. The interior of its southern part is 
an immense morass intersected by sluggish streams, while 
its northern portion is in some parts a level, and in others 
an undulated country with a sandy soil, and, except 
near the streams and ponds, and in the islands or insu- 
lated thickets of verdure locally called hammocks, where 
deciduous trees prevail, covered with pine trees and an 
undergrowth of dwarf palmetto. The chmate is peculiar ; 
summer and winter present no great extremes, and meet 
each other by slow and insensible changes ; the beautiful 
vegetation and verdant fohage of the tropics are ever 
present ; and with the temperature of Cuba, are enjoyed 
many of its productions also. Its zoology has never 
.been thoroughly investigated, but a careful exploration 



GEOGIIAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION HCj 

of its most southern portion, including the islands of the 
coast, has demonstrated that many of the land-moUusks 
indigenous to Cuba, arc found both on the main land and 
the islands, and that others ■which are derived from a more 
distant som'ce, also exist there. Among the former are 
Pupa incajia, Cylindrella lactaria, Cyclostoma dentatum, 
Bulimiis itndatus and fasciafus ; and among the latter, 
Bulimus virgulatus, and Selix rJiodocheila, selenina, 
ottonis, &c. There are other species which, so far as is 
at present ascertained, are peculiar to this section. Such 
is Vaginulus fioridanus. Dead and Avorn specimens of 
other Cuban species are also sometimes seen in collec- 
tions, and represented to have been procured in Florida, 
but the evidence that they actually -were, is not entirely 
satisfactory. 'The other species indigenous to this sec- 
tion are the same which are found in the next northern 
section. The influence of a mild climate approaching 
that of the intertropical regions, and very favorable to 
the multiplication of species, is counteracted, in some 
degree, by the excessive humidity of large tracts, and 
by the general prevalence of a sandy soil. For this 
reason, though in some situations they exist in multitudes, 
there are extensive portions where it is almost impossible 
to discover a single one ; and, in general, it may be said, 
that individuals are multiplied whilst species are re- 
strained. The marked characteristics of this section, 
and its near approach to a tropical clunate, lead us to 
expect that when it shall have been thoroughly explored 
it will be found to contain more than the tAventy-eight 



120 INTRODUCTION. 

species now supposed peculiar to itself, as well as other 
introduced species. It possesses a peculiar interest as the 
connecting point betAveen the Fauna of North America 
and that of the West Indian islands. 

Section 2. The Tertiary Begion of the Atlantic Coast 
and the Grulf of Mexico. This embraces the eastern 
parts of North and South Carolina and Georgia, the 
■whole of Florida not included in the preceding section, 
the southern parts of Alabama and Mississippi, the 
whole of Louisiana, and parts of Arkansas and Texas. 
It extends from the ocean to the point where the rivers, 
falling over the last rocky ledge, reach the level of tide- 
water ; and is a low and humid region characterized by 
extensive swamps and marshes, sluggish streams, and 
wide mlets from the sea. On the streams, the soil is but 
little elevated above the water, vegetation is vigorous 
and prohfic, and extensive and almost impenetrable 
cane-brakes prevail. On the higher grounds the soil is 
chiefly sandy, and vast tracts, extending for hundreds of 
miles, are covered by magnificent open forests of gigantic 
pines. Here the traveller may journey for days and 
weeks among the monotonous scenery, and will in vain 
seek relief or change in the unvarying landscape, 

" Where to the north — pine trees in prospect rise, 
Where to the south — pine trees assail the sides, 
Where to the east — pine trees obstruct the view, 
Where to the west — pine trees forever grew." 

To a favorable climate there is here superadded the 
concurrent geological influence of a substratum of soft 



GEOGRArHICAL DISTRIBUTION. J 21 

and crumbling limestone, "nhicli modifies the sandj soil, 
the yegetation remaining unfavorable. This section is, 
in its lower and more humid parts, the peculiar habitat 
of the genus Grlandina, which has not been noticed 
north of it. Here also exist in great numbers Helicina 
orbiculata, and the polygyral species of Helix. These 
last are most abundant on the sea islands, and near the 
inlets from the sea. In the sandy plains is found the 
species of Helix called by Mr. Say fallax, by the 
influence of climate very numerous in individuals, but 
through the eSect of a poor and sandy soil, much re- 
duced in size. HC. lucuhrata, H. seleniiia, and H. mohili- 
ana, so far as is known, are found here only ; so also is 
Succinea campestris. Off-shoots from this section extend 
into that next north of it, Helicina and one at least of the 
folygyral helices having been noticed as far north as the 
Ohio River. The species belonging to the section next 
north are found more or less abundant where the two 
sections blend, and extend to a considerable distance 
into this section. 

In the southern part of this section, the State of 
Texas is included, the climate of which exceeds consid- 
erably in its mean temperature that of the parts of the 
same section on the Atlantic. After crossing the Mis- 
sissippi River, several species appear which either do 
not exist, or are very rare on the eastern side ; these 
increase in size and development as we proceed in a 
south-western direction, until they are found in the most 
mature condition in the western part of Texas. Promi- 

VOL. I. 15 



192 INTRODUCTION. 

ncnt among these are Bulimus dealhatus, wLicli is very 
abundant, If. Buffoniana and H. herlanderiana. Helix 
texasiana, a modification of the tridental forms, also ap- 
pears, and seems to constitute a connecting link between 
Helix tridentata and its varieties and the polygyral forms 
so common throughout the rest of this section. Wliile 
these new forms are developed, the common forms of 
Helix se^Jtemvolva and auriculata diminish sensibly in 
frequency, as we proceed towards the south-west along the 
shores of the Mexican Gulf, and at length become very 
rare or disappear entirely. Among these is Helix sep- 
temvolva, a species more or less common in the low 
lands of the whole coast from South Carolina to Louis- 
iana inclusive. These circumstances indicate a tran- 
sition to another fauna, and it is therefore reasonable to 
suppose that, as regards the terrestrial moUusks, Mexico 
is a distinct zoological region. 

Section 3. The Southern interior Section. In this 
section is included the territory north of the preceding, 
its western part lying between it and the Ohio River, 
while its eastern part extends northerly, though not well 
defined on its northern boundary, as far as North Caro- 
lina or the southern part of Virginia. It is for the most 
part broken into mountains or hills, is watered by large 
and rapid rivers, and numerous streams and brooks, and 
is covered with forests of deciduous trees. The cfimate, 
geological structure, soil, and vegetation, are in general 
favorable, and accordingly, both species and individuals 
are numerous. As before mentioned, some of the spe- 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. J 0.3 

cics of the preceding section extend into this, and almost 
all of those belonging to the next succeeding section are 
common to it ; but it has its own peculiar species "which 
prevail particularly in the mountainous parts of its most 
southerly portion. Among these are Helix sjnnosa, 
jr. major, H. cumherlandiana, H. suhplana, H. gularis, 
H. rotula, H. leporina, and H. lasmodon. The physical 
conditions of this section are peculiarly conducive to 
the development of testaceous variation ; hence we find 
here the carinated and heavily-ribbed Helix palliata, the 
deep-ribbed Helix alternata, and others. In it the 
genera Limax and Tebennophorus are very abundant. 
This section, already distinguished by a larger number 
of pecuHar species than either of the others, has been 
but partially explored. Being in its greater part a 
mountainous region, subject to climatal influences differ- 
ent from those of the coimtry north of it, it may be 
expected to furnish a still larger number of yet unob- 
served species, and would doubtless well reward the 
industry of any naturalist who shovdd thoroughly recon- 
noitre it. Like the preceding, it extends beyond the 
Mississippi River, but its limits are there unknown. 

Section 4. The Noi'thern interior Section. This 
includes the country between the Ohio River and the 
Great Lakes, and between North Carolina and New 
York and Vermont. Its character is much like that of 
the preceding section, except that its winters are longer 
and more severe. Its boundaries on the north-east and 
north-west are not well defined, and it extends like the 
preceding, west of the Mississippi River. The influences 



124 INTRODUCTION. 

operating within this section are of the most favorable 
kind, except the climate, which, though considerably 
severe in winter, is in the northern part meliorated by 
the presence of the great body of the waters of the 
lakes. Soil, vegetation, and geological structure com- 
bine with the climate to produce, in the southern part of 
this section, as well as in the northern part of the pre- 
ceding, a greater amount of circumstances and condi- 
tions propitious to their existence and increase, than exist 
elsewhere. Vaginulus, Glandina, JTelicina, the larger 
species of BuUmus, and Ci/dostoma, restrained by cli- 
matal influences, have disappeared ; but the majority of 
the species of Helix, Suceinea, Piqja, and Vertigo flour- 
ish in great numbers, and all the naked slugs, both 
native and introduced, with the exception of Vaginulus, 
are found. It would seem to be the great central focus 
of all these genera, from which they radiate into the 
other sections. Very few species have as yet been 
noticed ; H. lucida, an introduced species, and Pupa 
badia, decora and gouldii, are perhaps the only ones. 

Section 5. The North-ivestern Section. The coun- 
try west and north-west of the Great Lakes and extend- 
ing to the 49th degree of north latitude. This section 
is described to be " literally a wilderness of lakes, islands, 
and peninsulas ; a mazy waste, so inhospitable and irre- 
claimable, as to mock the art and enterprise of man, and 
bid defiance to his industry." It is characterized as the 
coldest climate of the United States ; the winters being 
long and severe, the change from summer to winter being 
rapid, and the extremes of temperature very great. 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. J 25 

The extreme range of the thermometer extends from 
38° below zero, Fahr., to 100° above, making one hun- 
dred and thirty-eight degrees ; and the mercury often 
remains below zero for many days together. The sum- 
mer heat, though never long continued, is excessive. 
The prevailing rocks west of Lake Superior are primary, 
the soil is thin and poor, and the vegetation stunted. 
Operated upon by these causes, the species which pre- 
vailed in the preceding section become less and less 
numerous as the secondary region east of Lake Superior 
runs out farther west, and finally disappear. The genus 
Vitrina is, however, indigenous to it, and Jlelix inornata, 
which is believed to reach a more northern as well as a 
more elevated position than any other species, is also 
fomid in it. Here appears also the singular little Bul- 
imus harjpa, which is unknown farther south. This sec- 
tion is but httle known. 

Section 6. The North-eastern Section. This lies 
between the St. Lawrence River and the Atlantic Ocean, 
and comprises the northern parts of New York and Ver- 
mont, and all New Hampshire and Maine ; the British 
provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia are also 
included within it. Its summers are short, and its win- 
ters long and severe, exhibiting extreme reductions of 
temperature, but modified by its proximity to the ocean. 
In Nova Scotia, which is almost insular, the winters are 
said to be much more mild than in the same parallel of 
latitude in Canada. In its general character, as affected 
by climate, the section resembles the precedmg, and 
though separated from it by a great extent of interme- 



128 INTRODUCTION. 

diate territory, the most peculiar species of the two are 
the same. This is an instance of the tendency of similar 
causes to reproduce the same forms in localities widely 
separated, though upon the same continent. In it the 
influences are unfavorable, and the species gradually run 
out towards the north-east, until, in Nova Scotia, the 
only one of our larger species common to the more south- 
ern sections, known to prevail, is Helix alternata, pro- 
bably the most universally diffused species of our whole 
catalogue. The number of individuals is also greatly 
diminished, and they never attain the same size and 
beauty which they reach in more favorable situations. 
In many parts of this section, land shells are never seen, 
and throughout the whole of it they are more or less rare. 
But, while such is the operation of climate and soil on 
our native species, Helix hortensis, a species undoubtedly 
introduced from Europe, has made a successful lodgment, 
and is the most abundant species throughout the greater 
part of Nova Scotia, the islands north and east of it, 
parts of Lower Canada, New Brmiswick, and on several 
small islands on the coast of Maine and Massachusetts, 
but does not extend to more southern and temperate 
parts. The genus Vitrina also belongs to tliis section, 
as does also Bulimus harpa. 

The distribution of the genera and species in each of 
the preceding sections is exhibited in the synopsis on 
pages 128, 129 ; the species supposed to be introduced 
from foreign countries being printed in italics. The 
catalogues are, of course, imperfect, and additions and 
alterations will be made from time to time. 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTlllBUTlOX. 1'21 

111 addition to the causes mentioned before, as exer- 
cising a general influence, there are others operating 
in a more limited sphere, and acting only at particular 
times, the effect of which, nevertheless, is for the time 
being very important, and they are therefore deserving 
of remark. They may be denominated occasional or 
accidental causes. 

Sadden and extreme Vicissitudes of Temperature. 
The terrestrial mollusks resist changes of temperature 
better than many others by the defences they construct 
over the mouth of the shell, as well as by retiring into 
protected situations. There is, however, a limit to their 
powers of resistance, and sudden and extreme depres- 
sions of temperature, particularly in those parts of the 
coimtry where such changes are uncommon, are very 
fatal to them. In the winter of 1834 and 1835 a sud- 
den and severe frost continuing for several hours, de- 
stroyed all the orange trees in the Territory of Florida, 
causing a most serious loss to the inhabitants. At the 
same time, the tide being at ebb, the marine mollusks 
living above low water mark were nearly exterminated, 
and immense numbers of the terrestrial species were 
killed. We have noticed the surface of small islands on 
the coast of Florida literally covered with the bleached 
remains of Hehx and Hehcina that were destroyed at 
that time. It must have required several years to re- 
store the species to the same position in point of numbers 
which they held before that occurrence. Cold, not very 
extreme in degree, but continued for a longer period than 
usual, gradually produces results of a similar character. 



SYNOPSIS OF GENERA AND SPECIES 



SECTION 1. 


SECTION 11. 


SECTION III. 


Vaginiiliis . 


• • • • • 




floridaiius. 






• • • 





Tebennophorus 
caroliiiiensis. 


• • 


< • • • • 

Limax .... 


Limax .... 




agrestis. 


campestris, variegatus. 


• • • 

Succinea 


Succinea 


Succinea 


luteola. 


campestris, 


aurea, avara. 




luteola, iiiunita. 


obliqua, ovalis. 


Bulimus 


Bulimus 


Buliuuis 


exiguus, 


doalbatus. 


dealbutus, lubricus, 


fasciatus, 


decol/atus, 


exiguu.s, fallax, 


subula, 


exi^mus, 


superastrus. 


virgulatus, 


fallax, 




zebra. 


lubricus. 




Acliatina 


. 




gracillima, 






pellucida. 






Glaiuliiia 


Glandina truncata, 


. . . ... • 


truiicata. 


vanuxemensis. 




Helix . 


Helix .... 


Helix .... 


aurieulata, 


albocincta, alternata, 


albolabris, alternata, 


jejuna, 


arborea, aurieulata, 


appressa, arborea, 


labyrinthica, 


berlanderiana. 


cliersina, chiusa, concava. 


minusciila, 


bulibniana, chersina, 


cumberlandiana, demissa. 


niobiliana, 


clausa, coutracta, 


elevata, exoleta, electrina. 


ottonis, 


demi.ssa, fallax, 


fatigiata, fallax, fuliginosa. 


pustula, 


fatigiata, gularis. 


gularis, hirsuta, indentata, 


rhodocheila, 


hir!-uta, indentata, 


inornata, interna. 


seleniiia, 


inornata, labyn'ntbica, 


intertexta, intiecta. 


septemvolva. 


iucubrata, major. 


labyrinthiea, lasmodon. 




minu.scula, niobiliana, 


ligera, lineata, leporina. 




plicata, pustula, 


Iucubrata, minuscula. 




pulchella, saxicola. 


monodon, maxillata, major. 




selenina, septemvolva, 


multilineata, multidentata. 




suppressa, texasiana. 


palliata, pennsylvanica. 




tliyroidus, vultuosa. 


perspectiva, profunda, sayi, 
plicata, pulchella, rotula, 
solitaria, spinosa, striatella, 
subplana, suppressa, 
thyroidus, tridentata. 


Pupa . 


Pupa .... 


Pupa .... 


coiitracta, 


rupicola. 


armifera, contracta. 


incana, 


contracta. 


corticaria, rupicola. 


pontifica, 


variolaria. 




rupicola. 






• • • 


Vertigo 


Vertigo .... 




milium. 


milium, ovata, pentodon. 


Cylindrella . 






lactaria, 






jejuna. 






• 

• ■ • 


Helicina 


Helicina .... 




orbiculata. 


orbiculata, rubella. 


Cyclostoma 


* • . . • 




dentatum. 







IN EACH GEOGRAPHICAL SECTION. 



SECTION IV. 


SECTION V. 


SECTION VI. 


Tebennophorus .... 

caroliniensis. 

Arion hortensis 

Lunax 

agrestis, campestris, 

variegattis. 

Succinea 

avara, aurea, obliqua, 

ovalis, putris. 
Bulinuis ..... 

lubricus, fallax, 

exiguus. 

HelLx 

albolabris, alternata, 

appressa, arborea, 

cellaria, chersina, 

clausa, eoncava, 

demissa, dentifera, 

electrina, elevata, 

exoleta, fallax, 

fuliginosa, hirsuta, 

hortensis, indentata, 

iutlecta, inornata, 

interna, intertexta, 

labyrinthica, ligera, 

hmatula, lineata, 

lucida, mmuscula, 

monodon, multidentata, 

multilineata, palliata, 

pennsylvanica, perspectiva, 

profunda, pulchella, 

sayi, solitaria, striatella, 

suppressa, thyroidus, tridentata. 
Pupa 

armifera, badia, 

corticaria, coutracta, 

rupicola. 

Vertigo 

decora, gouldii, miliimi, 
ovata, pentodon. 


. ■ • 
... 

Vitrina pellucida. 

Bulimus 
lubricus, 
harpa. 

HelLx . 
chersina, 
hii-suta. 

• • 

* 
... 


• • > 

Tebennophorus 
caroliniensis. 

Limax 

agrestis, 

campestris. 
Vitrina pellucida. 
Succinea 

avara, obhqua, 

ovalis. 
Bulimus 

lubricus, 

exiguus, 

harpa. 

• • • 

Helix 

albolabris, 

alternata, 

arborea, 

aspersa, 

chersina, 

eoncava, 

dentifera, 

electrina, 

hortensis, 

indentata, 

inornata, 

labyrinthica, 

lineata, 

minuscula, 

monodon, 

pulchella, 

sayi, 

striatella, 

thyroidus, 

tridentata. 
Pupa 

contracta. 

Vertigo 
ovata, 
pentodon. 

• • • 

• • * 



VOL. I. 



16 



130 INTRODUCTION. 

The -winter of 1842, which was very severe, produced a 
similar effect on the naked moUusks of the coast of 
Massachusetts. The species which usually are very 
abundant there were hardly observed during the suc- 
ceeding year. Oysters, spread by the fishermen on 
oyster banks for preservation, were destroyed at the 
same ' time in great numbers. Thus a series of long 
and uncommonly cold winters, or of cold and dry sum- 
mers, reduces their numbers to such a degree that 
scarcely an individual is seen where thousands were 
met with before. On the other hand a succession of 
warm and moist seasons increases their numbers incred- 
ibly. 

Inundations of Rivers. Tracts of land, but httle 
raised above the level of high water, occur on the bor- 
ders of nearly all our large rivers. On the lower parts 
of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers especially, they con- 
stitute a wide, level, alluvial territory, of great extent, 
comprismg many hundred square miles. The periodical 
melting of ice and snow in the spring, and heavy rains 
in the mountains where they have their sources, cause 
such an increase in the volume of their waters, that 
they occasionally rise above their banks and overflow 
the low lands in their vicinity. These inundations are 
usually limited to a narrow region, and speedily sub- 
side ; but when, by a simultaneous operation of these 
causes over a wide extent of country, all the head 
waters pour their tribute at the same time into the 
main trunks, the mass of water becomes irresistible, 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. \^1 

and breaking tlirougli every barrier, it spreads out into a 
vast inland sea. The body of water is then so great, 
that weeks elapse before it can be drained off through 
the usual channels, and the country remains during this 
time covered with it. Wlien these mimdations are thus 
excessive and long continued, which usually only hap- 
pens after intervals of years, they must in a great de- 
gree destroy animal life, and reduce, if they do not ex- 
terminate, the species most exposed to them. Thus the 
undue extension of these animals is checked in a region 
otherwise particularly adapted to their increase, and 
they are kept within more restricted numerical Hmits. 

Another and very different influence of rivers in 
their ordinary action is to bring down into the plains 
and lowlands, and thus aid in distributing, the species 
occurring in the more elevated regions. We may 
suppose that a species, having by its own powers at- 
tained the summit of a range of mountains, may, when 
aided accidentally by the current of rivers, be very 
rapidly diffused through the country on the other side ; 
and thus a much shorter period of time be required 
for its extension than would have been necessary under 
other circumstances. 

Fires. It was the custom of the aboriginal inhabit- 
ants of the country to burn over, annually, large 
tracts of land, by setting fire to the rank, dry grass 
and herbage on the prairies and in the more open parts 
of the woods. This practice, repeated every autumn, 
insured a fresh and luxuriant growtli of plants in the 



132 INTRODUCTION. 

ensuing spring, and thus afforded ample pasturage for 
their game. It prevented also the growth of trees 
upon the prairies, and of underwood in the forests, 
and tended to preserve them in their then existing 
condition. The conflagration of the combustible mass 
was of course fatal to the smaller animals, and in such 
tracts the mollusks were, and still are, comparatively 
rare. As, under the proprietorship of lands by the 
present population, this practice has, with few excep- 
tions, become obsolete, it may be expected that the 
land-shells wUl gradually spread over the tracts for- 
merly exposed to fires, and become as numerous there 
as elsewhere in the same region. Indeed, there is no 
doubt that this result has already taken place to a con- 
siderable extent, in those States where extensive prai- 
ries exist, and that they will continue to multiply 
until such lands come under the dominion of agriculture. 
On the other hand, the accidental spreading of fires, in 
seasons of drought, over wooded tracts, may, from 
time to time, diminish their numbers in places subject 
to this contingency. 

Agriculture. The influence which at this time is 
producing the most marked changes in the number 
and distribution of the land-mollusks, proceeds from 
the operations of man m opening the forest for culti- 
vation, and adapting the country for the abode of 
civilization. As the forest falls, light and heat are 
admitted, the moist places are dried up, the mollusks 
are deprived of their natural protection, and brought 



GEOGRAPinCAL DISTRIBUTION. \^^ 

under the action of agents to which they arc unaccus- 
tomed, and Avhich tend to their gradual extinction. 
The omnivorous hog, which accompanies man in all 
his migrations, seeks them out in their most secluded 
retreats, and uproots them from the soil itself; and 
the domestic poultry find m them a favorite food. 
Fires, which from year to year are applied to consimie 
the trees felled by the axe, aid in the work ; and finally 
comes the plough, which completes their extermina- 
tion. Thus, they mostly disappear as the settlement 
of the country proceeds, until in the older and most 
populous districts, they are nearly extinct or are repre- 
sented only by the smaller species, existing under fa- 
vorable circumstances, and in the most retired local- 
ities. So, too, in the well-wooded regions of the West 
not actually subjected to the operations of agriculture, 
where they were until lately known to be very nume- 
rous, the universal practice of rearing great numbers 
of hogs, which roam at large in the forest, has dimin- 
ished their numbers and rendered them much less com- 
mon. No species, however, is likely to become extinct 
from this cause alone, for many escape these various 
dangers, and some portions of land remain uncultivated ; 
and when sufiered to rest for a tune immolested, they 
increase very rapidly. 

Destruction hy Animals. The increase of individuals 
is kept in check by the depredations of other species 
of the same family, and even by other individuals of 
the same species. Other kinds of animals also prey 



134 INTRODUCTION. 

upon them. We have frequently noticed that "when 
in a state of confinement, Helix concava, itself not an 
abundant species, will generally destroy other species 
which are kept with it ; and the animal of Cfla7idina 
truncata, which we have occasionally had in captivity, 
has uniformly destroyed those of the other genera and 
species placed within its reach. In the same manner 
Limax variegatus, when kept a few days without food, 
has devoured the weaker Limax agrestis, leaving no 
vestige of them except the rudimentary shell. We have 
also been informed, on what we consider to be good au- 
thority, that a foreign species, believed to be Jlelix 
nemoralis, which existed formerly in great numbers in 
Charleston, S. C, was completely exterminated by Buli- 
mus decoUatus, a foreign species also, which now flour- 
ishes there in abmidance. In this case, however, the 
destruction of the one species, though subsequent to the 
introduction of the other, might not have had any con- 
nection with it. Birds also make great havoc among 
them, where the woods are so far opened as to permit 
the entrance of such of them as do not usually fre- 
quent the forest. They seize the shell with their beaks, 
and bearing it to a prostrate tree or log, break it with 
repeated blows of the point of the bill, and extract the 
soft animal. It is not uncommon to find numerous 
broken shells about a spot in the woods which has been 
selected by the bird as the seat of its operations. The 
little heaps of shells in the woods are by some supposed 
to be due to the agency of squirrels, and not of birds, 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTllIBUTION. J 35 

but probably it is merely because they are found, like 
the shells of nuts Avhich are known to be eaten by the 
former, near to logs. Frogs also, and toads, in their 
excursions upon land, frequently meet with and prey 
upon them, and it is quite a common occurrence to 
find the shell of a Helix in the stomach of a froo-. 
Some of the aquatic mammalia feed upon and destroy 
great numbers of the Naiades, and there would, there- 
fore, be nothing improbable in the supposition that some 
of the smaller terrestrial quadrupeds feed upon the land- 
mollusks. Indeed, we have been informed that a spe- 
cies of field-mouse, probably a Sorex, burrows in the 
deep snow that covers the ground in the winter, and 
seeking the torpid Helices in their retreats, drags them 
to the surface and devours them, leaving the broken 
shells scattered upon the snow. 

Proximity of the Sea. Among the causes afibcting 
the distribution of land-shells which have been noticed 
in other comitries, the vicinity of the ocean has been 
supposed to exercise very considerable influence. In 
Great Britain it has been stated, that species are more 
numerous, individuals multiplied to a greater extent, 
varieties more common, and the shells larger, more 
developed, and marked with more brilhant colors, on 
sea-hanks than elsewhere. It seems to be thought, 
though it is not so stated in terms, that the ocean pro- 
duces a direct influence in this case, and no intimation 
is given of its being an indirect climatal efiect. It is 
said also, that the presence of sand aids the multiplica- 



136 INTRODUCTION. 

tion of individuals. If these effects were the result of 
the causes named, we might expect to find them occur- 
ring in similar localities elsewhere ; but, in this country 
at least, the observed facts do not support such a con- 
clusion. On the contrary, so far as the author's per- 
sonal observation and inquiry have extended, it has 
appeared that the land-shells are much less numerous 
near the sea than in the interior, and that they are par- 
ticularly deficient immediately upon the sea-shore, upon 
what may be termed sea-hanks. The influence of the 
sea, as well as of large bodies of fresh water, tends to 
mehorate the climate of the country bordering upon 
them, and hence, perhaps, the sea-shore of Great Britain 
is a more favorable habitat than the interior, although 
this mfluence modifies the climate of the whole island in 
a greater or less degree. Our experience, too, as to 
the presence of sand, is entirely opposite to that noticed 
in Great Britain, sandy banks near the sea and else- 
where being destitute of shells, and all soils in which 
sihceous sand predominates supporting them only in 
small numbers. Indeed, pure sand creates a mechan- 
ical obstacle which these animals cannot overcome ; its 
loose dry particles adhere to their wet mucous surface, 
incrust them entirely, and prevent their locomotion. 
They vainly endeavor to free themselves from it, by 
secreting more mucus, and in this way soon become 
exhausted, and die. 

There is, however, a class of facts in the United 
States, which at first view seems to confirm the English 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRTBTTTION. ;I37 

observations. Ten years since, we observed great num- 
bers of Sellx liortensis on a small uninliabitcd island 
comprising less than an acre of surface, near the shore 
of Cape Ann, in Massachusetts. Dr. Mighels has 
observed the same species very abundant on an island, 
of only a few rods in extent, in Casco Bay. Helix sep- 
temvolva and Helicina orhicidata occur in such quan- 
tities as almost to cover the ground upon small islands 
on the coast of Florida. The diminutive islands called 
the Brothers, in Lake Champlain, near Burlington, fur- 
nish the shells of that district in abundance. Oak 
Island,' a little wooded islet a few miles eastward of 
Boston, surrounded by extensive salt marshes and at 
high water by the sea, was, a few years since, covered 
by myi'iads of Bidimus lubricus, and Vertigo ovata. 
And very recently, on throwing a bridge from Goat 
Island, at Niagara Falls, to an islet near it, the surface 
of which measures but a few hundred square feet, and 
which had been previously inaccessible, it was found to 
contain the Helices and Sucdnece of the neighborhood 
so plentifully, that hundreds might have been taken in a 
few moments. In all these cases, the fact that individ- 
uals were greatly multiplied above their numbers on 
the adjacent main land, was striking and beyond doubt. 
The locality, in each instance, being situated within the 



1 The railroad from Boston to Salem now passes through this island, and 
connects it, in two directions, with the main land. This will probably eflect 
an entire change in its peculiar molluscous fauna, or rather cause the ex- 
tinction of these animals. 

VOL. I. 17 



138 INTRODUCTION. 

immediate influence of large bodies of water, it would 
not have been unreasonable to have considered this 
influence, the only one apparently common to all of 
them, as the cause of the great multiplication of indi- 
viduals ; and hence to have inferred, that the proximity 
of the sea or of the Great Lakes was favorable to their 
increase. But, as other islands, seemingly subject to 
the same influences, are totally destitute of shells, and 
the main land in their immediate vicinity maintains them 
only in scanty numbers, we must necessarily seek some 
other cause adequate to explain the facts. According 
to our views, we find it m the circumstance that either 
these islands are from their position inaccessible, or 
from their diminutive extent unworthy of attention, and 
hence not subjected to agriculture, and not inhabited by 
man and the domesticated animals which accompany 
him. The mollusks are therefore in undisturbed pos- 
session, and being free from the attacks of enemies, 
they multiply to such an extent as the climate and 
facility of obtaining food wUl permit ; and consequently, 
in process of time, become very abundant. These facts, 
then, do not corroborate the opinion held abroad as to 
the influence of the sea. 

Local causes. There are probably other causes of a 
local character not understood, but aflectmg the increase 
of individuals in particular circumscribed spots, pro- 
moting the increase of species and individuals in some 
localities, and restraming it in others. Such causes may 
exist in the intimate composition of the soil, or in the 



GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. 139 

character of the plants ; and it is likely that both of 
them have their influence. The mechanical properties 
of the soil also have an influence, as in the instance of 
sand, to which we have alluded. So too, a soil composed 
of stifi" clay which on a few hours exposure to the sun 
becomes baked and rigid, and cannot be penetrated by 
them, is equally unfavorable. There are other localities 
where individuals multiply infinitely. Mr. Anthony, of 
Cmcinnati, Ohio, informs us, that in his walks around 
that city, himself and a fi-iend collected during a single 
week, above five thousand specimens of Helices, the time 
devoted to the walks bemg taken from the mtervals 
between business hours, and good and mature specimens 
only being selected. Professor Adams states that he 
collected, in one hour, more than one thousand specimens 
of Helix minuscula ; and Dr. Gould found Bulimus 
liibncus so abundant upon Oak Island, that many hun- 
dreds could be taken from the ground with a single 
handful of decaying leaves. 

Although some few species seem to occupy somewhat 
Hmited localities, not having as yet been found over any 
very broad region, yet the range of most species is very 
extensive ; and, what is worthy of remark, the widest 
distribution is to be noticed in the smallest species. The 
smaller species are also tenfold, and probably a hundred- 
fold more numerous than the larger. This circum- 
stance is somewhat difficult of explanation. Both their 
number and their broad range may perhaps be owing 
to their very diminutiveness, on account of which they 



140 



INTRODUCTION. 



more readily find shelter and escape observation, thus 
being exempted from many destructive agencies. 

There are some species, upon the distribution of which, 
climate, vegetation, geological structure and other gen- 
eral causes, seem to exercise but very little influence, as 
is shown by the universality of their diffusion through- 
out the country. Helix labyrinthica, for example, is 
equally abundant, and as much developed, upon the sides 
of the primary hills of Vermont and Maine, in the rig- 
orous climate of 45° north latitude, where snow covers 
the ground three or four months of the year, as it is 20° 
further south, upon the tertiary levels of southern 
Florida only a few feet above the sea, where it enjoys a 
climate of almost tropical mildness. The same remark 
may be made of Helix minusoula, Pupa contracta, 
P. rupicola and P. exigua, and perhaps of other mhmte 
species. 






?fEK^-p.f^^ 







VI. 



OF ZOOLOGICAL FOCI, OR POINTS OF ORIGIN WHENCE 
GENERA AND SPECIES ARE DERIVED. 



The distribution of species, as treated of in the pre- 
ceding chapter, has thus far been considered only as 
influenced by existing causes, whose operation is known. 
These, however, will hardly account for the present con- 
dition of all the species, or rather, some of them as it 
would seem, occupy their present positions, notwithstand- 
ing the restraining influences, which, if the preceding 
views are correct, should have limited them within more 
narrow bounds. The species alluded to, are those which 
occupy dififerent and widely distant countries and conti- 
nents, and which have already been discovered upon so 
many points of the earth's surface, as to indicate an 
almost universal difi"usion. The researches which are 
now continually undertaken, to elucidate the zoology of 
almost every part of the world, frequently bring to our 
knowledge instances of the wide range of species, which 
had been noticed previously only in a single coimtry ; 
and the number of these is already large. The most 



142 INTRODUCTION. 

striking example among them occurs in Helix 2mlc7ieUa. 
This diminutive species is spread throughout the con- 
tment of Europe ; it is common in the north of Africa, 
and in some parts of the south of Asia ; * it is found in 
Cuba, and others of the West Indian islands ; and is 
abundant in nearly every part of the United States and 
Canada. The various positions which it is thus found 
to occupy, and the dissimilar circumstances in which it 
exists, together with the difference of chmate and other 
physical agents to which it is subjected, and the vast dis- 
tances both of land and ocean which intervene between 
these localities, render it doubtful whether its general 
dispersion is not due to other causes than those which 
have been named, and whether, indeed, it can be ex- 
plained on any acknowledged principles. Its condition 
in this country tends to increase these doubts. Its occur- 
rence might, of course, be expected, in any country 
which has been closely connected with Europe by com- 
merce, but this would be no reason for meeting it in the 
interior of North America, far removed from the settle- 
ments of white men, and in places still inhabited by the 
aboriginal races, and only occasionally visited by the 
wandering hunter. Yet, in 1820, on the arrival of 
Major Long's explormg expedition at Council Bluffs, on 
the Missouri River, five hundred miles above its embou- 

1 Specimens of Helix pulchella were brought to tliis country by Mr. 
Lyell, which were obtained by Lieut. Lyell, in the neighborhood of Can- 
dahar. They difler in no respect from common European and American 
specimens. 



OF ZOOLOGICAL FOCL ;[43 

chure into the Mississippi, and more than fifteen hundred 
miles from any maritime port, Mr. Say discovered it in 
considerable numbers. Its existence in this case involves 
some important consequences, for, if we consider it to 
be of foreign origin, and take the period of its introduc- 
tion to have been some time since the first permanent 
colonization of this continent by Europeans, and suppose 
the point at which it was introduced to have been upon 
the sea-coast, it is necessary that the animal should have 
travelled more than twenty thousand times its own length 
every day while in motion, and to have been in progres- 
sive motion one fourth of the whole time for two hundred 
years, in order to have reached this locality; and if its 
progress has been aided by accidental transportation to 
some point on the IMississippi River, the result will not be 
the less improbable. Now when we reflect, that it is 
only sLxty or seventy years since the first settlements of 
white men were made west of the Alleghany Mountams, 
and that it is scarcely forty years since the country 
beyond the Mississippi River was reached in their pro- 
gress, and bear in mind that the accidental transporta- 
tion of such animals could only have occurred by the 
merest chance, and that in their natural progress they 
must have overcome numerous and steep mountains, and 
crossed wide and rapid rivers, the difficulties in the way 
of this mode of explanation seem to be insuperable. It 
is true, that the historical period within which this con- 
tinent has been kno-wn, comprises probably but a small 
part of its whole existence, and that the action of known 



144 INTRODUCTION. 

causes through a period of mdefinite duration, might 
have produced even a more general diffusion, but, as an 
impenetrable veil hangs over everything that preceded 
the historical epoch, and we know of no facts which cor- 
roborate this latter suggestion, we cannot place much 
rehance upon it. We must seek then for other causes, 
to explain the general dispersion of this and other cos- 
mopolite species.^ 

Of the origin and mode of creation of organized 
beings, we of course can know nothing, through our own 
limited faculties. The subject is beyond our comprehen- 
sion, and Divine Providence has vouchsafed to us no 
revelation concerning it. The Mosaic account of cre- 
ation informs us that after the surface of the earth was 
prepared for the support of animal life, the different 
classes of animals were created at different periods of 
time, and our own experience, drawn from observation 
of the fossil remauis of former animals, which have been 
preserved in the strata of the earth's crust, fully cor- 
roborate this account. But, we are limited to these 
very general facts, and must found our views of the 
local origin, and the subsequent dispersion of species 
over the earth upon such observations as we possess, and 
such reasonings as we can base upon them. 

1 A similar course of remark might be pursued in relation to Bulimus 
lubricus, and Vitrina pellucida, the former abundant and generally diflused 
in the country, the latter rare and found only in insulated situations, but in 
every case directly upon the route followed by hunters and fur-trappers, 
from the earliest seltleineiils. 



OK ZOOLOGICAL FOCI 



145 



There arc two theories, which have mainly divided 
the opinions of naturalists. The first supposes that the 
existing races of animals were of simultaneous creation 
at a common centre or focus, from which they have 
spread over the whole earth ; the other considers that 
there were several distinct centres or foci, from which 
the species radiated into — and thus formed, the zoolo- 
gical circles or regions which are now apparent. The 
first supposition, though possible, is seen at once to be 
attended with many physical difficulties, and has but few 
supporters ; while the second, commends itself to the 
minds of almost all. In surveying the zoology of the 
earth, we find groups of distinct animals, of the different 
classes, occupying regions which are defined by natural 
boundaries, and limited to these regions alone ; and the 
discovery of new continents and islands has, in every 
case, revealed animals peculiar to each of them. The 
existence of distinct zoological regions has hence come 
to be an axiom in the philosophy of zoology, and the 
theory of distinct foci of animal origin has thus been 
greatly fortified. But in all the speculations of natural- 
ists on this subject, and in all their attempts to deduce 
the limits of the various regions, from the actual distri- 
bution of animals, attention has been given almost solely 
to the large animals, and mostly to the vertebrata, and 
consequently the regions as laid down by authors, are co- 
extensive with the wide range of these species. It is 
manifest, however, that the ranges of the different classes 
of animals differ very much among themselves, and that 

VOL. I. 18 



146 INTRODUCTION. 

the quadruped that seeks its food, according to the 
change of seasons, throughout the greater part of a con- 
tinent, and the bird which, guided by its instinct, spends 
its summers in the polar regions, and its winters between 
the tropics, are subjected to very different laws of dis- 
tribution from the insect whose range is often strictly 
local, or the mollusk, whose limits are defined by the 
causes we have described. The higher classes of ani- 
mals, indeed, are unaffected, or bui slightly restrained, 
by many of the causes which, to the inferior classes, 
constitute insurmountable obstacles ; and consequently, 
the geographical space wliich they respectively occupy, 
or the circles within which they habitually move, are of 
very different extent. It would seem to result, from this 
reasoning, that, in seeking to ascertain and define the 
various zoological regions, we must make a distinct 
apportionment for each distinct class of animals ; and 
that the spacious regions ranged by the higher animals, 
must be divided and subdivided into others of more 
limited extent, which shall represent the more Umited 
spheres of the less diffused species. It follows, also, that 
within each of these minor spheres or zoiilogical sections, 
the original focus of all the species contained within it, 
must have been located. We believe that these ideas 
will be found to be consistent with facts everywhere 
observed. In appljdng them to North America, we find, 
that its temperate parts are considered to constitute a 
peculiar zoological region, characterized, among other 
animals, by the bison among quadrupeds, and the wild 



OF ZOOLOGICAL FOCL 



147 



tui'kej among birds ; and for these two classes of animals 
it is probably correctly defined ; but for the terrestrial 
mollusks, some other division is necessary ; for the most 
•widely difiused among them does not occupy so large a 
space, and several groups of species are much more lim- 
ited, as we have endeavored to show. It will be objected 
to this theory of distinct zoological centres, that it can- 
not be natural, because it concerns only one department 
of animals ; and that, as nature acts through general laws, 
these separate plans of diffusion are inconsistent with 
this principle. The objection, in our view, has but little 
weight ; the laws of nature are known only by their 
results, and as we see that different classes of animals 
have different capacities and different powers of action, 
and of resisting action, we must believe that they were 
formed to be subject to different influences ; and that 
their diffusion may, without any inconsistency of purpose, 
have been regulated by different' plans. And the gen- 
erally received opinion, of the successive creation of the 
different classes of animals, after intervals of greater or 
less durations, adds strong confirmation to our theory ; 
for, admitting this to be true, the centres from which 
sprung the various mollusks were established, and the 
causes influencing their extension and distribution were 
in operation, for an indefinite period in advance of even 
the existence of the animals of the higher classes. 

There are difiiculties which it seems to us can hardly 
be overcome on any other supposition. If all the species 
had been created at one time and at one place, they 



148 INTRODUCTION. 

ought to be found to have made nearly an equal advance, 
and to be pretty equally dispersed over the earth, for we 
know of nothing in their organization that should give 
any considerable advantage in this respect to one over 
another. The species of the two hemispheres should 
also be in general the same. If all the species then, 
originated on the eastern continent, how has ,it happened 
that those that have reached the western continent, have 
ill general, left none of their kind behind them ; or that 
peculiar species exist in small islands or groups of islands 
far removed from other land ? If it be said that in the 
long lapse of ages, species once universally diffused have 
become extinct in particular regions, and that the sur- 
vivors are confined to more limited ranges, we ask how 
it happens that the testaceous remains discovered by 
geological research, differ as much from existing species 
as the recent species of the two contments differ from 
each other. It seems to us that the facts taken for 
granted in these objections are inconsistent with any 
other theory than that of different foci of creation, and 
that this theory is sustained by all that we know of the 
geological revolutions of the earth, and of the condition 
of the species formerly existmg upon it. 

Having thus adopted the theory of distinct zoological 
centres, and admitting that as successive portions of the 
earth's surface emerged from the waters, and became 
adapted to sustain the different classes of animals, those 
races which were fitted for the then existing physical 
condition of things, were brought into being by the pro- 



OF ZOOLOGICAL FOC'i. 



149 



lific hand of nature, we find no difficulty in supposing 
that under the same or similar conditions, the same 
species may have been created at different centres. In 
this Avay the presence of any species in every part of 
the earth may be accounted for, and thus only can we 
satisfactorily explain the diffusion of the species that 
have been under consideration. 

The zoological sections which, in accordance with 
these ideas, we have ventured to propose, are given 
merely as suggestions, indicated by the present state of 
information. It is desirable that the subject should be 
fully investigated, and the correctness of the proposed 
divisions tested. Should they be proved to be untenable, 
we shall very willingly relinquish them, and adopt such 
other views as may be found more consistent with facts. 




YII. 



OF THE INTRODUCTION OF FOREIGN SPECIES INTO THE 

UNITED STATES. 



The frequent commercial intercourse subsisting be- 
tween various countries is producing, slowly but surely, 
important changes in the fauna of many districts ; and 
must presently render it difficult to distinguish their in- 
digenous animals from those that have been imported. 
Nowhere is international commerce more active, than 
between the western and southern nations of Europe and 
the United States ; and hence we are peculiarly liable to 
the introduction of animals from that part of the world. 
Considerable additions to our catalogues of the lower 
animals, particularly of insects, have already been made 
in this way, and it has therefore become desirable, that 
an accurate determination of our native species, in every 
department, should be had, previous to any further in- 
crease from this source. For this reason, we have 
endeavored to ascertain the facts relating to the intro- 
duced species of land-shells, whether derived from this 
source or others, both for the interest connected with the 



INTRODUCTION OF FOREIGN SPECIES. I5I 

subject, and that thej might serve as points of compar- 
ison for future observers. Among the species which are 
common to this and to other countries, we shall mention 
Helix pulcliella and Bulimus lubricus, as being of foreign 
origin, and as having been introduced ; but this we do, 
rather in deference to received opinion, than because we 
are satisfied of the fact ; for, in truth, so generally are 
they diffused over the country, that we are inclined to 
believe, as may be mferred from our remarks on a for- 
mer page, that they are as truly native species as many 
others which have never been considered to be other- 
wise. 

The process of introducing foreign species is constantly 
going on. The animals sometimes, but more commonly 
their eggs, are transported in the soil of boxes of plants, 
or about the roots of trees and shrubs imported for hor- 
ticultural purposes, or in the cavities of woods used in 
the arts. Another common mode of introduction is 
among the ballast of vessels, collected on the shores of 
foreign countries, and often discharged on our own. 
Some of the larger European species, and particularly 
Helix aspersa, are sometimes shipped to this country as 
an article of commerce, and are used for food by foreign 
residents. Others are brought as objects of curiosity, 
and are preserved in gardens, and conservatories. Indi- 
viduals introduced in some of these modes, escaping or 
preserved by accident, are thus enabled to colonize the 
species in new localities, where, if favored by propitious 
circumstances, they obtain a permanent footing, and 



152 INTRODUCTION. 

extend themselves gradually in the country. Of these, 
Limax agrestis, and L. variefjatiis, Helix asper-^a, IT. eel- 
laria, II. hortensis, H. lucida, and //. pulchella, and 
JBulimus decoUatus, B. zebra, B.fasciatus, B. virgulor 
tus and B. luhricAis, are examples. Others strive in 
vain to establish themselves ; the climate or some other 
cause is fatal to them, and after some increase, they 
diminish and become extinct. Of these, Helix nemoralis, 
virgata, pisana, and lactea, and Bulimus acutiis, are 
recorded as having been noticed in the United States 
at different times ; and it is only by adopting the sup- 
position of their subsequent extinction, that we can give 
credit to these observations, for it is nearly certain, that 
none of them now exist within our territory. 

Oceanic currents also aid in bringing to our shores 
foreign species, and have been the means of introducing 
and naturalizing them. The Gulf Stream is a promi- 
nent example of this. This great body of water, flow- 
ing from the Gulf of Mexico into the Atlantic, passes 
between the Peninsula of Florida and the Island of 
Cuba, and after turning the southern point of Florida, 
sweeps along its eastern shore. It is sometimes driven 
close to the northern coast of Cuba, and sometimes 
forced much further north, according to the direction 
and force of the wind. Various counter currents, due 
also to the influence of the wind, diverge from the main 
stream, among which is noticed a current which, after a 
northerly wind has prevailed for several days, sets in a 
south-westerly direction near to the Florida Reef. The 



INTRODUCTION OF FOREIGN SPECIES. ^53 

principal stream and the currents ori^^inating in it, bear 
upon their surface various vegetable and other produc- 
tions brought by rivers into the Gulf, or swept from its 
shores, and these are frequently deposited upon parts of 
the coast very distant from their origin. In this way 
seed-vessels from the Spanish Main, trunks of trees and 
fragments of wood of unascertained origin, and numer- 
ous objects from the northern shore of Cuba, are fre- 
quently found on the shore of Key West, and on the 
beach of Cape Florida and the shores and islands to the 
north of it.' These circumstances are adequate to 
account for the transmission of land-shells from the 
Island of Cuba, and even from more distant places, to 
the mam land and islands of Florida ; and to this source 
we ascribe the origin of Selix rJwdoeheila, and Bulimus 
vir^ulatus, which are probably derived from the Bar 
hamas, but possibly from the Spanish Main, and of 
Selix ottonis, Bulimus fasciatus, B. zehra, B. siibula, 
BujM incana, Cydostoma dentatum, and Cylindrella 
lactaria, all midoubtedly from Cuba, which, having 
found a congenial soil and chmate in the southern 
part of the peninsula of Florida, are now flourishing 
there in great numbers. To the same cause may 



' A few years since a bottle was picked up on Tavernia Key, near Cape 
Florida, containing a note stating that it was thrown overboard ofl' the More 
Castle. A Cuba barge, of the kind used in lading and unlading vessels in 
Mataazas, was lately found stranded on the beach at New River, twenty- 
five miles north of Cape Florida. Small objects from Cuba are often found 
on the shore of Key West. 

VOL. I. 19 



154 INTRODUCTION. 

possibly be due the passage of some of the smaller 
species, of universal diflPusion in the United States, to 
the Island of Cuba. Among these are Helix minuscula, 
Piqja contracta, and P. rupicola, which from their gen- 
eral distribution on the continent, may be supposed to 
have originated there rather than upon the island. 

We cannot help thinking, too, that such currents have 
had some agency in introducing Helix hortensis on our 
north-eastern coast, at some former period, although we 
are not aware of the existence of one, capable of produ- 
cing such an effect. This species is found, within our 
hmits, only in the States of New York and Vermont on 
the boundary of Canada, and in the north-eastern States 
from Massachusetts to the British provinces along the 
borders of the sea. In the first-named localities, its 
presence is accoimted for, by its extension under usual 
circumstances from Canada, where it is said to be com- 
mon. On the sea-coast, some other explanation is neces- 
sary. Commencing at what appears to be its southern 
limit, it occurs on the sandy soil at the extreme end of 
Cape Cod ; it then disappears in the intermediate country, 
and is next found on a small, rocky, uninhabited island, 
on the shore of Cape Ann ; proceeding further east, it 
is lost until it again appears on a small island of a sim- 
ilar character in Casco Bay, Maine. Along this exten- 
sive line, it is nowhere found inland, and, with the excep- 
tion of the locality on Cape Cod, never on the main land, 
although the islands referred to are in close proximity 
to it. In New Brunswick it begins to occur in the mte- 



INTRODUCTION OF FOREIGN SPECIIiS. I55 

rior, and in Nova Scotia is said to be the most common 
of the larger species. That it should occur on the 
extreme point of a cape extending far into the sea, and 
on desolate islets along the coast, is consistent with the 
supposition of its having been borne there by currents ; 
while the common mode of distribution, bj numerical 
increase and extension, or by direct introduction through 
commercial agency, from Europe, does not explain why 
it is found in such unfrequented spots only, on the bor- 
ders of the sea alone, never upon the main land, and on 
some islets, but not on others. Our own hypothesis is, 
that having been very early introduced into the French 
province of Acadia, (and also into Canada) by the 
European colonists, and become numerous there, it has 
been borne along the coast by counter currents and 
eddies, to the places which it now occupies, where, being 
protected from other animals, and from the operations of 
agriculture, to which it would have been exposed on the 
main land, and under the influence of a climate rendered 
mild by the proximity of the sea, it has multi])lied to a 
great extent.' 



J Since the above obsen'ations were penned, the author has again 
vLsiled, after an interval of nine years, the locality upon Salt Island, 
Cape Ann. Tliis island, which at extreme low water is connected with the 
main by a narrow sand-bar, is a mass of granite elevated not more than 
sLxty or seventy feet above the sea ; its seaward side is bold and precipitous, 
and being open to the assaults of the waves, is denuded of soil to the very 
smuinit. Its landward side, protected by the crest of the island from 
storms coming- from the ocean, has a thin superstratum of soil, whicli sup- 
ports a rank growth of coarse grass and low slirulss, tlie latter allbrding a ' 



l^Q . INTRODUCTION. 

That this hypothesis of the agency of currents is no 
violent one, is proved by common experience. A single 
log of timber, removed from the bank of a river by the 
rise of its waters during a freshet, and borne by them 
to the ocean, and driven by winds, tides, and currents, 
might carry with it, and deposit upon other shores, the 
eggs of mollusks, or even the living animals themselves, 
provided they were not too long exposed to the elements. 
It is difficult to estimate their powers of endurance under 
such circumstances, or to hmit the amomit of exposure 
which they might bear, but they are unquestionably such 
as to enable them to sustain hfe for several days, in the 
case we have supposed. The eggs of snails have been 
subjected to a high temperatui-e in an oven, until, being 
totally deprived of moisture, they were friable between 
the fingers ; they have been repeatedly frozen and 
thawed again ; they have been suffered to remain a con- 
constant shade. On this part of it, apparently not exceeding an acre in 
extent, Helix hortensis formerly existed in such numbers that hundreds 
could be obtained in a few moments. On approaching the island at this 
time, smoke was seen rising from it, and presently a rude hut erected on 
the sheltered side, boats drawn up on the strand, nets spread upon the 
bushes to dry, and lobster-traps scattered about, became \-isible, and an- 
nounced that a fisherman had taken possession of it. The usual conse- 
quence of the presence of man and his companions has followed. Helix 
hortensis is greatly reduced in numbers, and must very soon become ex- 
tinct. After a diligent search of nearly an hour, only four or five living 
specunens could be found. It may be well to mention in tliis place, that 
the same effect has followed the connection of the small island near Niagara 
Falls with Goat Island. Within two years after admission was thus gained 
to it, the mollusks were nearly exterminated. 



INTRODUCTION OF FOREIGN SPECIES. I57 

siderable time immersed in water, and yet, on being 
placed in favorable circumstances, have been found to 
retain their vitahtj, and have matured and produced 
young. They would not be exposed to severer trials 
when floating upon a log in the ocean, and their chances 
of surviving would be as good. Logs and trunks of 
trees which have drifted from a great distance, may 
often be seen upon our sea-beaches ; and we remember, 
on one occasion, to have seen Nantasket beach, at the 
mouth of Boston harbor, strewn with logs which had 
been driven from the rivers of ]Maine by easterly winds 
of several days continuance. 

The limits of species, and particularly of the intro- 
duced species, are gradually enlarging, and though their 
progress must necessarily be slow, it is susceptible of 
satisfactory proof. Unless of native origin, as we have 
suggested, the time of their introduction must be taken 
to be a period subsequent to the colonization of the 
country, which is comparatively a recent date, and yet, 
some of them have extended over a large part of the 
country, as Helix pulchella, and Bulimus lubriciis, and 
are extremely abundant. The fact that the distant 
regions to which these species seem to have extended, 
are in the track of the early French voyagers and col- 
onists, along the great Lakes and about the upper Mis- 
sissippi, is quite significant ; and shows that they might 
have been introduced into those parts directly, with the 
effects of the colonists, in the same manner as we sup- 
pose tliom to have been introduced on the Atlantic bor- 



158 INTRODUCTION. 

ders. Others are met with only adjacent to the sea, 
or rather not very far removed into the interior, as 
Helix cellaria, and Limnx agrestis, which in many 
localities are very common. The extreme distance 
from the sea-shore at which we have hitherto noticed 
them, has not exceeded one hmidred miles. Others 
again, as Liniax variegatus, occur in the cities and 
other limited localities separated by considerable dis- 
tances from each other, whither they have been trans- 
planted by accident ; and yet another class are confined 
to a single locality, beyond which they have not yet 
advanced, as Bidimus decollatus m gardens in Charles- 
ton, S. C, and Helix lucida in the vicinity of Albany, 
N. Y., where they have probably been introduced in 
packages of imported plants. As all these are probably 
destined to a still further extension, the present range of 
each is important as a point of comparison in future 
investigations. 

The annexed table exhibits a list of foreign species, 
which have been stated by authors to occur in the Uni- 
ted States, or the countries adjacent, with an indication 
of the present condition of those now existmg. It is 
quite probable that some of the species, said to be ex- 
tinct, have never in fact occurred here ; and that others, 
which now seem to be identical with foreign species, may 
be found essentially different when examined more accu- 
rately, and the difference may become still more obvious 
on a careful comparison of the animals. 

Foreign species now first ascertained to be found in 
the United States, are not included in the table. 



(159) 



TABLE OF FOREIGN SPECIES RECORDED BY AUTHORS AS 
OBSERVED IN THE UNITED STATES. 



NAMES OF SPECIES. 



AUTHORS REFERRED TO. 



Arion hortensis. 

Liiuax agrestis. . 



varieg^atus. 



Vitriiia pellucida. 
Succiaea amphibia. 
putris. . 



Helix asper.«a. . 



bonplandi. 



cellaria . 
depicta. . 

liortensis. 

lactea. . 
lucida. . 

nemoralis. 
nitida. . 
pisana. . 
pulchella. 
variabilis. 



Bulimus acutus. . 

decollatus. 

lubricus. 



radiatus. 



undatus. 

virgiiieus. 

octona. . 

acicula. 

Partula otaheitana. 



Binney. 

Gould. Binney. . < 

Say. Fcrussac. . J 

Say. Adams. Mighels. 

Forbes. 

Ferussac. 

Gray. Forbes. 

Hmnb. and Bonp. 



Lamarck. 

Binney. Gould. 
Grateloup. . 

Binney. Gould. I 

Say. . 

Ligalls. . . I 

Gray. . 

Ferussac Gray. 
Gray. Forbes. 
Say. Gray. 
Gray. Forbes. 
Fer. Gray. Forbes. 
Say. Gray. 
Gould. Adams. . 

Ferussac. 

Say, . 
Say. . 

Des Moulins. 



PRESENT CONDITION 
AND LOCALITIES. 



Boston and vicinity. 

Atlantic States, not more 
tHan 100 miles from the 
sea. 

Cities in Eastern and Mid- 
dle States. 

N. E. and N. W. Sections. 

Not unconmion. 
Charleston, S. C. Maine. 

Probably inhabits the pe- 
ninsula of Florida. H. al- 
bolabris supposed a vari- 
ety of this by Lam. 

Common in Eastern and 
Middle States, in cities. 

Not existing in U. States. 

Islands on coast of Mass. 
and Maine ; borders of 
Canada. 

Extinct. 

Numerous at Greenbush, 
New York. 

Extinct. 

Probably H. arborea. 

Probably H. rhodocheila. 

Very common. 

Extinct. 

Extinct. 

Charleston, S. C. only. 

Common. 

Probably B. dealbatus. 
Say. 

Florida. 

Florida. 

Greenhouses and conser- 
vatories. 

Never existed in U. States. 



IQQ INTllODUCTION. 

There is another branch of this subject which de- 
mands attention, as connected with the introduction of 
foreign species, and that is, the distribution in the neigh- 
boring countries and islands, of those species which are 
usually admitted to be indigenous to the United States. 
In the dearth of zoological information concerning that 
part of North America south of the United States, we 
find but few facts recorded which illustrate the subject, 
and hence w^e can present nothing of much interest. 
We have reduced the observations into the form of a 
table, which will show at one view all that we have been 
able to gather. We include in it Bulimus zebra and 
S. fasciatus, because, although we believe, from their 
appearance in our territory only on the southern point 
of the peninsula of Florida and on the small islands 
closely adjacent, that they were accidentally introduced 
from the neighboring island of Cuba, others may not be 
of the same opinion, and it may be interesting to ascer- 
tain their range as well as that of the other species. In 
the British provinces at the north of the United States, 
the observations are still fewer in number, and we are 
acquainted with only a single local list (and that a very 
meagre and incomplete one,)' of the land-mollusks oc- 
curring in any part of the British North American pos- 
sessions. We know, however, from authentic informa- 
tion, that many of the species indigenous to our fourth 
zoological section, are also common to the peninsula of 

1 Mrs. Sheppard's, in the Transactions of the Literary and Historical 
Society of Quebec, Vol. i. p. 88. 1829. 



INTRODUCTION OF FOREIGN SPECIES. 161 

Upper Canada ; and, if we may judge by the climate 
and physical characters, they must be as abundant there 
as in the northern parts of the United States. But, as 
we are not able to particularize species, or their local- 
ities, or the extent of their range north of Lake Erie, 
we have omitted them in the table. The few species 
known to extend north of the St. Lawrence River, are 
included in it. 

We are aware that no important deductions can be 
drawn from this table in its present imperfect condition, 
and therefore offer it with some hesitation. But as the 
facts which would go to complete a table of this kind, 
must necessarily be collected before we can determine 
with accuracy the species which are Indigenous to the 
United States exclusively, we have thought it expedient 
to furnish the outline, in the hope that others would, ere 
long, provide the materials for filling it up. It is also 
not improbable that some of the species, now supposed 
to be identical with extra-limital ones, may prove to be 
different. The same facts might also have an important 
bearing upon the question of the local origin of the sev- 
eral species. For the species contained in the table, 
we have given such authorities as are known to us ; 
where none are named, we have relied either upon our 
own personal knowledge, or upon the information of per- 
sons whose accuracy we could not doubt. 

VOL. 1. 20 



(102) 



TABLE OF DISTRIBUTION OF SPECIES INHABITING THE 
UNITED STATES, IN OTHER PARTS OF AMERICA. 



SPECIES. 



Vitrina pellucida. . 
Succinea putris. . 
Bulimiis dealbatus 



fasciatus. . 

■ subula. . . 

■ zebra. ... J 



Achatina gracillima. 
pellucida. 



Helix altemata. 

Sub nomine dubia. 

auriciilata. . 



:\ 



:1 



■fallax. . . 

Sub nom. triodonta, 

■ minuscula. ? • • [ 

Sub nom. lavalleana. j 

• monodon. ? 

Sine nomine. 



— ottonis. 

— saxicola. 

— seleniiia. 



Glandina truncata. 



Pupa rupicola. . . 

Sub nom. servilis, 

contracta. . . 

incana. . . . 



Cylindrella lactaria. . . 
Helicina orbiculata. . . 
Cyclostoma dentatum . 



DISTRIBUTION. 



Greenland. 



Canada, near Quebec. . 

Mexico 

The Antilles, Trinity. . 

Mexico 

BrazQ 

Yucatan, and Central 
America. 

Cuba 

The Antilles, Barbadoes, 
Cayenne. 

Cuba 

Cuba 

Canada, near Quebec. . 
Nova Scotia. Common. 
Mexico 

Mexico 



Cuba. 



Canada, near Quebec. 

Cuba 

Cuba 

St. Croix 

The Antilles. . . . 

Mexico 

Central America. . . 

Cuba, St. Croix. . . 



Cuba. 
Cuba. 

Cuba. 



Cuba. 



ACTIIOEITIES. 



Forbes. 
Sheppard. 

Ferussac. 
Humb. and Bonp, 
D'Orbigny. 



Ferussac. 

Pfeiffer. 
Pfeifler. 

Sheppard. 
M'Culloch. 

Jan. 



De la Sagra, 



Sheppard. 

Pfeiffer. 
Pfeiffer. 
Griffith. 
Fer. De la Sagnra. 



Gould. 
Gould. 

Gould. 



VIII. 



OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF GEXERA AND SPECIES IN THE 
UNITED STATES, COMPARED WITH THAT OF EUROPE 
AND SOUTH AMERICA. 



The distribution of the terrestrial mollusks in the 
United States, as compared with the temperate parts of 
Europe, presents some curious results. The following 
table shows the number of species found under the sev- 
eral genera : 



GENERA. 


NUMBER OF 
SPECIES. 


INTRODUCED 
SPECIES. 


Vaginulus. 

Tebennopliorus 

Arion. 

Limax. . 

Vitrina. . 

Succinea. 

Bulimus. 

Helix. 

Achatina. 

Glandina. 

Pupa. 

Vertigo. . 

Cylindrella. 

Helicina. 

Cyclostoma. 












1 

2 
1 
3 
1 
8 
11 
71 
2 
2 
8 
5 
2 
3 
1 






1 



1 

2 
1 
1 
2 
5 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 




Total ' . 
Deduct introdu 


ced s 


pecies 








121 
22 






22 




Indigenous species. 








99 











164 mTRODUCTION. 

The whole number of species hitherto ascertained, 
within the bounds of the United States east of the Mis- 
sissippi River, excluding species found elsewhere also, is 
ninetj-nine. 

The first reflection that arises, on examining this table, 
is, the comparatively small number of species which it 
exhibits. The number inhabiting the corresponding cli- 
matal parts of Europe, of equal territorial area, is more 
than twice as great ; and the limited extent of the British 
Islands affords at least an equal number. This in- 
equality of numbers may perhaps be partly explained by 
the supposition, that many species remain yet undiscov- 
ered ; but, considering the attention which has already 
been given to our conchology, we can hardly expect that 
the whole difference should be made up by future re- 
searches. A further approximation of numbers may 
also be gained by cutting off some of the nominal species 
of European Limaces, which seem to be established on 
very slight external characters, and will hardly maintain 
their places ; but when this is done, the difference 
remaining will still be very considerable. We confess 
that we do not perceive the means of reconciling the 
disparity of distribution, which strikes us as the more 
remarkable, because the species live in this country 
more in their natural condition than they can do in the 
cultivated parts of Europe, and because a large portion of 
our territory seems to be, by its climate and geological 
structure, and other physical circumstances, peculiarly 
adapted to their growth and increase. The only circum- 
stance which we perceive, wherein the European local- 



DISTRIBUTION OF GENERA AND SPECIES. IQ^ 

ities can be supposed to have the advantage is, the more 
equable and gradually changing temperature which they 
enjoy; the changes of temperature in many parts of 
this country being frequent, rapid, and excessive. 

We notice, also, the remarkable deficiency of the 
lAmaeidm, of Tvhich Tehennophorus is the only unequiv- 
ocally native genus, while Arion and Vaginulus are 
each represented by a single introduced species, and 
lAmax has two introduced species and one somewhat 
doubtful native. The whole appear to have been for- 
merly represented by TehenyiopJiorus, which is believed 
to be peculiar to North America, and differs essentially 
from its allied genera by its external form and internal 
structure. It may be remarked, however, that as the 
animals of this family are nocturnal in their habits, and 
their places of resort are but little open to common ob- 
servation, it is almost certain that other species will be 
discovered. The genus Olaiisilia, which, in Europe, 
comprises numerous species, is without a representative, 
and, so far as we know, does not occur either upon the 
continent of America, or the adjacent islands. Its place 
is supplied by Cylindrellay which is common in the 
Antilles. Vitrina contams only a smgle species, iden- 
tical with the most common European species, and by 
many thought to be introduced. Of the other genera 
common to both lists, Sucdnea is more numerously rep- 
resented here than in Europe ; Pupa, Vertigo, and Buli- 
mus, much less so, although our proximity to the regions 
where Bulimus prevails would induce us to expect to 
find it more numerous ; and Helix, making allowance for 



166 INTRODUCTION. 

a few deductions from some of the foreign lists, main- 
tains nearly an equal representation. The most consid- 
erable differences, however, indicated by the comparison, 
arise from the introduction into our catalogue of the 
genera Vaginulus, Crlandina, Cylindrella and Helicina, 
which are believed to be entirely wanting in Europe, 
and the very distinct section of Helix, which includes the 
polygyral species. All these are due to our near ap- 
proach to the tropical parts of our continent, withm which 
they all prevail. Crlandina, it is believed, is peculiar 
to the coasts and islands of the Gulf of Mexico, the 
alluvial regions north and south of it, and the larger 
West Indian Islands ; while Helicina and Cylindrella, as 
well as Cyclostoma are most numerous in the Antilles, 
from which most probably our species, w\.\h. one excep- 
tion, were derived. The sub-genus Helicodonta of 
Ferussac, which is numerous in species, as we shall 
hereafter have occasion to observe, is also characteristic 
of the American continent and islands, but is not, like 
the preceding, more predominant near the equator than 
elsewhere. We shall notice the peculiarities which dis- 
tinguish our native species, and the particulars in which 
they differ from those of other countries, in our general 
remarks upon each genus. We give here a comparative 
table showing the number of species of the several 
genera of terrestrial mollusks in the United States, and 
in various sections of Europe. It is derived from au- 
thentic catalogues of local authors, and exhibits forcibly 
our numerical deficiencies in species. A single local 
catalogue of the North of Africa is added. 



DISTRIBUTION OF GENERA AND SPECIES. 



167 



COMPARATIVE TABLE OF TERRESTRIAL MOLLUSKS IN 
THE UNITED STATES AND IN EUROPE. 




































COUN'TRIES. 


AUTHORS. 


1 








■A 

a 
4 


> 
1 


3 

8 


2 
13 


1 

71 


C3 

3" 

13 


.3 

3 

2 


-5 
2 


a 

X 
3 


3 
p 


1 


hi 
121 


United States, ] 
East of River > 
Mississippi ) 




3 


Great Britain . 


Alder . . 








1 


7 


1 


2 


5 


3G 


13 


5 








1 


71 


Scotland . . 


Forbes 











7 


1 


2 


4 


24 


9 


2 











49 


Ireland . . . 


Thompson 








1 


G 


1 


2 


4 


30 


9 


2 








1 


56 


Germany . . 


Pfeiffer . 











C 


3 


2 


7 


58 


16 


17 








2 


111 


Sweden . . . 


Wilson 











9 


1 


1 


3 


20 


6 


4 











44 


Russia, with ) 
Caucasus J 


Krynicki . 














1 


2 


9 


47 


16 


15 











90 


Switzerland 


Charpentier 











7 


4 


2 


5 


40 


21 


11 











90 


Province of \ 
Brabant, N. of \ 
Belg-ium 3 


Kicks 











S 


2 


1 


6 


22 


12 


6 








1 


58 


France . . . 


Michaud . 








1 


12 


4 


2 


10 


79 


27 


11 








7 


153 


Department of ) 
Pas-de-Calais, \ 
N. of France ) 


Bouchard- > 
Chantereaux ^ 











8 


1 


3 


4 


21 


7 


6 








2 


52 


Department of '\ 
Puy-de-Dome, > 
S. of Centre ) 


Bouillet 








1 


10 


3 


2 


4 


27 


9 


5 








1 


62 


Department of ^ 
the Landes, > 
S. of France ) 


Grateloup 








1 


8 


1 


2 


5 


30 


5 


3 








1 


56 


Department of ■) 
Finisterre, !> 
W. of France j 


Collard-des- > 
Cherres. J 








1 


3 


1 


1 


3 


24 


7 


3 








2 


45 


Italy . . . 


Jan . . 











2 


3 


2 


6 


66 


13 


10 








2 


104 


Province of 1 
Como, North V 
of Italy ) 


Porro . . 











3 


3 


2 


3 


29 


14 


5 








3 


G2 


Sicily . . . 'Philippi 





3 








1 


1 


7 


41 


1 


4 








3 


GI 


Portugal . . Morclet 





1 


1 


M 


1 


4 


G 


28 


7 


1 








1 


64 


North of Africa 


Terv-er 








1 


4 





1 


5 


42 


4 










2 


49 



168 INTRODUCTION. 

In the preceding table, the numbers for Scotland, 
Germany, Sweden, Russia, Switzerland, and Italy, are 
copied from Mr. Forbes's Report ; in the other instances, 
they are taken from the authors named in the table 
itself. Tebennopliorus includes Vaginulus, Limax in- 
cludes Arion, Bulimus includes Aehatina, Pupa includes 
Vertigo, and Clausilia includes Azeca and Oylindrella. 
Ci/clostoma, which was not given by Mr. Forbes, is added. 
Besides exhibiting the numerical relations which our 
species bear to those of Europe, this table also shows 
the local distribution of the genera. While Limax 
is most numerous in species towards the north, though 
not in the extreme north, its numbers diminish towards 
the south, until, in Sicily, it appears to be replaced 
by Parmacella. Vttrina, Succinea, and Bulimus are 
pretty equally diffused. Clausilia is shown to pre- 
dommate most towards the north, and Cyclostoma with 
equal certainty to prefer the south. Pupa, while it 
flourishes most in northern latitudes, is at the same 
time, partial to mountainous districts. The sixteen 
species which it comprised in Russia and Germany, 
are reduced to seven in the south of France (Landes), 
and to only one in Sicily ; the limited and moun- 
tainous territory of Switzerland affords many more 
species than the whole extent of Germany, which is fur- 
ther north ; and the small province of Como, situated a 
little south of the Alpine ranges, in northern Italy, con- 
tains as many as all the rest of Italy. The genus Helix 
is most plentifully distributed towards the south. In 



DISTRIBUTION OF GENERA AND SPECIES. IQQ 

Italy and Sicily it comprises two-thirds of all the terres- 
trial species, while in Sweden and Scotland, and in 
Switzerland, where elevation produces the effect of a 
high latitude, its species are less than half of the whole 
number. The only countries on the list, that have been 
thoroughly mvestigated, are Great Britain and France. 
The disproportionate number of species shown to belong 
to the latter, is due in part to its thorough exploration, 
but in a greater degree to its extent, which reaches from 
the Mediterranean to the North Sea, and to the singular 
variety of its surface, which, although in general by no 
means mountainous, yet includes parts of the mountain 
ranges of the Pyi^enees, the Jura, and the Alps, and 
therefore partakes of a greater diversity of climate and 
elevation than any other country of Europe. The effect 
of these peculiarities upon its fauna is very apparent, 
the northern species, except Clausilia, all the southern 
species, and all those affecting mountainous regions, 
being in excess. The value of tables of this kind is 
very evident from this example. A complete series of 
them, including especially those of limited districts 
which present strongly-marked topographical or climatal 
peculiarities, would be invaluable in affording the means 
of deducing the laws of geographical distribution. 

When we commenced our introductory remarks, we 
did not expect to extend this division of our subject 
beyond a comparison between our species and those of 
Europe ; but, an opportunity having occurred of exam- 
imng the valuable work of M. De la Sagra, on the 

VOL. I. 21 



lYO INTRODUCTION. 

Natural History of Cuba, we cannot forbear making use 
of some of the interesting information that it affords, 
and also of facts contained in the memoir of Dr. Pfeiffer 
on the pneumobranchiate mollusks of the same island. 
In this connection also, the results of the observations of 
M. D'Orbigny in Sovith America, in their relation to the 
distribution of the terrestrial species on this continent, 
gain an additional importance. We compare therefore 
the genera of Cuba, and of South America, with those 
of the United States. It is not to be supposed that 
these lists are equally complete with that of the United 
States ; indeed it may be taken for granted that they 
are much less so. Being the work of foreign travellers, 
who resided but a short time in those countries, many 
species must have necessarily escaped notice, however 
careful their researches may have been ; and whenever 
the subject shall be resumed by native naturalists, the 
gleanings may be expected to equal in number the first 
harvest. But they probably represent pretty nearly the 
proportion in which the respective genera prevail, and 
may, therefore, serve our present purpose. 

It is proper to observe, before introducing the follow- 
ing table, that the researches of M. D'Orbigny were 
mostly confined to that part of South America which 
lies north of the twenty-fifth degree of south latitude, 
and that a large majority of his species appear to have 
been collected in Bolivia, Peru, and Colombia, on the 
western side of the continent. 



DISTRIBUTION OF GENERA AND SPECIES 



171 











NUMBER OF SPECIES. 


GENERA. 


Cuba. Cuba. South America. 
By De la Sagra. By Pleiffer. By D'Orbigny. "'^'^^ ^"^'s*- 


Tebennophorus 


. 


. 


. 


2 . 


Vagiiiulus . . 




. 1 . 


. 


2 . 


1 . 


Anoa 










. 


. 


. 


1 . 


Liinax 










. 


. 


2 . 


3 . 


Vitrina 










. 


. 


. 


1 . 
9 . 


Siiccinea 










1 . 


. 


4 . 


Buliious 










12 . 


11 . 


91 . 


11 . 


Helix . 










22 . 


16 . 


26 . 


79 . 


Glaiidina 










2 . 


4 . 


. 


2 . 


Pupa 










9 . 


4 . 


4 . 


8 . 
5 . 


Vertigo . 










. 


. 


. 


Cylindrella 










. 


4 . 


. 


3 . i 


Helicina 










. 


8 . 


4 . 


3 . 1 


Cyclostoma 








. 


. 4 . 


2 . 


1 , 


Total .... 




47 . 


51 . 


135 . 


. 129 



We notice, in the first place, the South American list. 
Here Vitrina, Vertigo, and Glandina, all the genera of 
the Limacidce except Vaginulus, which replaces Tehen- 
nopliorus, being, like that species, entirely covered with 
a mantle, are wanting. Succinea holds a smaller nu- 
merical proportion than in North America. Bulimus 
predominates in the astonishing proportion of ninety- 
one in a total of one hundred and thirty-five ; holding 
about the same rank there, that Helix maintains in the 
southern part of Europe. Helix is reduced to a sixth 
part of the whole number. Pupa remains very subor- 
dinate, and Helicina and Ci/clostoma are merely repre- 
sented. In the Cuban list of M. De la Sagra, Tebenno- 
phorus, Vitrina, and Vertigo are wanting ; and a single 
Vaginulus represents the whole family of Limacidce. 



172 INTRODUCTION. 

Selix makes up less than one half, and Bidimus about 
one third of the whole number. Selicina,^ a genus not 
numericallj strong, is very predominant ; and Cydosto- 
ma is considerably numerous. Clausilia appears in the 
list of M. Pfeiffer, but it comprises only species which 
are not true Clausilice, and for which, more recently, he 
has constructed the genus Cylvndrella. 

The facts exhibited in the tables which we have given, 
and derived from the other sources mentioned, suggest 
certain general inferences concerning the geographical 
distribution of the genera which are worthy of notice, 
and deserving of being tested by observation in other 
parts of the world. They indicate, that native species 
of the European genera of the Limacidce, namely, Li- 
max, Avion, and Testaeella, are wanting hi the tropical 

' We have not seen that part of the work of M. De la Sagra, which 
treats of Helicina, but the monograph of this genus by Mr. Sowerby, ( The- 
saurus Conchy liorum,) gives descriptions of seventy-two species, of which 
seventeen are set down as belonging to Cuba, fourteen to the Antilles and 
other West Indian islands, and tliirteen more to the adjacent parts of the 
continent of America. Bolivia, on the western coast of South America, is 
said to furnish three species, and the Philippine islands six. A single 
species is ascribed to Opara, in Polynesia : and to this we may add nine 
others, collected by the United States Exploring Expedition. The locahties 
of the remaining species are unknown. We make a similar remark con- 
cernmg Cyclostoma, the species of wliich Mr. Sowerby has also collected 
into a monograph. Of one hundred and thirty-three species, whose habitat 
is known, thirty-two belong to the West Indian islands, forty-two to the 
East Indian Archipelago, thirteen to the African islands, five to Polynesia, 
(to which we add nine from the Exploring Expedition,) four to the islands 
of the Mediterranean, seven to Europe, nine to Asia, eight to Africa, and 
thurteen to America. Some of the species ascribed to the continents, pro- 
bably only occur upon the islands adjacent. 



DISTRIBUTION OF GENERA AND SPECIES. 173 

and temperate portions of the American continent and 
islands, their place being supplied by the genera Tehen- 
noplwms and Vaginulus, the first in North and the 
second in South America, the Antilles and that part of 
Florida adjacent to Cuba. The only exception to this re- 
mark is, a single and somewhat doubtful species of Limax, 
common in the United States.' At the same time, the 
climate is favorable to several species of foreign origin, 
"which are rapidly spreading through the country. Vit- 
rina only appears in America north of 44° north latitude. 
Helix, a genus common to all the continents and large 
islands, is most abundant in temperate latitudes of the 
northern hemisphere, towards their southern limits, and 
gradually diminishes in the number of its species, both 
in approaching the equator, and in going into higher 
latitudes. BiiUmus affects mostly the inter-tropical lat- 
itudes, where it takes the place of Helix, while ki the 
temperate latitudes of North America and of the east- 
ern contment it is reduced to a very small number of 
species*. In South America, however, which seems to 
be the great numerical centre of the genus, the species 
abomid as far as 25'^ south latitude. The European form 
of Pupa, differmg however in specific characters, is 
common to North America, and extends in a few species 

> The territory belonging to the United States, on the Pacific Ocean, south 
of 49° north latitude, is also known to produce one or more species of 
Limax, drawings of which were made by the artists of tlie United States 
Ebcploring Expedition. We do not loiow whether the species have been 
determined or not. 



174 INTRODUCTION. 

to the West Indian islands, in which other pecuhar forms 
of the genus prevail. Grlandma is an American genus, 
and confined to the limits which have been already men- 
tioned. Helkina is also an American genus, though 
not exclusively so, the central focus of which is the 
Antilles, whence it is diflfused through the other West 
Indian Islands to the adjacent parts of the continent on 
*the sea-coast, as far as 25° north latitude. In the 
Philippine Islands this genus re-appears under geo- 
graphical conditions similar to those which distinguish 
the American localities ; that is to say, the position of 
this group of islands and its relations to the neighboring 
continents of Asia and Australia, bear an extraordi- 
nary resemblance to those of the Antilles in respect of 
the continent of America. On all the principal groups 
of islands throughout the Pacific, this genus is found, 
though very essentially modified in form from the 
American types. In conclusion, the genus Cyclos- 
toma seems to range around the whole circumfer- 
ence of the globe within 20° both north and south'of the 
equator, avoiduig for the most part continental stations, 
and finding the conditions most favorable for its exists 
ence in the innumerable islands with which this belt of 
the globe is studded. It is difiused more numerously 
in the eastern than in the western hemisphere, in about 
the same proportion as the islands themselves are more 
numerous there. A single species being often confined 
to a small group of islands, or even to a single island, 
and the species in general being very much separated. 



DISTRIBUTION OF GENERA AND SPECIES 



175 



and, as it -were, scattered geographically, there docs not 
appear to be any centre where the genus is more predom- 
inant than elsewhere. In this respect it differs ap- 
parently from the other genera, which may be said to 
have each, one or more climatal or topographical centres. 
In the dispersion of this genus among the islands of the 
sea, a remarkable contrast is presented to the distribution 
of the superior classes, and particularly of the mamma- 
lia, the latter being, in general, entirely wanting in small 
islands remote from the continents, while, in those adja- 
cent to them, they consist of the species belonging to 
the main land. 




IX. 



GEOLOGICAL RELATIONS. 



Under this head we propose to make only a few re- 
marks on the geological conditions in which such of 
the existing species as are found also in a fossil state 
occur, and to draw, from the few facts collected, such 
inferences as to their former condition on the earth's 
surface in the regions where they occur, as these facts 
may seem to warrant. The conclusions which depend 
upon the situation in which fossil terrestrial shells are 
found, are however, much less worthy of confidence 
than those derived from the marine fossils. The lat- 
ter may reasonably be supposed to have lived and died 
in the localities which they now occupy, while the for- 
mer have only been preserved by being removed from 
their original positions, and subjected to conditions en- 
tirely different from those under which they existed 
during life. The substance of all land-shells possesses 
so little solidity, and their texture is so frail, that when 
they are deprived of the protection that the animal 
itself affords them, the operation of the elements soon 



GEOLOGICAL RELATIONS. J 77 

decomposes and destroys them ; hence, in a short time 
after the death of the animals, scarcely a vestige of 
their shells is to be found. The formations which con- 
tain them, and in which alone they have been found 
thus far, are those which have been deposited in the 
estuaries and bays at the mouths of ancient rivers, or 
in the beds of lakes. The streams and rivers which 
discharged their waters into those reservou'S were filled 
with the washings of the countries through which they 
flowed. The shells and other substances borne along 
by their currents, on reaching the sea or lake in which 
they terminated, were deposited in still water, and being 
immediately covered by succeeding deposits, remained 
protected from disturbing causes until the beds and 
strata Avhich contained them underwent the fossilizing 
process. But it may have happened that a river, rising 
in a high latitude, and flowing towards the equator, 
like the present Mississippi, may only have reached its 
outlet within or near the tropics. It may have re- 
ceived tributaries through its whole course, some of 
which, uniting with it near its mouth, may have passed 
through regions enjoying a tropical cUmate. The 
waters of such a river would of course be freighted 
with the animal and vegetable productions of regions 
very remote from each other, and of very different 
climes, and they would be deposited promiscuously 
together. Genera and species peculiar to mountainous 
countries would be found side by side with those belong- 
voL. I. 22 



178 INTRODUCTION. 

ing to lowlands and marshes ; while those which in life 
were habituated to a high temperature would be inter 
mingled with others which had Uved under the influence 
of an almost constant winter. And farther, besides the 
terrestrial shells of such different characters we might 
also find the Limniadce of shallow waters, the Naiades 
of deeper streams, and the various species of Cyrena, 
Crnathodon, and Neritina of the mouths of rivers, all 
mingled together with the truly marine genera. It is 
manifest that in the confusion of species which such a 
deposit would present, but few legitimate inferences 
could be drawn as to the former climate and condition of 
that part of the earth's surface where they occur, or as 
to the changes of habit and locality of the species them- 
selves, or ui fact as to any pomt except their contem- 
poraneous existence, and their affinities to the species 
which are now extant. 

It has been held that as the presence of certain spe- 
cies coincides in general with temperature, the occur- 
rence of certain fossil forms in a particular geological 
formation indicates that the climate of the locality was, 
at the period of deposition, similar to that in which the 
same or analogous Hving species are now known to exist. 
The preceding remarks show how erroneous this opinion 
is hkely to be when founded upon the occurrence of the 
terrestrial and fresh-water species ; for the place of their 
origin and its climate must be in a great degree uncer- 
tain, and while it may coincide with their present condi- 



GEOLOGICAL RELATIONS. 179 

tion it may on the other hand differ very materially 
from it. It has also been suggested that as vegetable 
remains have been detected in very ancient formations, 
it might have been expected that the animals -which feed 
upon vegetables, and especially the herbivorous land- 
mollusks would have existed contemporaneously with 
them, and that their remains should now be found in the 
same strata ; but that as they do not appear in any of 
the formations older than the tertiary, and but very 
sparingly in that, they could not have existed antecedent 
to, and were far from numerous during the tertiary 
period. Hence, as a further inference from these infer- 
ences, it has been stated, that the present time is the 
period of their greatest numerical development, and 
that their actual numbers far exceed those of any former 
era. These conclusions also ought to be received with 
great caution, for the premises on which they are 
founded are very uncertam. We have seen that the 
remains of these animals, by reason of their frail and 
perishable nature, soon decay, and we must take it for 
granted that only a small part of their whole number is 
washed into rivers and carried away by their currents. 
The deposites which finally receive them can therefore 
represent but very feebly their former numerical condi- 
tion, and a very general diflFiision of species upon the 
earth's surface is quite consistent with the existence and 
deposition of only a small number of their remains. 
The condition of the species at particular epochs cannot 
therefore be correctly mferred from such facts, and the 



X80 INTRODUCTION. 

suggestions we have alluded to deserve only the credit 
"which is due to plausible conjectures./ 

There is, however, a class of minor formations of the 
tertiary period, in which the testaceous remains point to 
more certain results. These we have mentioned as de- 
posited in the beds of lakes. When the body of water 
from which the deposit in these instances took place was 
small, it could of course only contain the productions of 
the lake itself, and of the region immediately around it. 
Hence species occurring together in such formations 
must have not only existed contemporaneously, but must 
have occupied the same geographical region, and have 
been subjected to the same physical influences. The 
inferences which may be drawn from them are therefore 
more to be relied upon. 

Shells of many of the terrestrial species, apparently 
in a fossilized condition, are often met with in collections, 
and are said to be brought from the western and south- 
western parts of the country. They indicate the exist- 
ence of the most recent tertiary or post tertiary forma- 
tions, but nothing certain is known of them. Dr. David 
D. Owen, of New Harmony, Indiana, has discovered an 
extensive deposit of this kind in Pusey coimty, on the 

1 This view of the subject is strongly corroborated by facts brought to 
light by the valuable researches of Professor Hitchcock. He has given, to 
us unequivocal proofs of the existence of birds, in the most ancient mesozoic 
period, through the evidence of their foot-tracks in the sandstone of the Con- 
necticut River valley. The number of species he has now made us ac- 
quainted with is not less than seventy, and yet not a single bone of any one 
of these has yet been discovered. 



GEOLOGICAL RELATIONS. J^gl 

Wabash River, in that State. It is a fine sandy marl 
of a yellowish-white color. It occurs on the upland, 
from twenty-five to fifty feet above the bottom land, and 
is reached at the distance of from six to ten feet from 
the surface, and has been penetrated to the depth of 
twenty-five feet without passing through it. It appears 
also on the opposite side of the Wabash in Illinois at 
about the same level, and near Shawneetown, forty miles 
distant, in descending into the bottom land, in a similar 
position. Dr. Owen has learned that a similar deposit 
in an analogous position exists opposite to St. Louis, 
above the American bottom on the INIississippi river, and 
there are said to be indications of a like formation at 
Big-Bone Licks, on the south side of the Ohio River, 
about twenty miles below Cincinnati. The Wabash 
deposit contains, in vast numbers, terrestrial and fluviatile 
shells of the same species as those now existing in the 
surrounding country ; they occur also, as we are informed, 
in strata of marl below the deposit in which the bones 
of the Mastodon are found.' Whether all these are 
parts of one continuous deposit, or whether they point 
out the location of several small basms in which a con- 
temporaneous deposition took place, is not yet ascer- 
tained. The fossils which they contain prove, accord- 

* The number of land and fresh-water shells occurring in the "Wabash 
deposit is very great. In a small parcel of the marl which we have exam- 
ined, the following species were noticed. Helix hirsuta, monodon, laby- 
rinthica, lineata, tkyroidus, claicsa, infiecta. Pupa armifera, coiitracta. 
Hdicina occulta ; together with several species of lamineu, Planorbis^ Am- 
nicola, Valvata. 



182 INTRODUCTION. 

ing to the opinions at present received among geologists, 
that the epoch of their deposition corresponded with the 
time when the surface of the earth in that region was 
diversified with lakes of considerable extent, and that it 
was antecedent to the period when, bj the lifting of their 
beds, the surface attained its present position, or when 
by some relative change in the level of the land, the 
lakes were dramed of their waters. We have said that 
these deposits contain the species of terrestrial and 
fiuviatile shells inhabitmg the surrounding country. Of 
the species indigenous to that section, nearly two thirds 
have abeady been found in a fossil state (although but 
little attention has been given to them) and their identity 
is beyond all doubt. There is, however, a single ap- 
parent exception to the general remark, in a species of 
Selieina, which Mr. Say, supposing it to be a recent 
species, described under the specific name occulta, and 
which is one of the most common species among the 
fossils. As the genus Helicina belongs mostly to inter- 
tropical regions, and has rarely been met with in a re- 
cent state in so high a latitude as that occupied by these 
fossUs, a good deal of importance has been attached to 
its occurrence here as indicating such a change of cli- 
mate as has been alluded to. But this supposition 
creates more difficulties than it obviates, for the numer- 
ous species of other genera found in company with the 
species in question, and which live at this time in the 
same district in which the fossils are situated, must, ac- 
cording to this view, have also been adapted to a warmer 



GEOLOGICAL RELATIONS. Igg 

climate than the present, though they do not now exist 
in southern latitudes, and therefore a very considerable 
change in their habits must have since taken place. 
Notwithstanding the facility with which the terrestrial 
moUusks accommodate themselves to the physical influ- 
ences which act upon them, such a change is not consist- 
ent with what we know of their history, and hence the 
most reasonable conclusion is, that the climate in which 
they have lived, from the days when the multitudes 
which now compose the mass of the fossil beds were in 
the enjoyment of hfe upon the sm-face of the earth, to 
the present time, has remained essentially the same. 

The question of the identity of this fossil, with any 
living species of Helicina is also interesting, as upon its 
solution, perhaps, may depend the opinion we may form 
as to the comparative remoteness of the period when all 
the fossil species of the formation flourished. If it 
should be considered to be specifically distuict from any 
other known living form, or in other words to be an ex- 
tinct species, we should refer its existence to a more 
ancient date in the tertiary period than would otherwise 
be assigned to it. If on the other hand it should prove 
to be identical with an existing species, it would date 
back only to the most recent epoch. This point we 
have established to our own satisfaction by carefully 
comparmg specimens of the fossils of the Wabash de- 
posit with the few specimens we have seen of the only 
species of Helicina which inhabits the country north of 
the tertiary section of the coast of the Gulf of Mexico, 



184 INTRODUCTION. 

and which was described by the late Jacob Green, M. D., 
as HeUcina rubella. We cannot doubt the identity of 
the two, as they are as nearly alike as the soft and 
crumbling fossil can be to the shell whose surface yet 
retains its original character. The recent shell is ex- 
tremely rare, and is found in only a few collections, and 
in tliis respect oifers a strong contrast to the fossil, which 
must have been very numerous. One of the most evi- 
dent facts taught to us by geology is the constant suc- 
cession of zoological species. They come into existence 
one after another, increase and flourish for a longer or a 
shorter time, and then gradually die out and disappear. 
That there are laws which regulate and limit their con- 
tinuance we cannot doubt, although they are not under- 
stood by us ; neither can we doubt that they are yet in 
operation, and that in accordance with them species do 
now sometimes become extinct. The abundance of the 
species mider consideration, at the time of its deposition 
in the fossil beds, and its rarity now, suggest the 
thought, that having then reached its greatest numerical 
development, it has since slowly declined, and is now in 
•a condition of zoological senility antecedent to its entii'e 
extinction. 

The light which is afforded by geology, in elucidating 
the former zoological condition of the earth, is a beauti- 
ful illustration of the manner in which one science often 
ministers to another. Without the aid which has been 
derived from our knowledge of the animated creation, 
geology, indeed, would hardly have attained the cer- 



(JEOLOGICAL RELATION. 185 

tainty of a science, but it is from time to time amply 
repaying the benefit, by making kno-\vn the condition of 
the animal kingdom at remote periods of time. We 
are thus enabled to obtain glimpses of the state of the 
earth -when races of animals very different from those 
now living inhabited it, and to note their successive ap- 
pearances and decline, until at length we reach the time 
when animals which are still extant began to prevail. 
The results afforded by such observations are among the 
most Avonderful presented to us by science. They tend 
to enlarge our ideas of the power of the Creator, while 
they multiply infinitely om' conceptions of the unlimited 
variety of created things, and of the immeasurable du- 
ration of their existence. 

Guided by the light reflected from geological sci- 
ence, we may feel rationally authorized to draw from 
the preceding facts and considerations the following 
inferences. That our existing species of land moUusks 
were Hving at a period which, though recent in a geo- 
logical sense, was anterior to the last geological revolu- 
tion, when the surface of this portion of the earth was 
brought to its present condition, and to the existence of 
the higher orders of animals which now inhabit it, and 
even to that of the extinct mammaUans which are known 
only by their gigantic remains. That, during the period 
of the deposition of the newest tertiary beds they 
were at least as numerous as at present, and that conse- 
quently, the existing epoch cannot be considered as that 
of their greatest development. That, in the interval of 
VOL. I. 23 



18(3 



INTRODUCTION. 



time between the two periods, the immense extent of 
which we have no means of estimating, very few, and 
perhaps none of the then existing species (as indicated 
bj the fossil deposits) have become extinct ; and that 
consequently, the term of their specific existence is of 
great length. That, although the numbers contained in 
the Wabash deposit indicate that, at the time of their 
deposition, the species had been a long time in existence, 
none of their remains have yet been discovered in ear- 
lier formations. 




X. 



HABITS AND FACULTIES. 



The animals of this order, indigenous to the United 
States, are essentially inhabitants of the forest. It is 
there, under the deep shadows of a dense foliage, where 
the sun's rajs hardly penetrate to the sui'face of the 
earth, and where the ground is covered with the mould- 
ering trunks of trees and thick layers of decaying 
leaves, that they find a constant moisture, a twilight 
interinipted only by darkness, abmidance of vegetable 
and animal food, and the means of shelter and protec- 
tion. These constitute a combination of circumstances 
very favorable to their increase, and hence they may be 
discovered, in situations where these conditions exist, in 
every part of the country where they can be found at 
all. But when, with these, are conjoined a mild climate, 
and a calcareous soil, the maximum of favoring influences 
is reached, and large numbers are produced. It is in 
the great valley of the Mississippi, based throughout 
nearly its whole extent upon horizontal limestone forma- 



188 INTRODUCTION. 

tions, that these combined causes operate over an exten- 
sive region, and there, consequently, the species proper 
to it exist in multitudes. In the parts of the country 
which have been long cultivated, and are nearly deprived 
of their forests, they have mostly disappeared, and only 
survive in places where some shelter of wood or stones is 
still afforded to them. They everywhere avoid cultiva- 
ted fields and open pastures, and are never found in 
gardens/ or about or within houses or other buildings. 
In this respect, they present a remarkable contrast to 
the same animals in Europe, which not only are very 
common in open and cultivated tracts, but are particu- 
larly numerous in fields and gardens, where some of the 
species commit much mischief, and in cellars, drains and 
other similar situations, in immediate contiguity with 
man. The species which have been introduced from 
Europe, and naturalized in this country, are distinguished 
by the same habits as the stock from which they are 
derived, and differ as much from the native species. 
Thus, Helix hortensis, and IT. jnilchella live in open and 
exposed situations destitute of shelter, except that 
afforded by grass and shrubs. Helix cellar'ia occupies 
gardens and cellars. Limax variegatus inhabits cellars 
and damp places about drains, and L. agrestis is com- 
mon everywhere in gardens, fields, cellars, and houses. 
It infests the road side, and the neighborhood of our 

' There is a single exception to this remark in Helix fallax, Say, which 
we observed a few years since living in great numbers in gardens, in 
Charleston, S. C. in company with Bulimiis decnllatxis. 



HABITS AND FACULTIES. 189 

clAvelllngs, and has in some places become the pest of 
the horticulturist. 

Whether this difference of habitat arises from original 
constitution, or is the consequence of the long continued 
operation of external causes, is a curious subject of in- 
quiry. The preference for the forest over the open 
country exhibited by the native species, even m situa- 
tions where both have been for a long time equally 
accessible to them, seems to indicate that the former 
supposition is correct ; and this opinion is strengthened 
by the disappearance of nearly every species with the 
progress of agriculture. If their habits were not in- 
superable, they might be expected to have been some- 
what modified ere now, and to have become adapted to 
the new physical conditions to which they are subjected. 
That they have not been, suggests the thought, that like 
the aboriginal race of men, and some of the larger 
quadrupeds, they are destined to give way before the 
advance of civilization, and to have their places filled by 
foreign species. On the other hand, there are some 
facts which tend to show that accidental causes may 
have produced a slow and gradual revolution in the 
habits of the European species, corresponding with the 
changes which, within the historical period, have taken 
place over the surface of the greater part of Europe ; 
and that in process of time, the same influences will pro- 
duce similar results on the habits of the North Amer- 
ican species. All those parts of Europe which are now 
the most populous were covered with forests, at no very 



190 INTRODUCTION. 

distant period, and all the terrestrial moUusks were then, 
like ours at the present time, living in the forest. The 
progress of agriculture there was verj slow compared 
with its advances in this country, and thus time was 
given to the animals to accustom themselves to the 
change ; and thej have thus, by slow degrees, adopted 
their present habits. In the United States, the advance 
of agriculture in newly settled parts is very rapid ; 
large tracts of forest are almost simultaneously subjected 
to the axe and to fire, and a very few years produces an 
entire change in the vegetation of a whole section. 
Consequently these animals are at once exterminated, 
or the few that survive are brought suddenly under the 
influences of new circumstances, which, from the abrupt- 
ness of the change, are fatal to them, but which, if 
imposed upon them more gradually, might have been 
sustained. A few spots and some limited tracts of land, 
remaining unchanged, in the midst of cultivation, protect 
some individuals of every species ; and it is from this 
comparatively small number, thus preserved, that their 
subsequent increase is derived. But, at this period, the 
field is equally open for the multiphcation of those 
foreign species which accompany man as for the native 
species, and it is not surprismg that the former, whose 
habits are already adapted to the existing state of things, 
should increase more rapidly than the latter. The native 
species however, become gradually familiarized with the 
circumstances around them, and some few of them 
advance, and after a time establish themselves in the 



HABITS AND FACULTIES. 191 

open country, Avhere they seek such shelter as they can 
find. This transition is very slow, but there are suffi- 
cient indications, in the exceptions which are found to 
the general habits of the species in this particular, to 
show that it is going on; and therefore, it is reasonable 
to believe, that when a period shall have elapsed as long 
as that since the south and west of Europe were cov- 
ered with forests, our species will have become able to 
sustain themselves in the open country, and will have 
spread themselves in great numbers over those populous 
parts where they are now wanting. The power of 
adaptation to new circumstances, which is a prominent 
quahty of nearly all the shell-bearing species of this 
order, and which, combined with a remarkable tenacity 
of life, enables them to resist successfully the many 
dangers to which they are exposed, is illustrated in the 
extremes of their mode of Hfe on the two contuients. 
We know of no other instances of animals living in a 
natural condition, not domesticated nor accompanying 
man, where the same diversity of habitat in analogous 
species exists. The presumption of changes which shall 
approximate the habits of both, in proportion as the 
physical circumstances of both approach each other, is 
therefore not a violent one. But it is by no means cer- 
tain that all the species Avill survive the violent change 
to which they are at first exposed. Those of them which 
are in a state of declme and nearly run out, and those 
which are strictly local in then- habitats will be least 
able to sustain themselves, and their entire extinction 
will be very likely to follow. 



1Q2 INTRODUCTION. 

All the species are nocturnal or semi-nocturnal in their 
habits. In the day-time thej seek such shelter as may 
be at hand, and retreat into dark holes and crevices, or 
hide themselves under the fallen trunks of trees, frag- 
ments of wood, leaves and stones, or bury themselves 
wholly or partially in the earth. There they remain 
inactive until evening twilight, when, except in seasons 
of drought, they sally forth in numbers ; and in favorable 
situations, such as ravines and low places in the forest, 
may be seen crawhng over the surface of the ground, 
and sometimes climbing the stalks of plants, and the 
trunks of trees. They are probably active during the 
whole night, during which they all seek their food, and 
those species which are noxious to man commit their 
depredations in the garden and orchard. At this time 
too, their sexual meetings take place. Soon after day- 
light, they retire to their retreats, and remain very close 
until night approaches agaui. They also come forth 
when the atmosphere is charged with moisture, and after 
light showers. 

There is a difference in the places of their retreat. 
The Limaeidce are oftenest found attached to the lower 
surface of wood and stones lying in contact with the 
ground, or to the damp walls of cellars, and, in the forest, 
concealed under logs. So soon as, from the increased 
dryness of the atmosphere, these places no longer retain 
moisture, they abandon them for others, and in seasons 
of drought they penetrate deeply into the earth. The 
HeUcidoe, in the forest, are observed under prostrate 



HABITS AND FACULTIES. I93 

timber, to the lower surface and crevices of which they 
adhere by a mucous attachment during the day, in hol- 
lows under the roots of trees, and under the layer of 
decaying leaves which cover the ground. In situations 
where such places of shelter are not found, they half 
bury themselves in the soil, at the roots and under the 
shade of thick tufts of plants. Numbers frequently 
resort to the same retreat, but this in the Helieidce seems 
a mere matter of accident, while in the introduced 
species of Limacidce it appears to indicate a gregarious 
habit, as they prefer to crowd together and lie in close 
contact with and upon each other.^ These last are said 
by some to occupy permanently the same retreat, but 
the assertion is probably incorrect. They often, and 
perhaps generally, remain in the immediate vicinity of 
the place where they procure their food, and hence they 
often resort to the same place of shelter ; and as many 
of them have frequently been observed in the same 
place, they have been thought to be the same individuals. 
But when one set of individuals is destroyed another soon 
takes their place, and whenever a new shelter is provid- 
ed, by the accidental presence of fragments of wood in 
suitable situations, it is immediately resorted to by them. 
The native genus Tebennophorus is in no manner grega- 
rious ; it lives in the forest, mostly buried in decaying 
and rotten wood, and no more than two are usually found 

' The promiscuous mingling of individuals of Limaz agrestis and Limax 
variegatus in their respective retreats has often reminded us of the familiar 
positions in which swine place themselves for sleep. 
VOL. I. 24 



194 INTRODUCTION. 

together. In clouclj weatlier, when the atmosphere is 
charged with moisture, and during light showers, all the 
species come forth in the day time ; but on a change of 
weather, immediately return again, and during rains 
remain in their retreats. Long continued or excessive 
rains, however, inundate their hiding places, drive them 
out, and force them to resort to trees. 

We have seen, in a preceding part of this work, how 
numerous are the agencies which are continually tending 
to destroy the lives of individuals, and to exterminate 
whole species. Being all of them sIoav in their motions, 
without means of escape from enemies, destitute of in- 
struments of offence or of defence, and some of them 
unprovided with a covering, it would seem as if their 
existence must be very precarious, and that they must 
be easy victims to the unfavorable circumstances around 
them. Such would be the case undoubtedly, and these 
causes would interfere with the diffusion of species and 
derange their distribution in a greater degree than they 
actually do, if there were not counteracting properties 
in the animals themselves which modify and limit the 
destructive tendency. These conservative properties 
are, their prohfic generative capacity, their insensibility 
to pain, their extreme tenacity of hfe, and their extra- 
ordinary power of reproducing important organs which 
have been cut off or destroyed by accident. 

The number of eggs produced varies in the genera 
and species in the same proportion as the dangers to 
which they are exposed are greater or less. Thus, in 



HABITS AND FACULTIES. ^95 

the lAmacidce, whose means of protection, and whose 
chances of preservation are much less than those of the 
ffelicidce, the number is much greater than in the latter. 
The number of eggs produced by two individuals of 
Limax agrestis kept in confinement by Dr. Leach was, 
in the course of rather more than a year, seven hundred 
and eighty-six. It usually amounts to at least three 
hundred per annum. The other species, though not 
equally prolific, multiply greatly ; and each pair of the 
various species of Helicidce produces, annually, from 
thirty to one hundred eggs, aud perhaps more. The 
young of the Limacidce complete their growth and re- 
produce their kind sometimes within the year of their 
birth, and always as soon as the second year ; and the 
species of the other families are believed not to require a 
much longer time to attain maturity. This rapid 
increase replaces the numbers annually destroyed, and 
maintains the species in their relative importance. 

Their extreme tenacity of life is manifested in every 
stage of growth, from the egg to the mature animal. The 
eggs of Limax have been so entirely desiccated that their 
form has disappeared, and there remained only a thin 
skin, friable between the fingers. In this condition they 
have been kept for years ; and yet a smgle hour's expos- 
ure to humidity was suflScient to restore their form and 
elasticity.! They have been dried in a furnace eight 
successive times, until they were reduced to an almost 
invisible minuteness, yet in every interval have regained 

' Bouchard-Chantereaux, Ipc. cit. p. 15. 



196 INTRODUCTION. 

their original bulk in a moist situation.^ In all these 
instances, the young have been developed in the same 
manner as in other eggs not subjected to the experiment. 
In the northern part of the United States •we have fre- 
quently observed the eggs of the Helicidce in the forest 
covered with snow, protected only by a single leaf, where 
they had remained through the winter months, constantly 
exposed to a temperature much below the freezing point. 
The Helicidce themselves withstand the cold of the sever- 
est winters in the same situations ; and Succinea has 
been frozen in a solid block of ice, and yet escaped 
unharmed. Helices, when frozen in a state of confine- 
ment, though they sometimes recover so far as to move 
about with some activity, usually survive but a short 
time. 

The power of reproduction of parts of the body is more 
astonishing still. It is well established by experiments 
on thousands of Helices, that the tentacles, when cut off, 
grow out again, — that considerable parts of the loco- 
motive disc may be amputated, and the new parts imme- 
diately bud out, and supply their place. The great length 
of time they can subsist without food is another exempli- 
fication of their great tenacity of life. Those species, 
especially, which live in dry and exposed situations have 
this power of endurance to a remarkable degree. A 
friend received specimens of H. desertorum which had 
been collected in Egypt, had been shipped to Smyrna, 
thence to Constantinople, thence to Rio Janeiro, and 

' Leuchs, loc. cit. 



HABITS AND FACULTIES. 



197 



finally to Boston, — occupying a period of about seven 
months, — ■wliich appeared in full vigor when taken from 
the papers in -which they had been enveloped. They 
were laid away in a drawer ; and on being examined 
three years afterwards, some of them still came out in 
tolerable vigor. 




XI. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY OF THE TERRESTRIAL GASTEROPODA 
OF THE UNITED STATES. By JOSEPH LEIDY, M. D. 

OF PHILADELPHIA. 



INTRODUCTION. 

When the researches were commenced in the winter 
of 1844, of which the following chapters are the result, it 
was the proposition of Dr. Binney for the author to give 
a complete anatomical and physiological description of 
the terrestrial Gasteropoda of the United States, includ- 
ing the special and general anatomy, with the embryo- 
logy of the several genera. Before the special anatomy 
was fairly completed, the death of Dr. Binney put a stop 
to the work ; and, a diflferent course of observation hav- 
ing occupied the author's attention, the subject is now 
published, after a long delay, in its present incomplete 
state, from notes taken at the time. 

The animals dissected are as follow : — 

LiMAX ; L. variegata, L. agrestis, L. campestris. 

Arion ; A. Jwrtensis. 

Tebennophorus ; T. caroUnensis. 

Vaginulus ; V. floridanus. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 1<)9 

Helix ; H. alholabris^ H. tht/roidus, H. sayi, H. tri- 
dentata, H. fallax, H. 2Jcdlicita, H. llgera, H. intertexta, 
H. siippressa, H. auriculata, H. elevata, H. profunda, 
S. concava, H. fidiginosa, H. perspectiva, H. alternata, 
S. cellm'ia, H. exoleta, IT. multUineata, H. hirsuta, H. 
soUtaria, S. dentifera, H. arborea, S. pulchella, JS. 
berlanderiana, S. gularis, S. injlecta, S. tezasiana. 

BuLiMUS ; B. fasciatus, B. decoUatus, B. virgidatus, 
B. dealbatus, B. caribbceorum. 

Pupa ; P. incana. 

SucciNEA ; aS". obliqua. 

Glandina: Cr. truncata. 



Chapter i. — general remarks upon the exterior form 

AND structure OF THE TERRESTRIAL NAKED GASTERO- 
PODA. 

Upon examining a Limax or an Arion, we find it com- 
posed of a thick, vermiform body, with a broad, ribbon- 
like, pedal disc, rmming the whole length of its inferior 
surface. The anterior, obtuse extremity forms the head ; 
and from it protrude four retractile tentaculse, upon the 
outer side of the tip of the two superior, or longer of 
which, is placed the eye. The mouth is situated at the 
antero-inferior part of the head ; and immediately below 
it is a deep depression, or bhnd sac. The posterior part 
of the body forms the tail, and is acute. Upon the 
antero-superior part of the body is placed the mantle, 
which covers the pulmonary chamber, and contains within 



200 INTRODUCTION. 

it a rudimentary, laminar, calcareous testa. The ante- 
rior part of the mantle is free and movable, and the head, 
indirectly through the retractor muscle of the buccal 
body, is capable of being retracted beneath it. On the 
right edge of the mantle the pulmonary orifice exists ; 
and at the posterior side of the latter the anal aperture 
is placed. Upon the right side of the head, a short dis- 
tance posterior to the superior tentacula of that side, the 
genital orifice is situated. The body has two distinct 
cavities ; the pulmonary chamber, containing a vascular 
net- work upon its surface, the heart, the renal organ, and 
the rectum ; and the visceral cavity, separated from the 
former by a muscular partition, containing the digestive 
and generative apparatus and the nervous centres. 

In Tebennoj^Jiorus the mantle covers the whole upper 
surface of the body, and encloses no testaceous rudiment. 
Its anterior edge is unattached, and the head is retractile 
beneath it. The pulmonary chamber is placed beneath 
the anterior part of it ; and the muscular membrane 
bounding the visceral cavity in a great part of its extent, 
is but loosely attached to the outer integument. 

In Vaginula, the body appears broad from the mantle, 
which encloses the whole body except the comparatively 
narrow pedal disc, forming a lateral, angvilar projection 
as it is inflected inferiorly to the margin of the pedal 
disc. In transverse section it is semi-elliptical, as repre- 
sented in figure 4. The mantle contains no testaceous 
rudiment. The head can be but slightly protruded. The 
respiratory orifice is situated on the right side of the tail, 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £01 

between it and the extremity of the pedal disc. The 
anal aperture opens at the posterior margin of the latter 
orifice. The generative apparatus has two distinct ex- 
ternal apertures, distant from each other. The male 
genital orifice is placed just beneath the mouth, between 
it and the blind sac, mchning to the right. The female 
orifice is situated upon the inferior part of the left side 
of the mantle, midway between the head and tail. 

As usual, the body has two catties, of which the pul- 
monary occupies a position at the right posterior part, 
beneath the mantle, and extending backwards on the 
right to the tail. 



Chapter ii. — general remarks on the terrestrial 
testaceous gasteropoda. 

A testaceous gasteropod resembles a slug with the 
greater portion of the viscera squeezed out upon the 
back, and arranged in a turbinate manner. The turbin- 
ate mass is always an exact mould of the testaceous cover- 
ing of the anunal; its length in the spiral direction holds 
no proportion with that of the foot, or that part of the 
body which the animal protrudes from the shell, and dif- 
fers very much, not only in different genera, but also in 
different species of the same genus. With an increase 
ni length a proportionate decrease in breadth is observa- 
ble, and vice versa. In Pupa it reaches its maximum 
length and narrowness ; in Succlnea it has the mini- 
mum length, and the greatest proportionate breadth. 

VOL. I. 25 



202 INTRODUCTION. 

When the foot is protruded from the shell, every part 
of the exterior surface of the turbinated mass is still in 
contact "with the interior surface of the latter, and is re- 
tained so by means of the comparatively capacious pul- 
monary chamber. When the foot is retracted, it is at 
the expense of the latter cavity ; so that the pulmonary 
chamber of the testaceous genera is as much larger than 
that of the naked genera as the size of the foot super- 
added, whilst the extent of the pulmonary net-work of 
blood-vessels remains the same. 

The testacea have a muscle which is pecuHar, namely, 
the retractor-muscle of the foot, which has its origin, in 
common with the retractors of the tentaculse and buccal 
body, from the columella of the shell. Narrow at its 
commencement, it increases in breadth, splits into several 
bands, and diverges as it descends to get its insertion 
into the whole of the inner margin of the excavation of 
the foot, excepting anteriorly, where its place is occupied 
by the retractor of the buccal body. 

The head occupies the anterior portion of the foot, and 
in Helix, Bidinms, Pujm, and Succinea oflFers nothing 
peculiar from that of Limax. In Cflandina a third pair 
of tentacular appendages exists. These are non-retractile, 
auriculate in form, and originate just postero-inferiorly to 
the base of the inferipr, retractile tentaculce, and project 
horizontally backward. 

The body of the testacea, like that of slugs, has two 
great cavities. The visceral cavity includes the greater 
part of the turbinated mass, and the excavation of the 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 203 

foot. The pulmonary chamber occupies a position on 
the outer side of the lower one to three whorls of the tur- 
binated mass. The collar apparently takes the place of 
the mantle in slugs. In all the genera it is attached 
around the base of the turbinated mass, and is perfora- 
ted on the right side by the pulmonary orifice. On the 
outer border of the latter the anal aperture is placed. 

As in slugs, the genital orifice is situated on the right 
side of the head, just posterior to the tentaculre. 

Chapter hi. — on the tegumentary covering of the 
terrestrial gasteropoda. 

Besides a testa capable of enclosing the whole body, 
which most of the terrestrial Gasteropoda possess, they 
have a thick envelop, composed of mucous and muscular 
membrane. The exterior, highly irritable and contractile 
investment consists of an actively secreting mucous mem- 
brane, (Figs. A, B, C, 1) with a substratum of interlaced 
muscular fibres (2). In the naked genera it is prettj^ 




Figure A. 

Fig. a is a diagram representing the disposition of the coverings of 
the body in Limax and Arion. 1. mucous lamina; 2. muscular subslratinn ; 
3. muscular peritoneum ; 4. visceral cavity ; 5. rudimentury testa ; U. pul- 
monary chamber. 



2G4 



INTRODUCTION. 



uniformly developed throughout, but is thickest upon the 
pedal disc, the tail, and the upper surface of the mantle, 
and thinnest upon the head, tentaculoe, and reflected 
border of the mantle. 




Figure B. 
In the testaceous genera, upon the part of the body 
corresponding to the interior of the shell, it appears as if 
the mucous layer had been pushed downwards to form 
the collar (fig. C, 1*) ; but it may be still traced over the 
surface of the turbinated portion, as a delicate, tessel- 
lated epithelium. 




Figure C. 

The mucous glands are very numerous in the mucous 

Fig. B, disposition of the tegumenta in Tebennophoriis. 1. mucous 
lamina; 2. muscular lamina; 3. peritoneum ; 4. visceral cavity; 5. pulmo- 
nary chamber ; G. interval between the two muscular layers. 

Fig. C, disposition of the tegumenta in Helix, Bulkmis, &c. The refer- 
ences are the same as in figs. A and B, except 1*, which is the collar. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 205 

layer ; its epithelial cells are flattened, from three to six 
sided, granular, and with large, round nuclei. 

The muscular substratum (figs. A, B, C, 2) of the 
mucous lamina is composed of unstriped fibres, arranged 
transversely, obliquely, and longitudinally. It is inflect- 
ed outwards beneath the mantle, in Limax and Avion, 
to form the outer parietes of the pulmonary chamber. 
Between this portion and the mucous layer is placed the 
rudimentary testa (fig. A, 6). In TehennopJwrus, it is 
inflected inwards (fig. B, 5) beneath the anterior portion 
of the mantle, to form the parietes of the pulmonary 
cavity. Its transverse fibres predominate within the 
tentaculiB, its longitudinal fibres, in the exterior pul- 
monary parietes of the testaceous genera, and especially 
accumulate on the outside of and parallel to the rectum, 
so as to serve as an efficient agent in the retraction of 
the collar, and an aid in the expulsion of mattefs from 
the rectum. 

Interior to the musculo-mucous investment of the body 
is a second covering, (figs. A, B, C, 3) which may be 
considered as a sort of peritoneum. It is a muscular 
membrane, and encloses the digestive and generative 
apparatus. It is usually pretty closely attached to the 
outer tegument, except in Tehennopliorus carolinensis, 
in which the two are separated in all parts of the body, 
except above the pedal disc, where they are firmly 
blended together, as in all Gasteropoda. It forms the 
partition or diaphragm between the visceral and pulmo- 
nary cavities. This membrane is composed of transverse 



OQg INTRODUCTION. 

and longitudinal, unstriped, nuclear fibres, and is the ori- 
gin of the especial retractor muscles of different organs. 



Chapter iv. — of the digestive apparatus. 

LiMAX. The orifice of the mouth is bounded by a 
pair of contractile lips, is situated at the anterior part of 
the head, and opens into the cavity of the buccal body. 
When the latter is retracted by its peculiar muscle, the 
oral orifice becomes lengthened into a canal by the in- 
version of a portion of the external integument. 

The buccal body is an irregularly oval-shaped, muscu- 
lar organ, resembling in appearance a gizzard, and con- 
tains "within it the masticatory apparatus. Just Tvithin 
the upper lip, attached to the entrance of the buccal 
body, is the dental plate, a crescentic, corneous lamina, 
used for cutting the food. Its anterior face is convex, 
and presents several vertical ridges. Into its upper 
convex edge, a band of muscular fibres is inserted, by the 
contraction of which the inferior, concave, cutting edge 
is advanced beyond the line of the upper. The middle 
of the cutting edge is extended into a short, conical 
toothlet. This plate is brought into view when the ani- 
mal is eating, by the advancement of the buccal body. 
The floor of the cavity is occupied with a gouge-shaped, 
muscular tongue, the tip and upper surface of which are 
free, and are covered by a corneous lamina studded with 
a great number of conical dentures, with the points pro- 
jecting backwards, arranged in transverse rows. These 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 207 

teeth preserve the same form in the lines from before 
backwards ; the central line ahvajs differs from the 
others, and the teeth also vary gradually in form and 
size as they pass off from the central line laterally. They 
also vary slightly in form in different species. This 
lamina protrudes from the buccal body posteriorly, into 
a short, rounded, protuberant, blind sac, within which it 
appears to undergo a constant growth, as it is worn away 
by attrition anteriorly ; for its use appears not only to 
facilitate the passage of the food onwards to the oesoph- 
agus, but also to act as a sort of rasp for triturating it, by 
means of the powerful muscles composing the buccal body. 
Into the posterior, inferior part of the buccal body, below 
the blind sac of the lingual lamina, is inserted, in a trans- 
verse, curved line, its retractor muscle. This muscle has 
its origin, in common with the retractors of the tentacles, 
from the muscular investment of the visceral cavity, pos- 
terior to the pulmonary cavity, and to the right of the 
rectum. 

The oesophagus proceeds from the upper, posterior part 
of the buccal body backward to the stomach. It is short, 
and dilates gradually into the latter. 

The stomach is a capacious, membranous receptacle, 
when extended being two-thirds the length of the animal. 
In L. variegata and L. agrestis, anteriorly it is dilated, 
and elongated-oval in form, posteriorly it is intestiniform. 
In L. campestris, it is nearly uniformly cylindrical 
throughout. Where the stomach terminates in the small 
intestine, it makes a turn forward with the latter, pro=- 



208 INTRODUCTION. 

ducing, in L. variegata and L. campestris, a sort of cul- 
de-sac posteriorly. Into the angle formed bj the stomach 
and intestine, on each side, opens a biliary duct, "which, 
in L. agrestis, however, are more removed toward the 
small intestines. 

The intestine forms a single convolution among the 
lobes of the liver, and then passes obliquely forward from 
the left to the right side, to join the rectum. It is capa- 
cious, and pretty uniformly cylindrical throughout. 

About the middle of the oblique portion going to join 
the rectum, in L. agrestis, opens a short, cylindrical cul- 
de-sac. In L. variegata the intestine, upon reaching 
the retractor muscles of the buccal body and tentacles, 
■winds around their origin, turns backward a short dis- 
tance, and then again forward to the rectum, producing 
in this way a sigmoid flexure. From the termination of 
the latter in the straight portion, there proceeds back- 
ward as far as the termination of the visceral mass, a 
long, cylindrical cul-de-sac. 

The rectum is short and straight, and penetrates into 
the pulmonary cavity, upon the right side of which it 
proceeds to the pulmonary orifice, at which it terminates 
by the anal aperture. 

The salivary glands are two in number, flat, oval or 
irregular in outline, of a grayish pink hue, and are situ- 
ated upon the anterior parietes of the stomach. They 
are composed of several lobuli, which are conglomerated. 
From each gland proceeds a duct, along the oesophagus 
to the buccal body, into which they open on each side of 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 209 

the entrance of the oesophagus. In L. campestris, the 
two glands are conjoined, so as to form a collar around 
the commencement of the stomach. 

The liver, by far the largest viscus in the body, 
occupies a position at the posterior part of the latter. 
It is of a brownish color, and consists of two principal 
lobes, an anterior and a posterior, which are further 
divided, the anterior into three or four, and the poste- 
rior into two lobes. Each lobe is composed of a number 
of lobuli held together by bloodvessels. From the con- 
vergence of branches, an hepatic duct is formed for each 
principal lobe, which opens in the side of the angle formed 
at the termination of the stomach in the intestine. The 
posterior cul-de-sac of the stomach usually contains some 
bile, which is a thin, glairy, drab-colored fluid. 

AriOjST. The digestive apparatus offers but little 
peculiarity from that of Limax. The retractor muscle 
of the buccal body is not so strong, and is divided into 
two lateral bands. The oesophagus is narrower and 
lonsrer. In the form of the stomach and absence of a 
cul-de-sac to the small intestine, it resembles Limax 
campestris. The rectum, in its course to the pulmonary 
orifice, perforates the renal organ. 

Tebennophorus. The buccal body has a conspicu- 
ous curve downwards, and the buccal pouch of the 
lingual lamina is longer than in Limax or Arion, and 
curves upwards from the postero-inferior part of the 

VOL. I. 26 



210 INTRODUCTION. 

buccal body. The retractor muscle of the latter is split 
into two bands as in Arion, but one stronger. There are 
also two small retractor muscles to the lower lip. The 
oesophagus is comparatively long. The stomach is cylin- 
drical and sacculated, and, posteriorly with the small 
intestine, forms a wide cul-de-sac. The small intestine 
is like that of L. cmnpestris and Arion. The salivary 
glands occupy a position on each side of the oesophagus. 
The ducts are tortuous. 

Vaginula. The buccal body possesses no retrac- 
tor muscle. The dental plate is broad, and, upon the 
anterior surface, has a pectinate appearance, from the 
numerous ridges upon it. Its cutting edge is devoid of 
the conical toothlet. The oesophagus is moderately long 
and capacious. The stomach is cyhndrical and saccu- 
lated, and posteriorly forms a deep, capacious cul-de-sac, 
independent of the small intestine. It is strongly mus- 
cular and shining, the transverse muscular fibres being 
very distinct. The anterior hepatic duct opens into the 
angle formed by the cul-de-sac and the intestine, the 
posterior into the fundus of the latter. The small intes- 
tine is pretty uniformly cylindrical, and holds the usual 
course to near its termination in the rectum, Avhen to 
reach the latter it turns abruptly backward, and joins it 
on the right side, just posterior to the middle of the 
body. The rectum is straight, and proceeds backwards, 
along the right side of the body, within the pulmonary 
cavity, and terminates between the extremity of the tail 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. Oj^J 

and the pedal disk, at the side of the pulmonary orifice. 
The salivary glands are arborescent, or fasciculated in 
appearance. The ducts are short and delicate. The 
lobuli of the liver are looser, or more separated, than in 
the preceding genera. 

Helix. The buccal body has the same appearance, 
generally, as in the slugs. The retractor muscle is 
much stronger, and has its origin in common with the 
retractor of the foot and tentaculse, from the columella of 
the shell ; at its insertion it forms a semicircle around the 
posterior inferior part of the buccal body. The pouch of 
the lingual lamina is always a prominent object. In H. 
cellaria and H. coneava^ihe buccal body is proportionately 
nearly twice the length of that of the other species. The 
dental plate varies in some degree in different species : in 
H, ligera, H. intertexta, &c. it is smooth anteriorly, and 
in the middle projects downwards into a large, conical 
toothlet ; in H. albolabris, H. tridentata, &c. the ante- 
rior surface presents a number of curved ridges, each of 
which projects inferiorly as a sort of toothlet. 

The oesophagus is generally long and narrow. In 
some species it is unusually long and contracted, as in 
H. concava, R. cellaria, H. hirsuta, IT. perspectiva, etc. ; 
in others it is long, and dilated in the middle, as in S. 
aurieulata ; in many it is capacious, and gradually passes 
into the stomach, as in M. exoleta, etc. 

The stomach is usually cylindroid, and more or less 
sacculated. The posterior cul-de-sac is always present. 



212 INTRODUCTION. 

The small intestine comes off from the stomach at a 
very acute angle, and into the latter two hepatic ducts 
empty. It is pretty uniformly cylindrical, and forms, as 
in slugs, a single convolution or a sigmoid curve, among 
the lobes of the liver, and penetrates to the pulmonary 
cavity at its right posterior angle. The rectum, in all 
the testaceous genera, corresponds in length to the pul- 
monary cavity, the right side of which it occupies to the 
pulmonary orifice, at the outer border of which it ter- 
minates by the anal aperture. It is cylindrical, usually 
wider than the small intestine, and is frequently some- 
what sacculated. Upon the outer side of the rectum, 
running its whole length, is a band of muscular fibres, 
the object of which is, apparently, the retraction of the 
collar, the shortening of the rectum, and the expulsion 
of its contents. 

The salivary glands are generally elongated, oval, with 
lobed edges. They are usually united together and 
situated on the oesophagus, or commencement of the sto- 
mach. When the oesophagus is narroAV they surround 
it ; when dilated, they occupy one-half or two-thirds of 
its surface. The salivary ducts are long and large. 

The liver is four lobed, three of which lobes are ante- 
rior or inferior, and the fourth posterior or superior. The 
fourth lobe, conjoined with the testicle, forms the very 
summit of the turbinated mass. The ducts from the 
anterior ^obes converge to form a single trunk, which, 
with that from the posterior lobe, open into the junction, 
or angle, of the cul-de-sac of the stomach with the intes- 
tine. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 213 

BuLiMUS. The digestive apparatus in B. dealbaius, 
B. decoUatus, and B. virgidatus, resembles that of H. 
aurieulata; the oesophagus is long, narrow, and dilated 
in the middle ; the stomach is cylindroid, and more or 
less sacculated. The stomach of B.fasciatus resembles 
that of Limax variegata, being large find capacious ante- 
riorly, cylindrical and sacculated posteriorly. The rec- 
tum is capacious and sacculated. 

Pupa. A characteristic of this genus is the very great 
proportionate length of the viscera, corresponding to the 
numerous whorls of the shell. The retractor muscle of 
the buccal mass is long and strong. The dental plate 
has two central, conical toothlets in its cutting edge. 
The oesophagus is very long and narrow. The stomach 
is very long, and even forms a fold upon itself. The rec- 
tum is very long and sacculated ; the muscle on its outer 
side is well developed. 

SucciNEA. A characteristic of this genus, the re- 
verse of Pupa, is the great breadth and shortness of the 
viscera. The dental plate has an upper, quadrangular 
piece, superadded to the ordinary, crescentic plate. 
The stomach resembles that of Limax variegata. Its 
mucous membrane presents several longitudinal rugae. 
The small intestine does not undergo the same relative 
diminution with the other viscera. The rectum is very 
short, and, from the transverse position of the pulmo- 
nary cavity, it is placed along the right of the breadth, 



214 INTRODUCTION, 

instead of the length of the latter, as usual. The salivary 
glands are situated one on each side of the commencement 
of the stomach ; their ducts, just before opening into the 
buccal body, become dilated. 

Glandina. The oral orifice is triangular, and bounded 
by three papillated lips, one upper and two lateral. The 
buccal body is a very long muscular cylinder, a little 
curved downward at the posterior part. There is no 
cul-de-sac for the lingual lamina protruding behind ; and 
the retractor muscle is divided into three fasciculi, one 
central and passing into the buccal body posteriorly, the 
others lateral and inserted as usual. Externally, it has 
a very thin investment of longitudinal muscular fibres, 
continuous with those of the retractor muscle and the 
origin of the especial muscles of the tongue. This layer 
is very delicate and transparent ; and at the anterior 
third of the buccal body, laterally and inferiorly, it pre- 
sents several fasciculi, which pass to the tegumentary lips. - 
Beneath the exterior covering, and readily seen through 
it, is a thick and strongly fasciculated, transverse layer of 
muscular fibres. When the buccal body is laid open the 
oral orifice is found to be continuous with a triangular ca- 
nal with smooth sides, running one-third its length. At 
the posterior superior termination of the canal, is the open- 
ing of the oesophagus and orifices of the salivary ducts. 
There is no dental plate. The posterior two-thirds of the 
buccal body is occupied by a long oval organ, composed 
of numerous,' strong fascicuh of muscular fibres, arising 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 215 

laterally and infcriorlj at the posterior part of the buccal 
body ; the former passing inwards and forwards, the lat- 
ter forwards to the anterior extremity of the organ, which 
is free, and projects into the triangular, oval canal. The 
lateral fasciculi leave between them superiorly an inter- 
stice, at the bottom of which is found the lingual lamina, 
in the form of a tube, closed posteriorly, and open and 
reflected downwards and backwards upon the anterior, 
free tip of the organ. Into the posterior extremity of 
the lamina, the middle fasciculus of the retractor mus- 
cle of the buccal body is inserted ; and, just anterior 
to this insertion, a small, attrahent fasciculus, arising 
from the roof of the buccal body, posterior to the orifice 
of the oesophagus, which gets to the lamina by means of 
the interstice of the muscular organ superiorly. The 
teeth of the lingual lamina are arranged diagonally, from 
the middle line, in parallel rows, passing from within out- 
wards. 

The oesophagus issues from a fissure at the upper poste- 
rior line of the anterior third of the buccal body. It is 
long and cylindrical, and rather wider at its termination 
than at its origin. The stomach is irregularly cylindroid, 
and has a cul-de-sac at its commencement, projecting an- 
terior to the entrance of the oesophagus. The small intes- 
tine is capacious. 

The salivary glands are conjoined, so as to form a cir- 
cular collar around the posterior part of the oesophagus. 
The salivary ducts are long, and enter the same fissure 
of the buccal body at which the oesophagus issues. The 



21(3 INTRODUCTION. 

anterior lobes of the liver are comparatively very small, 
■while the posterior lobe is correspondingly large ; and to 
the whole there is but a single duct. 



Chapter v. — observations on the tissues of the 
digestive apparatus. 

The mucous membrane of the alimentary canal is 
usually smooth throughout. In the stomach it frequently 
presents a number of transverse folds, corresponding to 
the contractions which produce the sacculated appearance 
of the organ ; and in several species of different genera 
it presents a few longitudinal rugoe, as in Limax v alle- 
gata, Bulimiis fasciatus, Selix exoleta, etc. In its 
whole extent it is formed of a columnar epithelium and 
a nucleolated-nucleated basement membrane. The col- 
umnar cells of the epithelium are long and pyramidal, 
the upper part or base being broad, and the attached ex- 
tremity very narrow. They are filled with a very fine, 
indistinct, granular matter, intermingled with coarser, 
highly reflective granules. Each contains an oval, gran- 
ular nucleus, with a minute nucleolus. 

The muscular investment of the intestinal canal is 
strongest upon the stomach and rectum. In Var/inuhis, 
Pupa incana, etc. it is strong and shining upon the sto- 
mach. It consists of two layers, an internal transverse 
and an external longitudinal. They are both composed 
of white, shining, strap-shaped bands, with the extremities 
pointed and closely adapted to each other. None of 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £17 

the transverse bands surround the stomach, all bemg 
much too short. They are indistinctly granular in struc- 
ture, and each contains one or two elongated nuclei. 

The lobules of the salivary gland are composed of the 
dilated commencements of the ducts, lined with soft, 
granular cells, which are oval in form, and contain a 
round, granular nucleus with a minute nucleolus. The 
basement membrane of the salivary ducts is amorphous. 
The epithelial cells lining the trunks bear considerable 
resemblance to those found in their follicular commence- 
ment. Outside of the basement membrane, twine nar- 
row, muscular fibres in various directions. They are 
nucleated, and where the nuclei exist are wider than at 
the intervening parts. 

The lobuli of the liver are composed of the rounded 
commencement of the biliary ducts, and are lined with 
polygonal cells, which become globular on the removal of 
pressure. The hepatic cells contain a fine, granular 
matter, fine and large oil-globules, and a round, nucleo- 
lated nucleus. 



Chapter vi. — of the generative app^jiatus. 

All the terrestrial Gasteropoda under consideration are 
monoecious, or hermaphroditic, though none are capable 
of self impregnation. They are also all oviparous. 

LiMAX. The testicle is a round, or oval body, par- 
tially concealed by the liver ; it is brown in color, and 

VOL. I. 21 



218 INTRODUCTION. 

has the appearance of being composed of rounded acini. 
In L. variegata, it is lobulated. The epididymis is an 
undulated, or moderately tortuous tube, leading from the 
testicle to the inner side of the junction of the ovary with 
the prostate gland. It opens into a groove upon the inner 
side of the interior of the oviduct which is continuous, at 
its inferior extremity, with the vas deferens. Opening 
into the termination of the epididymis, and lying against 
the inner side of the ovary, is a small, compound, folli- 
cular body, Avhich appears to be common to all the terres- 
trial Gasteropoda. The prostate gland is a white, or 
cream-colored body, occupying the inner side of the whole 
length of the oviduct. It has a transverse, striated ap- 
pearance, and numerous openings into the groove leading 
from the epididymis to the vas deferens. 

The vas deferens is a comparatively short tube, pass- 
ing from the prostate gland to the penis. In L. varie- 
gata, it joins the summit of the latter ; in L. agrestis 
and L. campestris, it enters near the base. 

The penis, in L. variegata, is a long, cylindroid, irre- 
gular body, lying at the right anterior part of the vis- 
ceral cavity, and joining at its termination a short cloaca. 
Into its summit is inserted the retractor muscle, which 
has its origin from the muscular investment of the vis- 
ceral cavity, just posterior to the position of the pulmo- 
nary cavity. The interior of the penis is lined by mucous 
membrane, its exterior of muscular membrane. In L. 
agrestis and L. cajnpestjis, the organ which corresponds 
to the penis of L. variegata becomes of a someAvhat pro- 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 219 

blematical character. In L. agrestis^ it is an elongated, 
conical organ, with a protuberant base. Its summit is 
divided into three coeca ; the retractor muscle is 
inserted into its side. Upon the interior it presents 
several longitudinal folds of mucous membrane, and at 
its. lower part, corresponding to the protuberance of the 
base, an oval, pointed papilla. In L. eampestris^ the 
organ is spiral, and has but a single pointed summit. 

The ovary is a large, white, semi-elUptic organ, usually 
more or less curved and lobulated, and situated at the 
summit of the oviduct. In L. agrestis and L. campestris 
it is always two-lobed, or double. The oviduct is a long, 
wide, soft, white, tortuous, sacculated tube, passing from 
the ovary to the vagina. The neck or portion immediately 
joining the vagina, commences usually where the prostate 
gland terminates, and is contracted to less than half the 
calibre of the upper portion of the tube. Its interior sur- 
face exhibits a number of transverse folds, corresponding 
to the contractions which produce the sacculated appear- 
ance of the organ, and upon the inner side upon each 
side of the spermatic groove, or longitudinal fold. 

The generative bladder, in L. variegata, is a large 
pointed, oval receptacle, opening by a very short, wide 
tube or duct, into the vagina. In L. agrestis it is large, 
elongated oval, and opens by a short duct into the angle 
formed by the junction of the vagina with the male 
portion of the generative apparatus. In L. campestris 
it is a small oval sac, with a longer, narrow duct, open- 
ing into the tube leading from the penis to the cloaca. 



220 INTRODUCTION. 

In all three species of lAmax, the cloaca is a short canal 
opening at the generative orifice on the right side of the 
head. 

Arion. The generative apparatus resembles more 
that of i. variegata than the other species. The penis 
is cylindrical, dilated at base, and has its retractor mus- 
cle inserted into the latter point. The generative blad- 
der is large, oval, pointed at summit, and has a very 
short but muscular duct, joined midway by the vagina. 
At the latter junction is inserted a second retractor mus- 
cle. The cloaca is lono; and dilated in the middle. 



o 



Tebexnophorus. The testicle lies upon the right 
side, partly concealed by the liver ; it is round and loloii- 
lated. The epididymis is more tortuous than in the pre- 
ceding. The vas deferens is very long, tortuous, and 
muscular. It joins the penis at its summit, and has the 
retractor muscle inserted into it the length of the penis 
above the latter. The penis is irregularly eyhndroid, 
bent at its summit. 

The ovary is exceedingly lobulated. The oviduct is 
tortuous, wide, aud very much sacculated. The prostate 
gland is longer than in Limax or Avion. The genera- 
tive bladder is large, globular, or nearly so. Its duct is 
rather less than half the length of the oviduct. At its 
junction with the neck of the latter, an oval, muscular 
organ exists, the dart sac. AVithin the latter at the bot- 
tom, is a hemispherical papilla, upon the summit of which 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £21 

is placed a wliite, calcareous, calcarate dart. At the 
junction of the vagina, common to the neck of the ovi- 
duct, duct of the generative bladder, and the dart sac, 
with the penis, there are two short retractor muscles 
inserted. The cloaca is narrow and cylindrical, and has 
surrounding two-thirds of its middle, a thick, glandular 
organ. Interiorly, the penis, cloaca, etc. have a longi- 
tudinally rugous surface. 

Vaginulus. a remarkable peculiarity of this genus 
is the removal of the male and female portions of the sex- 
ual apparatus from each other. The former, except the 
testicle and prostate gland, occupies the usual position, 
but opens externally between the mouth and olfactory 
orifice ; the latter is placed in the middle inferior part of 
the \asceral cavity, and opens exteriorly on the right 
side, inferiorly just posterior to the middle of the body. 

The testicle is situated between the posterior part 
of the stomach and the liver, on the right side. It is 
not lobulated, but has the same aciniform arrangement 
as m the preceding genera. The epididymis is mode- 
rately tortuous, and becomes the vas deferens at the 
junction of the ovary with the oviduct. The vas deferens 
takes a remarkable course to get to the penis. It is, at 
first, attached for a short distance to the commencement 
of the oviduct, which it leaves, and then winds around its 
lower extremity, where it is joined by a comparatively 
very small prostatic gland. It continues its attachment 
to the lower part of the oviduct to the junction of the 



222 INTRODUCTION. 

latter with the duct of the generative bladder, where it 
receives a small duct from the duct of the latter organ, 
and then passes nearly to the external female orifice, 
where it turns abruptly forwards between the muscular 
peritoneum and the right edge of the podal disk, and 
continues this course to the head. It now turns abruptly 
backwards to the right, and again appears within the 
visceral cavity, and passes to the base of the penis. 

The penis is a conico-cylindroid, contorted organ, con- 
tained within a thin, muscular sheath. Its apex presents 
a small, round papilla, or glans ; and into its base is in- 
serted the retractor-muscle, which arises just anterior to 
the pulmonary cavity. The lower part of the preputial 
sheath of the penis is joined by the common duct of a 
highly developed, multifid vesicle. This latter organ 
consists of twenty-five long, narrow, cylindrical. Wind 
tubes, contorted at their termination, and opening sepa- 
rately into a common tube, containing, in the specimen 
examined, attached to its bottom, a narrow, cylindroid 
organ, which, probably, may have been an uncalcified 
dart. 

The tube formed by the prgeputium and the duct of 
the multifid vesicle, as previously mentioned, opens ex- 
teriorly immediately beneath the mouth. The ovary is 
small and unusually lobulated. The oviduct is a narrow, 
cylindrical tube, which winds forwards and then back 
again so as to form a double spiral, after which it makes 
a curve downwards, and is joined by the duct of the 
generative bladder. The latter organ is globular ; its 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £23 

duct IS short, graduallj increases in breadth, and is spi- 
rally twisted. From the duct, as previously mentioned, 
passes a small offset to the vas deferens. Tlie common 
duct of the bladder and oviduct, or vagina, is cylindri- 
cal, and, just before terminating, is joined by a short, 
wide, tube, derived from a large, oval sac, which is filled 
with a delicate, reticulated substance. This sac is pecu- 
liar to Vagimdas ; its use is problematical. 

The position of the female orifice of generation has 
been already stated. 

Helix. The testicle, very unlike that of slugs, is 
imbedded or commingled with the parenchyma of the 
posterior or superior lobe of the liver ; and, instead of 
having an aciniform appearance, it is composed of fasci- 
cuh of short coeca. It is usually of a lighter color than 
the fiver. The epididymis is long, and generally very 
much convoluted, and contains a white, silky, tenacious, 
substance, often distending the tube to a considerable 
degree, composed of spermatozoa. At its junction with 
the prostate gland, it always receives the duct of a small 
accessory gland, composed, in different species of Helix, 
of from three to nine acini. 

The prostate gland is generally larger than in the 
Limaces ; in H. ezoleta it is unusually large. 

The vas deferens generally corresponds in length with 
the curve passing from the termination of the prostate 
gland downwards to the cloaca, and thence to the sum- 
mit of the penis. In H. exoleta and H. albolabris it is 



224 INTRODUCTION. 

considerably longer, and in the latter presents several 
large convolutions. In H. intertexta, IT. ligera, H. gu- 
laris, and II. suppressa, it is much shorter. Generally, 
it is a white, narrow, cylindrical, frequently undulated 
tube. Sometimes it is distinctly and strongly muscular, 
as in H. alholabris, H. tridentata, II. elevata, etc. In 
II. fuliginosa its lower part is dilated to the diameter of 
the penis, and is strongly muscular. In H. albolabris, 
H. tridentata, and II. ezoleta, at its commencement it 
presents a dilated and glandular appearance. In M. 
solita7'ia it is much dilated, annulated, and glandular at 
its termination. In all instances except in H. cellaria 
and H. alternata, it joins the summit of the penis ; in 
the two latter it joins the penis at the side, very near 
the summit. 

The penis varies very much in form and size ; most 
usually it partakes of a conico-cylindroid form. In H. 
sayi, H. texasiana, H. injlecta, and 11. auriculata, it 
is very large and long, cylindrical, collapsed, and flaccid. 
In H. concava it is long, clavate, and bipartite at the 
summit. In H. alternata, H. persjjectiva, and H. solita- 
ria, it is short, stout, and clavate. In H. alholahris, H. 
trideyitata, H. multilineata, H. arhorea, H. dentifera, 
and H. palliata, it has a thick, preputial membrane, 
originating around its base, and rising upwards so as to 
envelop it for one or two-thirds of its extent. In H. pro- 
funda the base of the penis protrudes into a sheath join- 
ing the cloaca, in the form of a cone with its apex bent 
upon itself. In H. ligera, H. intertexta, and H. sup- 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 225 

' pressa, it is wholly enveloped in a sheath derived from a 
tubular offset from the duct of the generative bladder. 

The muscular tunic of the penis is thick and strong. 
The internal lining mucous membrane usually presents a 
number of large rugge, longitudinal and oblique ; fre- 
quently there is but a single, large, longitudinal fold, as 
in H. alternata, IT. albolabris, etc. At the point of en- 
trance of the vas deferens there is generally one or two 
pendant j valve-like folds of the lining membrane. 

In S. albolabris, II. tridentata, and H. onuItiUneata, 
the surface of the membrane is everywhere distinctly 
papillated ; in the others it is smooth. 

The penis of //. cellaria on the outside presents a row 
of minute, round, glandular bodies. 

The retractor muscle is in all cases, except in H. soli- 
taria, inserted into the summit of the penis, or into the 
vas deferens near its termination in the latter. In the 
excepted case, it is inserted into the side of the penis, 
above its middle. In H. multilineata there are some 
accessory fibres passing from the latter to the prepu- 
tium ; in H. jjrofunda to the base of the penis ; in H. 
albolabris, tridentata, etc. from the vas deferens to the 
preputium. The penis joins at its base the cloaca. 

The ovary has the same general form and color as in 
slugs, but rarely presents any thing more than a trace of 
lobuli, usually having a uniform, homogeneous appear- 
ance. The oviduct does not differ from that of the slugs. 
Its neck is usually narrow, and of variable length, and is 
joined at the lower part by the duct of the genital blad- 

voL. I. 28 



226 INTRODUCTION. 

der, to form the vagina. In H. concava and H. multi- 
lineata, the neck is long, dilated at its lower part, and 
strongly muscular, and its internal surface presents a 
number of longitudinal rugae. In H. profunda and S". 
fuliginosa, it is long, cylindrical, and strongly muscular. 
The genital bladder, constantly existing, presents con- 
siderable variation in the form, size, and length of the 
duct. It is generally subrotund, oval, or pyriform in 
shape, and large. In H. solitaria the duct is wide, as 
long as the oviduct, and dilated at its lower part. In H. 
jperspectiva it is as long as the oviduct, and narrow. In 
E. alternata, H. ligera, H. intertexta, IT. concava, H. 
snppressa, and H. gularis, it is rather more than half 
the length of the oviduct. In the remaining species gen- 
erally, the bladder reclines upon the lower part of the 
prostate gland, and its duct is about the length of the 
neck of the oviduct. In II. vmltilineata it does not 
reach the prostate gland, and so gradually passes into its 
duct as to be a mere, long, coecal tube. In H. her- 
landeriana the duct of the bladder is as short as that of 
Arion. Usually, the surface of the bladder is smooth ; 
in H. profunda and H. exoleta it is transversely folded ; 
in H. fuliginosa it is regularly, longitudinally folded. 
In H. concava and H. multilineata, the duct of the 
bladder at its termination dilates, and is strongly muscu- 
lar. In H. solitaria the lower third is dilated. In E. 
fuliginosa and ff. p)rofunda, it is strongly muscular the 
greater part of its extent. In H. albolabris, H. palliata, 
H. tridentata, etc. it is dilated to the size of the bladder, 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £27 

is strongly muscular, and internally presents a number 
of regular, longitudinal folds, sometimes undulated at the 
sides, extending to the lining of the bladder in the form 
of line-like pUcae. In H. ligera, IT. intertexta, H. 
gularis, and IT. supjjressa, an offset from the duct of the 
bladder passes down, and encloses the penis, dart sac, 
and cloaca. 

The vagina, or common duct of the oviduct and duct 
of the genital bladder, holds no correspondence with the 
length of the penis ; it is always shorter, usually not 
more than one-third the length, and is also narrower. 
In H. fidiginosa, it is surrounded by a thick, glandulous 
body. 

In H. ligera, H. intertexta, H. gularis, and H. sup- 
pressa, there exists, opening into the cloaca, a curved, 
cylindrical, strongly muscular dart sac, longer and nar- 
rower than the penis. The bottom of the tube, for one- 
fourth the length of the latter, is occupied by the papilla 
from which arises the dart. The muscular layer, for 
more than half the length of the tube, at the middle of the 
latter, closely envelops the dart, and terminates abruptly 
below in a sort of papilla, from which the point of the dart 
projects into the lower part of the tube. The dart is a very 
long, narrow, curved, cylindrical, tubular, flexible, calca- 
reous spiculum, terminating in a sharp, spear point. At 
the base of the dart, there opens into the dart sac, in IT. 
ligera and H. supjjressa, a single, short, pyriform follicle, 
the simplest homologue of the multifid vesicle. In H. in- 
tertexta and H. gularis, there is a pair of such folhcles, 



228 INTRODUCTION. 

but longer. Into the summit of the dart sac is inserted 
a retractor muscle, originating from the angle formed by 
the division of the duct of the genital bladder into two 
parts. Opening into the tube which leads from the penis 
to the cloaca, in H. Berlanderiana, is a cylindrical, 
curved, muscular organ, about one-half the length and as 
thick as the penis, which is probably a dart sac, although 
in the specimen dissected no dart was found. In H. con- 
cava^ opening into the cloaca, is a short, rounded, muscu- 
lar cavity, probably a dart sac, which, however, in the 
individuals dissected, were also destitute of the organ. 

The cloaca, or common receptacle of the termination 
of the male and female organs of generation, is a short, 
"wide, muscular tube, holding no relationship with the 
length of the penis, and opening exteriorly on the right 
side of the head. 

In many species of Helix, the anatomy of the genera- 
tive apparatus is so very similar, that they appear to 
differ in nothing but size. Thus, H. alholahris, H. 
tridentata, H. dentifera, H. palliata, IT. arhorea, and 
H. fallax, are alike ; JI. intertexta, H. gidaris, S. 
suppressa, and H. ligera are also alike, except that the 
two latter have but a single vesicle to the dart sac, while 
the former have a pair. H. auricidata, H. texasiana, 
and S. injleeta, are alike, and also iZ". thyroidus and H. 
pulcJiella. 

It is a very remarkable fact in the special anatomy of 
the generative apparatus of the genus Helix, that while 
the flagellate form of the penis and those accessory 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 229 

oriians, tlie dart sac and multifid vesicles, are so com- 
mon in European species, they are very rare in American 
species. In not one of the latter does the flagellate form 
of penis exist. A rudiment, or simplest condition of the 
multifid vesicles, only exists in four species ; S. inter- 
texta and H. gularis, in which there is a single pair of 
folhcles, and H. ligera and H. siqjj^ressa, in which there 
is but one short follicle. The dart sac exists certainly 
in only the four latter species, probably in II. berland- 
eriana, and doubtfully in H. concava. 

BuLiMUS. In B. fasciatus the penis is long, cylindri- 
cal, and strongly muscular. The vas deferens joins it 
near the summit ; and the retractor muscle, which is 
very long, is inserted into the latter. The oviduct is 
long, and its central part presents the peculiarity of be- 
ing colored brown. The genital bladder is ovate, situated 
near the ovary, and its duct is narrow, and as long as 
the oviduct. The vagina is broad and muscular. At 
the base of the penis, there opens a short, cylindrical 
duct, derived from a single, multiBd vesicle, which pre- 
sents six or seven rounded or ovate divisions. There is 
no dart sac. 

In B. dealbatus the penis is very long ; its upper por- 
tion is narrow and very tortuous, and flagellate in appear- 
ance ; although the true flagellum, or the free portion of 
the summit of the penis beyond the insertion of the re- 
tractor muscle, is very short. The lower third of the 
penis is dilated, and presents an annular constriction ; 



230 INTRODUCTION. 

at its base it is enveloped by a sbort prepuce. The vas 
deferens follows the course of the penis nearly to its 
summit. The genital bladder is oval ; its duct as long 
as the oviduct. 

In B. virgulatus the penis is long, irregularly cylin- 
droid, and has its base enclosed in a short prepuce. The 
vas deferens terminates in, and the retractor muscle is 
inserted into, its summit. The genital bladder is oval ; 
its duct is not more than one-third the length of the ovi- 
duct, and dilates as it passes downwards. 

In B. decoUatus the penis is short, conic o-cylindroid, 
and simple. The vas deferens enters near its base ; the 
retractor muscle is inserted into its summit. The geni- 
tal bladder is small ; its duct is narrow, and not longer 
than the neck of the oviducL. 

Pupa. In P. incana the penis is short, narrow, and 
cylindrical. The vas deferens is of a very great length 
when compared with what it is usually in the other 
genera. Its lower part, about the length of the penis, 
is dilated to the size of the latter organ, is strongly mus- 
cular, and terminates at the base of the penis. The 
retractor muscle is inserted into the summit of the latter. 
The lining membrane of the penis presents a single, longi- 
tudinal fold. At the base of the penis is a short, muscu- 
lar sac, or protuberance, probably a dart sac, although 
the individual dissected possessed no such instrument. 
The genital bladder is oval ; its duct is as long as the 
oviduct, and midway receives a long, narrow duct, de- 



I 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 231 

rived from a granular, glandular organ combined with 
the testicle in the posterior lobe of the liver. 

SucciNEA. The testicle is not separated into distinct 
fasciculi bj the parenchyma of the liver as in Helix, but 
forms a single mass. The epididymis is very much con- 
voluted, and appears always to be distended with sperm- 
atic matter. The prostate gland is unusually short, 
occupying the upper half only of the length of the ovi- 
duct, and is thick, clavate, and more or less colored by 
pigmentum nigrum cells upon the surface. The penis 
is long, cylindroid, curved downward at its upper part, 
and is joined at its summit by the vas deferens. The 
retractor muscle is inserted into the penis a short dis- 
tance below its summit. The genital bladder is large 
and globular ; its duct is nearly as long as the oviduct, 
and is narrow. The vagina is moderately long and mus- 
cular. The cloaca is short. 

Glandina. The testicle is an oval mass, separated 
from the Uver as in the Limaces. The epididymis ap- 
pears from a hilum in the side of the testicle ; at first 
but slightly tortuous, it becomes convoluted just before 
ending. Its accessory glandula is large. The penis is 
long, large, and clavate, very gradually enlarging from 
the base to the summit. The vas deferens, which joins 
the latter point, is long, moderately tortuous, and wide. 
The retractor muscle is inserted into it near its ter- 
mination in the penis. The bladder is oval, constricted ; 



232 INTRODUCTION. 

its duct is as long as the oviduct. The vagina is 
moderately broad. The cloaca is short. The exte- 
rior generative orifice is on the right side of the head, 
considerably posterior to the inferior tentaculse. 



Chapter vii, — general remarks upon the junction 
OF different portions of the generative appara- 
tus, AND THE STKUCTUKE OF ITS TISSUES. 

The testicle was mistaken by Swammerdam, Cuvier, 
and others for the ovary, and the latter organ and pros- 
tate gland for two portions of the testicle. A micro- 
scopic examination of these different organs at once, 
very easily settles their true nature ; although, even 
without this mode of analysis, we would suppose the epi- 
didymis would indicate the character of the gland of 
which it is the duct, and leave the remaining two organs 
to be considered as belonging to the female apparatus. 
In Hehx, the structure of the testicle consists of dense 
fasciculi of short coecal pouches, which are simple, bifur- 
cate, or trifurcate. These contain polygonal spermato- 
phori, which are finely granular with a round nucleus, or 
filled with granular globules of uniform size, or with coils 
or bunches or fasciculi of spermatozoa. The epididymis 
always contains, more or less, and is frequently dis- 
tended with, a white, silky, filamentous substance, com- 
posed of spermatozoa. The latter consist of very delicate 
and, comparatively, enormously long filaments, terminat- 
ing, at one extremity, in a thickened head. They vary 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 233 

in length in different species of these gasteropods. The 
head assumes two principal forms ; it is either sigmoid 
and pointed, as in H. alholabns, H. multilineata, etc., or 
else it is spiral and pointed, as in H. alternata, H. soli- 
taria, etc. In the vas deferens, the spermatozoa may 
often be detected in movement, which is slow and vibrat- 
ing in character. 

The prostate gland, although situated along the tract 
of the oviduct, evidently belongs to the male apparatus, 
as is proved by its emptying solely into the vas deferens 
in Vaginulus, and in its being placed between the ter- 
mination of the epididymis and the commencement of 
the vas deferens only, as is very conspicuously observed 
in Succinea. In structure, it is composed of closely 
packed, tortuous, tubular, simple folHcles, lined with 
short, thick, pyramidal epitheha, Avhich are densely gra- 
nular, and contain a round, nucleolated nucleus. The 
object of this organ probably is to dilute the very tena- 
cious spermatic matter as it oozes from the epididymis 
into the spermatic groove on the inner side of the ovi- 
duct. 

In all the terrestrial gasteropods examined, there was 
found a small, glandular body, from which proceeds a 
short duct to join the termination of the epididymis. It 
consists of from two to nine rounded follicles joining a 
common duct, and, from the constancy of its existence, 
must be deemed important. 

The ovary is soft and homogeneous in appearance ; 
viewed by the microscope, it is found to be almost wholly 
VOL. I. 29 



234 INTRODUCTION. 

composed of immature ova, polygonal cells with a germi- 
nal vesicle and macula. 

The sides of the oviduct are soft, and in great measure 
composed of a tissue consisting of large, polygonal cells, 
with from one to five small, round nuclei. 

The organ denominated genital bladder, from its open- 
ing into the vagina, or at the termination of the latter, 
and in Vaginulus from its belonging almost wholly to the 
female organs, must be considered rather as a portion of 
the female apparatus than a prostatic sac, as it is called 
by Owen. By many authors, this has been termed the 
spermatheca, from its supposed function of holding sperm- 
atic fluid received from the male organs ; and with some 
reason ; for in several instances I have found it to contain 
a tenacious mass, which upon microscopic analysis was 
found to be composed of spermatozoa. This cannot, how- 
ever, be considered wholly as its use ; for it secretes a 
mucoid matter, which may probably faciUtate the passage 
of the ova through the vagina and cloaca. The mucoid 
matter within the bladder is frequently found to contain 
immense numbers of an infusorial parasite, which I have 
described under the name of Cryptoicus.^ 

The epithelium of the bladder consists of very long, 
caudate, columnar cells, with elliptical, granular nuclei, 
and a small, round nucleolus. 

' Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. N. S. Vol. I. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 235 



Chapter viii. — of the respiratory and circulatory- 
apparatus. 

The lung of the Terrestrial Gasteropoda is a simple 
cavity, with an orifice communicating with the exterior, 
upon the right side of the body. The surface of this 
pulmonary cavity in part of its extent, and more parti- 
cularly near the pulmonary orifice, is covered by a close 
intertexture of blood-vessels. The blood of the body is 
conveyed directly to the lungs by two principal vessels, 
the pulmonary arteries, which join the capillary rete of 
the pulmonary surface. From this rete passes ofi" the 
pulmonary vein to the heart, which is systemic, and con- 
sists of an auricle and ventricle. The auricle receives 
the pulmonary vein ; from the ventricle passes off the 
aorta, to be distributed throughout the body. 

Limax. The pulmonary cavity is situated beneath 
the mantle, and has nearly the same size and form. It 
is separated from the visceral cavity by the muscular 
peritoneum, but contains the rectum, renal organ, and 
heart. The pulmonary orifice is situated at the antero- 
inferior edge of the mantle, on the right side of the body. 
When open it appears round ; it is closed by means of 
circular, muscular fibres. The pulmonary rete is princi- 
pally displayed upon the roof of the cavity, and from it 
converge three principal trunks, to form the pulmonary 
vein which passes to the auricle of the heart. 



236 ' INTRODUCTION. 

The heart, enclosed within a pericardium, is situated 
near the middle of the pulmonary cavity. The auricle 
and ventricle are pyriform, and placed base to base. 
The sides of the latter are considerably thicker than 
those of the former, and present internally several well- 
marked fascicuH, crossing in different directions. Be- 
tween the auricle and ventricle is a double valve. From 
the apex of the ventricle passes oiF the aorta, which 
pierces the muscular peritoneum, and divides into two 
principal branches, — one passing to the sub-oesophageal 
ganglia devoted to the viscera in the anterior part of the 
visceral cavity, the other passing to supply the viscera 
posteriorly. Upon the right of the heart, attached to 
the roof of the pulmonary cavity, is placed a large, glan- 
dular organ, considered as the kidney ; from the whole of 
its right margin proceeds a duct backwards, which then 
curves to the side of the rectum, at the left side of which 
it remains attached to the pulmonary orifice. 

Arion. The pulmonary cavity is situated as in 
Limax. Its whole interior surface presents an intricate 
rete, from which converge six or seven pulmonary veins 
to the auricle of the heart. 

The renal organ forms a complete circle around the 
heart, and is perforated by the rectum, in the course of 
the latter to the pulmonary aperture. 

Tebennophorus. The pulmonary cavity is situated 
beneath the anterior portion of the mantle. It is formed 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £37 

bj an inflection of the muscular layer of the Integument 
of the body. The renal organ is placed to the right of 
the heart, and at its posterior part is perforated by the 
aorta. 

Vaginulus. The pulmonary cavity is situated be- 
tween the muscular peritoneum and the integument of 
the body. Its principal portion is placed upon the right 
side, anterior to the middle, but extends to the left side, 
over the back, and along the right side to the pulmonary 
aperture, between the tail and posterior extremity of the 
podal disc. The heart is placed in the anterior portion 
of the cavity. The auricle receives a vem from the right 
and another from the left side. The renal organ is 
placed posterior to the heart, between the passage lead- 
ing from the pulmonary cavity to its orifice, and the 
course of the rectum. 

Helix. In this genus, as is also the case in all the 
testaceous genera under examination, the pulmonary 
chamber is comparatively very large, for reasons already 
stated, and occupies a position on the outside of the 
lower one or two whorls of the turbinated mass of the 
viscera. In front, it is bounded by the collar, in the 
right side of which is the pulmonary orifice. The floor 
of the cavity is formed, as in slugs generally, by the 
muscular peritoneum. The roof, or outer wall, is occu- 
pied on the right side by the rectum, posteriorly by the 
heart and renal organ, and anteriorly by the pulmonary 



238 INTRODUCTION. 

rete of capillary vessels. The pulmonary rete is most 
developed in the vicinity of the pulmonary orifice ; and 
from it in a line -with the latter, along the course of the 
rectum, proceeds backward a single pulmonary vein to the 
heart. The renal organ is elongated, pyramidal, and is 
placed to the right of the heart and pulmonary vein. Its 
duct commences upon the right border of the gland, 
courses backward to the rectum, along the inner side of 
which it passes to the pulmonary aperture. 

The remaining testaceous genera present nothing pecu- 
liar in the character of the pulmonary or circulatory 
apparatus. 

General Remarks. The heart, in warm weather, 
beats about fifty-five times in a minute, but to some 
extent appears to be under the control of the animal, for 
if disturbed or irritated it pulsates much slower. 

In composition, the heart consists of distinctly granu- 
lated, unstriped, muscular fibres, with oval nuclei, which 
are hardly visible before the application of acetic acid to 
them. 

The interior of the heart and aorta is lined with a tes- 
sellated epithelium ; and the exterior of the former and 
interior surface of the pericardium are covered by the 
same. The cells are granular, with distinct, round, or 
oval, granular nuclei, and a minute nucleolus. 

The pericardial epithelium separates its pecuHar fluid 
very freely, the pericardium frequently appearing dis- 
tended with the liquor pericardii. In Helices, it fre- 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 239 

quently contains numbers of an entozoon, whicli I have 
named Distoma vagans.^ The blood-vessels, especially 
in the liver, exhibit a white, opaque appearance, which 
is dependent upon the deposit in the sides of the vessel 
of innumerable, oil-like granules. 

The blood contains numerous blood-corpuscles, which 
vary in size, are granular, and exhibit numerous radiat- 
ing, projecting points of variable length, — frequently 
greater than the diameter of the corpuscle. 

The pulmonary cavity is lined with a tessellated epi- 
thelium, the cells of which are faintly granular, with a 
few coarser granules, and a distinct, round or oval, gra- 
nular, nucleolated nucleus. 

The renal organ is a gland which exhibits a foliated, 
or plicated appearance, within a capsule. The surfaces 
of the plicte communicate with the duct existing along 
the whole right border of the organ, and are covered 
with polygonal, organic cells, every one of which con- 
tains a large, white, round, opaque mass, resembling 
uric acid in appearance. 

Chapter ix. — on the nervous centres, and the 
distribution of the nerves. 

« 

The nervous centres consist of three distinct sets of 
ganglia, which are all placed within the anterior part of 
the body or head. 

The first set, or supra-oesophageal gangha, form a trans- 

' See Journal Acad. Nat. Sci. New Series, Vol, I. 



240 INTRODUCTION. 

verse band, above or in front of the buccal body, usually 
at its anterior part, but varying in the latter position, to 
some degree depending upon the movements of the buc- 
cal body. When the latter is protruded, the band of 
ganglia is thrown back to the commencement of the 
oesophagus ; when retracted it is placed just behind the 
upper lip. It consists of two symmetrical halves united 
by a short, transverse commissure. Each half is com- 
posed of several ganglia, aggregated to a greater or less 
degree in different genera and species. Sometimes they 
are so aggregated, or are so covered by enveloping tis- 
sue, as to appear a single mass ; in others five or six 
distinct masses may be readily counted. 

The second set, or sub-oesophageal ganglia, form a cir- 
cular mass, placed infero-posteriorly to the buccal body, 
in the excavation of the foot. It is asymmetrical, and is 
composed of several ganglia, more or less aggregated 
together ; from four to seven masses can generally be 
counted. It is usually more developed upon the right 
than the left side, and passes through all the shades of 
color, in different genera and species, from white, yellow, 
to orange. Through the opening formed by the arrange- 
ment of the ganglia into a circle, passes the cephalic 
branch of the aorta. The supra-oesophageal and sub- 
oesophageal ganglia are connected together on each side 
of the buccal body by a double commissure, which varies 
in length in different genera ; thus, in Helices, etc., it is 
generally so long as to allow of much movement of the 
supra-oesophageal ganglia forward with the buccal body, 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 241 

■while in Vaginulus it is so short that the two sets of gan- 
glia form a close ring around the anterior part of the 
buccal body. 

The third set of ganglia are the stomato-gastric, con- 
sisting of two minute, lateral masses, united by a short, 
transverse commissure, and always placed upon the buc- 
cal body immediately postero-laterally to the commence- 
ment of the oesophagus. The stomato-gastric ganglia are 
connected with the supra-oesophageal on each side, by 
means of a long, delicate commissure, which is more or 
less loose, and permits a free movement of the former 
ganglia with the buccal body to which they are fixed. 

From the supra-oesophageal ganglia pass off on each 
side, — 1st, a minute branch along the course of the 
supra-sub-oesophageal commissure ; 2d, three or four small 
branches to the retractor muscles of the tentaculte ; 3d, 
a large branch, the superior tentacular nerve ; 4th, one 
or two small branches to the base of the superior tenta- 
cle, for its integument ; 5th, the inferior tentacular 
nerve ; 6th, small branches to the integument of the 
lips. 

From the sub-oesophageal ganglia pass off, — 1st, nume- 
rous branches on each side, to the podal disk, and late- 
rally to the integument ; 2d, a branch on the right side 
to the penis ; 3d, a branch to the vas deferens and pros- 
tate gland ; 4th, on each side a branch to the retractor 
muscle of the buccal body ; 5th, a large one to each side 
of the collar and pulmonary chamber ; 6th, a branch 

which follows the posterior aortic vessel, which gives off 
VOL. I. 30 



242 INTRODUCTION. 

brandies to the muscular peritoneum ; 7th, branches to 
the origin of the tentacular retractors ; 8th, branches 
to the oviduct, ovarj, testicle, stomach, intestine, and 
liver. 

From the stomato-gastric ganglia pass off on each 
side, — 1st, a nerve to the external muscular structure 
of the buccal body ; 2d, two branches which penetrate 
posteriorly into the buccal body ; 3d, a branch to the 
sahvary duct and gland ; 4th, a branch to the oesophagus 
and stomach ; 5th, branch to the interior of the buccal 
body anteriorly. 

The above distribution of the nerves has been princi- 
pally derived from dissections of Glandina and Helix 
albolahris. In the former genus, upon what is the nerve 
to the inferior tentacle in the other genera, there is 
formed, near the base of the tentaculte, a ganglionary 
enlargement, from which passes off the true, inferior 
tentacular nerve of this animal, and two other large 
branches to the third, or external tentacle. 

The nervous centres are composed of ganglion glo- 
bules, varying very much in size ; some are very large, 
others are not more than one-eighth the diameter of 
the larger ones and nuclear bodies. The globules are 
more or less polygonal, from mutual pressure, are dis- 
tinctly granular, and contain a nucleus which is com- 
paratively of enormous size. The latter usually fills 
one-half or two-thirds of the cell or globule, is more 
distinctly and darkly granular, and contains from one 
to seven small, round, transparent nucleoli. The sepa- 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 243 

rate nuclear bodies resemble the nuclei of the ganghon 
globules, but are much smaller, and contain but a 
single nucleolus. The nerve fibres pass through the 
ganglionary centres, among the globules in every direc- 
tion ; but none of them appear to originate or terminate 
in the latter. None of the ganglionary cells are cau- 
dated. 

The nerves consist of bundles of tubuli, containing an 
oleo-albuminous matter, which in the fresh nerve is semi- 
fluid, faintly granular, homogeneous, and translucent, but 
after the matter is pressed out of the tubuli it separates 
into two portions, one of which is a tenacious, fluid sub- 
stance, containing the other in the form of oil-like glo- 
bules of no determinate size. The wall of the tubuli is 
amorphous and transparent, and has attached to it, and 
projecting externally, oval, granular, nucleolated nuclei. 

The nerves, especially in those emanating from the 
supra-oesophageal ganglia, are enveloped in a sheath 
formed of large, elongated, polygonal, transparent cells, 
containing in the centre an oval nucleus surrounded by 
a mass of coarse, granular bodies, which are endowed 
with a very active molecular movement. 

Chapter x. — on the organs of especial sense. 

Touch. The soft, mucous integument is very irrita- 
ble ; but tactile sensibility is most developed in the ten- 
taculse, which are two pairs of tubular prolongations of 
the external integument, from the anterior part of the 
body or head. The superior pair of tentaculee are 



244 INTRODUCTION. 

several times longer and thicker than the inferior pair. 
They are conico-cylindroid in shape, 'with the free extre- 
mity or point dilated, or bulbous, in the outer side of 
which the eyes are placed. The inferior pair are short, 
conico-cylindroid, and slightly bulbous at the point. 

The integument is thick at the base of the tentaculoe, 
but gradually becomes thinner as it approaches the free 
extremity, where it is delicate and transparent. The 
color is the same on the general investment of the body, 
except at the free extremity of the tentaculee, where, 
from its transparency, the structure beneath shows 
through, and appears whitish. On the superior tenta- 
culae it is rougher than upon the inferior, from the poly- 
gonal folds being deeper. It is but loosely attached to 
the parts within, except at the free extremity, where it 
becomes firmly united. 

The retraction of the tentaculse takes place by means 
of the contraction of the retractor muscle, which forms 
within the tentaculoe a cylindrical tube, and is inserted 
into the integument at their free extremity, so that when 
they are retracting the integument becomes inverted, 
and the point of the tentacula first disappears from view 
and, in protrusion, is last to appear. The latter move- 
ment takes place through the relaxation of the retractor 
muscle, and the gradual contraction of the circular, mus- 
cular fibres forming the basis of the integument, com- 
mencing at the base of the tentaculse and proceeding 
towards the free extremity, by which course of movement 
the latter is pushed out. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 045 

Within the tube of the retractor muscle of the tenta- 
culae, passes to the free extremity of the latter the ten- 
tacular nerve. When the tentaculse are retracted, the 
nerve becomes tortuous, and spiral, but when fully pro- 
truded it is nearly straight, or merely undulated. 

Near the free extremity of the superior tentaculoe the 
nerve undergoes a sudden constriction, and then dilates 
into a gangliform enlargement, from the outer side of 
which proceeds a small division of the tentacular nerve, 
as the optic nerve, to the eye. The gangliform enlarge- 
ment is composed, on the exterior, of the nerve-tubuli of 
the tentacular nerve, and on the exterior, of a soft, white, 
finely granular matter, containing, in the exterior layer, 
round, granular, nuclear bodies. Anteriorly, the enlarge- 
ment undergoes a constriction, and then dilates into the 
large, bulbous mass of the extremity of the tentaculae. 
This latter mass is white, soft, and finely granular. 
Upon its exterior, the nerve-tubuli of the exterior of the 
first gangliform enlargement diverge, and divide into a 
number of large branches, which laterally subdivide into 
numerous smaller branches, and thus inclose the granu- 
lar mass. 

The inferior tentaculae present the same nervous struc- 
ture, except that there is no well-marked constriction 
between the tentacular nerve and the first gangliform 
enlargement, nor between the two enlargements, nor is 
there any optic nerve. 

The space between the tentacular nerve and the 
retractor muscle, is filled with a filamentous tissue, con- 



246 INTRODUCTION. 

taining round, granular, nucleolated nuclei, and large, 
round or elliptical, transparent cells, with nulcei similar 
to those which lie free in the tissue. 

The integument of the tentaculoe is very freely sup- 
plied with nerves from the supra-oesophageal ganglia. 

Taste. If existent, it is probably dependent upon 
nerves distributed within the buccal body, and derived 
from the stomato-gastric ganglia. The structure of the 
lingual lamina precludes any idea of its existence there. 

Smell. The presence of this sense is undoubted, 
though there is much discrepancy of opinion as to its 
situation. I have suspected that it probably may be 
placed in the blind sac, or depression, which opens just 
below the mouth. This sac varies in its degree of devel- 
opment in the different genera ; in Limax it is a super- 
ficial depression ; in Vaginulus it extends backwards 
beneath the buccal body for half an inch, is conical in 
shape and yellowish-white in color ; in Bulimus fasciatus 
it extends back, in the excavation of the foot, to the tail, 
and is folded several times upon itself. 

Hearing. The acoustic apparatus consists of a pair 
of transparent, vesicular bodies, placed upon the postero- 
inferior part of the sub-cesophageal ganglia, one on each 
side. They are placed in a depression of the ganglia, 
formed by a separation of the nerve-tubuli as they pass 
from and into the latter, immediately upon the gan- 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £47 

glionic globules. Their interior is filled with a trans- 
parent fluid, containing numerous otoconites, which vary 
in size, are oval in form, transparent, composed of con- 
centric layers of carbonate of lime, and frequently have 
a small cavity in their centre. During life, and for a 
short time after the death of the animal, the otoconites 
are endowed with a peculiar vibratoi'y movement, by 
which they are disposed to accumulate into a mass in the 
centre of the auditory vesicle. After the cessation of 
the movement, they become diffused through the fluid of 
the vesicle. 

Sight. The eyeball is placed beneath the integu- 
ment, on the outer side of the constriction which exists 
between the gangliform swellings at the free extremity 
of the superior tentacula. The optic nerve is derived 
from the inferior part of the first gangliform enlargement, 
is tortuous or undulating, and reaches the eyeball at its 
posterior part. Its course is frequently indicated by a 
deposit of pigmentum nigrum. 

The eyeball is globular, and is invested exteriorly by 
a transparent tunic, corresponding to the sclerotica and 
cornea. 

The choroidea forms two-thirds of a sphere, and is 
inflected anteriorly into a sort of depressed disk, perfo- 
rated in the centre. It consists of a delicate, trans- 
lucent membrane, with a deposit of a single layer of 
irregularly rounded, or oval, black pigment cells. The 
interior of the choroidea contains a clear, consistent vit- 



248 



INTRODUCTION. 



reous humor ; but the character of the retina I did not 
detect at the time. Whether a crjstaUine lens exists or 
not I am in doubt ; at the time of making; the investiira- 
tions, in several instances I thought I discerned it very 
distinctly ; but in other instances, even when larger spe- 
cies were examined, if it existed it escaped my observa- 
tion. 




REFERENCES TO THE PLATES. 



PLATE I. 

LiMAX VARIEGATUS. 

Fig. I. The integument laid open, with the viscera in situ. 1. Buc- 
cal body; 2. salivary gland ; 3. stomach; 4. intestine; 5. termination 
of intestine in the rectum ; 6. blind tube from the termination of the in- 
testine ; 7. oviduct; 8. pulmonary chamber ; 9. heart ; 10. renal organ; 
11. left superior tentacle ; 12. sub-oesopliageal ganglia; 1.3. left stomato- 
gastric ganglion; 14. liver; 15. origin of the retractor muscle of the 
penis. 

Fig. II. The viscera dissected apart. 1. Buccal body; 2. stomach; 
3. intestine; 4. termination of do. ; 5. blind tube from do. ; 6. salivary 
glands; 6.* salivary duct ; 7. liver; 8. hepatic duct; 9. testicle; 10. 
epididymis; 11. prostate gland; 12. penis; 13. retractor of do. ; 14. 
ovary; 15. o^^duct; 16. genital bladder; 17. pulmonary chamber; 18. 
aorta; 19. cephalic branch of do.; 20. visceral branch of do.; 21. sub- 
oesophageal ganglia; 22. left superior tentacle 

Fig. III. The generative apparatus. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 

3. prostate gland; 4. penis; 5. retractor of do. ; 6. ovary; 7. oviduct; 
8. genital bladder ; 9. cloaca. 

Fig. IV. The pulmonary chamber laid open and magnified four 
diameters. 1 . Floor formed by the muscular peritoneum ; 2 pulmonary 
orifice; 3. rectum; 4. anal aperture ; 5. renal organ ; 6 duct of do. ; 7. 
pericardium laid open; 8. heart; 9. pulmonary vein ; 10. pulmonary 
arteries ; 1 1 . aorta. 

Fig. V. Testa. 

Fig. VI. Dental plate. 

PL.\TE II. 
Figs. I. — IV. Arion hortensis. 

Fig. I. Organs in situ. 1. Buccal body; 2. stomach; 3 intestine; 

4. termination of do. ; 5. liver; 6. testicle; 7. ovary; 8. oviduct; 9. 
cloaca; 10. pulmonary chamber ; 11. heart; 12. retractors of the penis 
and vagina. 

VOL. I. 31 



250 INTRODUCTION. 

Fig. II. Genitalia, two diameters. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 
2.* vas deferens ; 3. prostate gland; 5. penis; 6. ovary; 7. oviduct; 8. 
genital bladder ; 9. cloaca; 10. retractors of the penis and vagina. 

Fig. III. Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. retractors of 
do.; 3. ccsophagus ; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 6. rectum; 7. anus; 8. 
salivary glands ; 9. duets of do.; 10. liver; 11. duct of liver. 

Fig. IV. Pulmonary chamber, magnified. 1. Floor of the cavity ; 
2. pulmonary orifice ; 3. pulmonary arteries ; 4. auricle; 5. ventricle; 6. 
pericardium; 7. aorta; 8. renal organ; 9. intestine; 10. anus. 

Figs. V. — VI. Limax CAMrESXKis. 

Fig. V. The digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. its retrac- 
tor; 3. stomach; 4. intestine; 5. terminal portion of do. ; 6. anus; 7. 
salivary glands ; 8. liver. 

Fig. VI. Generative apparatus. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 2.* 
vas deferens; 3. accessory gland of do. ; 4. prostate; 5,6. penis; 8. 
oviduct; 9. genital bladder ; 10. cloaca. 

Figs. VII. — IX. Limax ageestis, 

Fig. VII. Body laid open, and viscera dissected apart. 1 . Buccal 
body; 2. stomach; 3. intestine; 4. blind tube of do.; 5. salivary 
glands; 6. liver; 7. testicle; 8. epididymis; 9. prostate; 10. recepta- 
cle of the penis ; 1 1 . trifurcate gland of do. ; 12. sac of penis ; 13- retrac- 
tor muscle; 14. ovary; 15. oviduct; IG. geftital bladder; 17. pulmon- 
ary chamber. 

Fig. VIII. Lower portion of the genitalia. 1. Prostate; 2. recepta- 
cle of penis; 3. trifurcate gland of do. ; 4. sac of penis ; 5. retractor; 6. 
oviduct; 7. bladder; 8. cloaca. 

Fig. IX. Eeceptacle of the penis laid open. 1. penis; 2. longitu- 
dinal folds of the receptacle ; 3. trifurcate gland. 

PLATE III. 
Tebennophokus caeolinensis. 

Fig. I. Integument laid open, and the viscera in situ enclosed 
within the muscular peritoneum. 

Fig. II. Muscular peritoneum laid open; the organs in situ. 1. 
Pulmonary chamber laid open; 2. muscular peritoneum; 3. buccal 
body; 4. stomach; 5. liver; 6. intestine; 7. testicle; 8. ovary; 9. ovi- 
duct; 10. d.irt sac ; 11. heart; 12. renal organ; 13. pulmonary orifice. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 251 

FiG- III. Digestive apparatus and pulmonary chamber. 1. Buc- 
cal body; 2. retractors of do- ; 3. tt'sophagus ; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 

6. rectum; 7. salivary glands ; 8. ducts of do.; 9. liver; 10. ducts of 
do.; 11. pulmonary chamber ; 12. pulmonary veins ; 13. renal organ ; 
14. lieart. 

Fig. IV. Generative apparatus. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 2.* 
vas deferens; 3. prostate; 4. penis; 5. retractor of penis; 6. ovary. 

7. oviduct; 8. genital bladder ; 9. dart sac; 10. cloaca; 11. glandular 
sti'ucture of do.; 12. right superior tentacle. 

Fig. V. Penis, dart sac, etc. laid open. 1. Penis; 2. folded lining 
of do.; 3. vas deferens; 4. dart sac, containing the dart; 5. neck of 
oviduct; 6. duct of bladder ; 7. cloaca. 

Fig. VI. The dart, enlarged. 

Fig. VII. Glandular layer of the cloaca, enlarged. 

Fig. VIII. Globular form of the genital bladder. 

Fig. IX. Spermatozoa, highly magnified. 

Fig. X. A bunch of imperfect spermatozoa from the testicle, highly 
magnified. 

Fig. XI. Granules from the testicle, highly magnified. 

Fig. XII. Imperfect ova from the ovary, highly magnified. 

PLATE IV. 

Vaginulus floridanus. 

Fig I. Integument laid open; the viscera in situ. 1. Buccal 
body; 2. salivary gland ; 3. stomach; 4. intestine; 5. rectum; 6. liver; 
7. testicle; 8. multifid vesicle ; 9. heart. 

Fig. II. Viscera separated. 1. Buccal body; 2. stomach; 3. intes- 
tine ; 4. salivary glands ; 5. liver; 6. course of rectum, renal duct, and 
pulmonary passage ; 7. testicle; 8. epididymis; 9. receptacle of penis; 
10. multifid vesicle ; 11. ovary; 12. oviduct; 13. genital bladder ; 14. 
parenchymatous sac of the vagina. 

Fig. III. Part of the digestive apparatus. 1. Esophagus; 2. sto- 
mach; 3. intestine; 4. liver; 5. hepatic ducts. 

Fig. IV. Genitalia. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 3. vas deferens; 
4. prostate; 5. receptacle of penis laid open ; 6. penis; 7. retractor of 
penis; 8. base of multifid vesicle ; 9. ovary; 10. oviduct; 11. genital 
bladder; 12. parenchymatous sac of vagina laid open. 

Fig. V. Visceral cavity, with the greater portion of the viscera 
removed. 1. Buccal body ; 2. salivary glands ; 3. a'sophagus; 4. rec- 
tum; .'). pulmonary passage; 6. pulmonary cells between the integu- 
ment and muscular peritoneum; 7. pulmonary artery from the left 



252 INTRODUCTION. 

side; 8. heart; 9. renal organ; 10. renal duct; 11. penis, seen within 
its receptacle ; 12. base of the multifid vesicle; 13. parenchymatous sac 
of the vagina; 14. vagina; 15. sub-oesophageal, and 16. supra-ciesopha- 
geal ganglia; 17. olfactory sinus. 

Fig. VI. Dental plate : a. size of nature ; b. magnified, with the 
retractor muscle attached. 



PLATE V. 

BULIMUS FASCIATUS. 

Fig. I. The viscera dissected apart. 1. Buccal body; 2. lingual 
pouch; 3. retractor of buccal body ; 4 stomach; 5. intestine; G. rec- 
tum; 7. anus ; 8. salivary glands ; 9. ducts of do. ; 10. liver; 11. posi- 
tion of the testicle commingled with the posterior lobe of the liver ; 12. 
epididymis ; 12.* vas deferens ; 13. accessory gland of the epididymis ; 
14 prostate; 15. penis; 16. retractor of do. ; 17. multifid vesicle; 18. 
ovary; 19. oviduct; 19.* glandular portion of do. ; 20. genital blad- 
der; 21. pulmonary chamber ; 22. pulmonary aperture ; 23. puhnonary 
artery; 24. pulmonary vein; 25. pericardium; 26. auricle; 27. ventri- 
cle; 28. aorta; 29 . renal organ ; 30 renal duct; 31. orifice of do. ; 32. 
supra-oesophageal ganglia; 33. stomatO-gastric ganglia; 34. suli- 
oesophageal ganglia. 

Fig. II. Buccal body laid open, enlarged. 1. Upper lip; 2. lower 
lip; 3. dental plate ; 4. sides of buccal cavity; 5. tongue; 6. entrance 
of oesophagus ; 7. oesophagus; 8. salivary ducts; 9. lower part of 
buccal body: 10. retractor muscle. 

Fig. III. The muscular tongue, with the tubular prolongation of 
the lingual lamina into the lingual pouch. 

Fig. IV. Dental plate: a. magnified; b. size of nature. 

Fig. V. Excavation of the foot 1. Buccal body turned forward; 
2. retractor muscle; 3. attrahent fasciculi; 4. lingual pouch; 5. re- 
tractors of the foot ; 6. olfactory sinus. 



PLATE VI. 
Helix albolaeeis. 

Fig. I. The animal, with the pulmonary chamber (1) laid open 
and turned back from the visceral mass (2); 3. the mouth; 4. the 
cloaca, voluntarily protruded. 

Fig. II. The viscera, all dissected apart. 1. Buccal body; 2. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 253 

retractor of do. ; 3. oesophagus; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 6. rectum; 
7. anus; 8. salivary glands; 9. liver; 10. testicle; 11. epididymis; 
11.* vas deferens; 11.** accessory gland of epididymis; 12. pro.s- 
tate; 13. penis; 14. retractor of do. ; 15. ovary; 16. oviduct, 17. 
genital bladder; 18. pulmonary chamber; 19. pulmonary vein; 20. 
heart; 21. renal organ; 22. its duct ; 23. anus; 24. cephalic branch of 
aorta; 2.5. supra-oesophageal ganglia. 

Fig. III. Genitalia. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis ; 2.* vas deferens ; 
2.** dilated commencement of do.; 3. accessory gland of epididymis ; 
4. prostate; 5. penis; 6. prepuce; 7. retractor muscle ; 8. ovary; 9. 
oviduct; 10. genital bladder; 11. muscular organ on the duct of do. ; 
12. cloaca. 

Fig. IV. Penis, etc. laid open. 1. A''as deferens; 2. retractor of 
penis ; 3. penis ; 4 a longitudinal papillated fold of the lining mem- 
brane; 5. jjrepuce; 6. bladder laid open; 7. muscular organ at its 
base; 8. neck of oviduct ; 9; orifice of do. ; 10. cloaca. 

Fig. V. A second appearance of tlie interior of the organ at the 
base of the bladder (1). 2. Longitudinal folds ; 3. neck of oviduct ; 4. 
orifice of do. 

Fig. VI. Portion of oviduct laid open, exhibiting the spermatic 
groove, and, within it, the orifice of the prostate gland. 1 . Epidid}Tnis ; 
2. accessory gland ; 3. spermatic groove ; 4. side of the oviduct. 

Fig. VII. Pyramidal epithelia from the prostate gland, highly mag- 
nified. 1. Mass of cells; 2. isolated cells. 

Fig. VIII. Imperfect ova from the ovary. 

Fig. IX. Dental plate, much magnified. 

Fig. X. Eye, much enlarged. 

Fig. XI. Portion of renal organ, moderately magnified. 

PLATE VIL 

Fig. I. H. cellaria; II. — V. H. alteenata; IV,, VII. H. 
perspectiva; VIII. H. palliata. 

Fig. I. Viscera of H. cellaria, dissected apart. 1. Buccal body; 

2. retractor of do.; 3. oesophagus; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 6. rec- 
tum; 7. anus; 8. salivary gland ; 9. liver; 10. ductof do. ; 11. testicle; 
12. epididymis; 12.* vas deferens; 13. prostate; 14. penis; 15. 
retractor of penis ; 16. ovary; 17. oviduct; 18. genital bladder; 19. 
vagina; 20. pulmonary chamber ; 21. heart; 22. renal organ. 

Fig. II. Viscera of H. altemata. 1. Buccal body; 2. ct-sophagus j 

3. stomach; 4. intestine; 5. rectum; 6. salivary gland ; 7. liver; 8. 
testicle; 9. epididymis; 10. prostate; 11. penis; 12. retractor of do. ; 



254 INTRODUCTION. 

13. ovary; 14. oviduct; 15. genital bladder; 16. pulmonaiy chamber ; 
17. heart; 18. renal orf^^an ; 19. renal duct; 20. pulmonary aperture. 

Fig. III. Dental plate, magnilied. 1. Muscle ; 2. the plate. 

Fig. IV. Penis laid open. 1. Penis; 2. thick longitudinal fold; 
3. vas deferens ; 4. retractor of penis. 

Fig. V. Spermatozoa, highly magnified. 

Fig. VI. Digestive apparatus of H. perspectiva. 1. Buccal body ; 

2. retractor of buccal body ; 3. oesophagus; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 

6. salivary gland; 7. ducts of do. ; 8. hepatic ducts. 

Fig VII. Genitalia. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 3. accessory 
gland of do.; 4. prostate ; 5. penis ; 6. retractor of do.; 7. ovary; 8. 
oviduct; 9. genital bladder; 10. cloaca; 11. right superior tentacle. 

Fig. VIII. Dissection of H. palliata. 1. Buccal body ; 2. stomach ; 

3. intestine; 4. rectum; 5. anus; 6. salivary gland ; 7. liver; 8. epidi- 
dymis; 8.* vas deferens ; 9. accessory gland of do. ; 10. prostate; 11. 
penis; 12. retractor of do. ; 13. ovary; 14. oviduct; 15. genital blad- 
der ; 16. retractor of buccal body ; 17. pulmonary chamber ; 18. heart ; 
19. renal organ; 20. supra-cesophageal ganglia. 

PLATE VIII. 
Figs. I. — VI. Helix multilineata. 

Fig. I. Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. retractor of do.; 
3. lingual pouch ; 4. stomach ; 5. intestine ; 6. salivary gland ; 7. 
hepatic duct. 

Fig. II. Genitalia. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 2.* vas deferens ; 
3. accessory gland of epididymis; 4. prostate; 5. penis; 6. prepuce; 

7. retractor of penis ; 8. ovary; 9. oviduct; 10. genital bladder; 11. 
vagina; 12. cloaca; 13. right superior tentacle. 

Fig. III. Penis (1) laid open to exhibit the papillary structure on 
its inner surface ; 2. prepuce ; 3. vas deferens ; 4, 5. neck of oviduct 
and vagina laid open; 6. bladder; 7. orifice of bladder. 

Fig. IV. Portion of the inner surface of the penis, magnified two 
diameters. 

Fig. V. Spermatozoa, highly magnified. 

Fig. VI. Spermatozoa in coil. 

Figs VII. — X. H. solitaria. 

Fig. VII. Digestive apparatus. Same references as Fig. I. 

Fig. VIII. Genitalia. 1. Testicle ; 2. epididymis ; 2.* vas deferens ; 
3. accessory gland of do. ; 4. pi'ostate ; 5. penis; 6. retractor of do. ; 
7. ovary; 8. oviduct; 9. bladder; 10. cloaca. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. £55 

Fig. IX. Spermatozoa and granules from the epididymis, highly 
magnified. 

Fig. X. Portion of the renal organ at its commencement, exhibit- 
ing the relation of the duct at its outer edire. 



Fig. XI. Helix Berlanderiana. 

Fig. XL Genitalia of Helix Berlanderiana. I. Testicle; 2. epi- 
didymis; 3. accessory gland of do. ; 4. prostate; 5. penis; 6. double 
retractor of do. ; 7. sac of the dart? ; 8. ovary; 9. oviduct; 10. blad- 
der; IL cloaca. 

PLATE IX. 

Figs. I. — IH. H. peoeunda. 

Fig. I. Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. retractor of do. ; 
3. oesophagus; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 6. salivary gland; 7. ducts 
ofdo. ; 8. hejjatic ducts. 

Fig. II. Inferior part of the genitalia. 1. Prostate; 2. vas defe- 
rens; 3. penis; 4. retractor of do. ; 5. prepuce; 6. oviduct; 7. bladder; 

8. vagina; 9. cloaca; 10. tentacle. 

Fig. III. 1. Vas deferens; 2. penis; 3. retractor of do. ; 4. prepuce 
laid open; 5. glans penis; 6. genital bladder and duct laid open, ex- 
hibiting the interior, longitudinal folds ; 7. neck of oviduct; 8. vagina; 

9. cloaca; 10. tentacle. 

Helix fuliginosa. 

Fig. IV. II. fuliginosa, with all the viscera dissected apart 1. 
Buccal body; 2. retractor of do. ; 3. oesophagus; 4 stomach; 5. intes- 
tine; 6. rectum; 7. anus; 8. salivary gland ; 9. ducts of do.; 10. liver; 
11. testicle; 12. epididymis; 13. accessory gland of do. ; 14. prostate; 
15. penis; 16. retractor of do. ; 17. ovary; 18. oviduct; 19. bladder; 
20. glandular structure surrounding the vagina ; 21. pulmonary cham- 
ber ; 22. heart ; 23. renal organ ; 24. retractor muscle of the foot ; 25, 
supra-, 26. sub-cesophageal, and 27. stomato-gastric ganglia. 

Figs. V. VI. H. aukiculata. 

Fig. V. Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. lingual pouch ; 
3. retractor of buccal body ; 4. oesophagus; 5. stomach; G. intestine; 
7. salivary gland ; 8. ducts ofdo.; 9, hepatic ducts. 



253 INTRODUCTION. 

Fig. VI. Genitalia. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis ; 2.* vas deferens ; 
3. accessory gland of epididymis; 4. prostate; 5. penis; 6. retractor 
of do.; 7. ovary; 8. oviduct; 9. genital bladder; 10. vagina; II. 
cloaca. 

Figs. VII. — IX. Attditory apparatus of H. pulchella. 

Fig. VII. Inferior ganglia of the sub-oesophageal mass, highly 
magnified, with the auditory vesicles attached. 

Fig. VIII. Side view of one of the auditory vesicles. 
Fig. IX. Otoconites, very highly magnified. 

PLATE X. 

Figs. I. — III. H. exoleta. 

Fig. I. Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. lingual pouch; 
3. retractor of buccal body ; 4. stomach ; 5. intestine ; 6. salivary gland ; 

7. ducts of do.; 8. hepatic ducts. 

Fig. II. Genitalia. Same references as Fig. VI. PI. IX. ; 2.** glan- 
dular commencement of vas deferens. 

Fig, III. Penis laid open. 1. Longitudinal folds ; 2. vas deferens; 
3. valvular folds ; 4. retractor of penis ; 5. vagina; 6. orifice of do. 

Figs. IV. V. H. elevata. 

Fig. IV. Viscera dissected apart. 1. Buccal body ; 2. oesophagus; 
3. stomach; 4. intestine; 5 rectum; 6. anus; 7. salivary gland; 

8. liver; 9. testicle; 10. epididymis; 11. accessory gland of do. ; 10.* 
vas deferens ; 12. prostate; 13. penis; 14. retractor of do. ; 15. ovary; 
16. oviduct; 17. genital bladder; 18. pulmonary chamber; 19. pul- 
monary vein; 20. heart; 21. renal organ ; 22. duct of do. ; 23. pulmo- 
nary orifice ; 24. supra-, 25. sub-oesophageal, and 26. stomato-gastric 
ganglia. 

Fig. V. Penis laid open. 1. Longitudinal folds of interior ; 2. vas 
deferens; 3. retractor of jjenis. 

PLATE XI. 

Figs. I. — IV. H. Sayi. 

Fig. I- Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. retractor of do ; 
3. lingual pouch ; 4. oesophagus ; 5 stomach; 6. intestine; 7. salivary 
gland ; 8. salivary ducts j 9. hepatic ducts. 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 257 

Pig. II. Genitalia. Same references as Fig. VI. PI. IX. 
Fig. III. Portion of the oviduct laid open. 1 . Transverse folds of 
the sides; 2. spermatic groove. 
Fig. IV. Dental plate, largely magnified. 

Figs. V. — VI. H. hirsuta. 

Fig. V. Viscera dissected apart. 1 . Buccal body ; 2. oesophagus ; 
3. stomach; 4. intestine; 5. rectum; 6. anus; 7. salivaiy gland; 8. 
liver; 9. testicle; 10. epididymis; 11 . accessor)' gland of do. ; 10.* vas 
deferens; 12. prostate; 13. penis; 14. retractor of do. ; 15. ovary; 16. 
oviduct; 17. genital bladder ; 18. pulmonary chamber ; 19. heart; 20 
renal organ. 

Fig. VI. Accessory gland of the epididymis, highly magnified. 

Figs. VH. — IX. H. thteoidxts. 

Fig. Vil. Digestive apparatus. Same references as Fig. I. 
Fig. VIII. Genitalia. Same references as Fig. VI. PI. IX. 
Fig. IX. Penis laid open. 1 . Longitudinal folds ; 2. valvular fold ; 
3. vas deferens; 4. retractor of penis; 5. orifice of vagina. 

PLATE XII. 

Figs. I. — III. H. inteetexta. 

Fig. I. Genitalia. 1. Testicle; 2. epididymis; 3. accessory gland 
of do. ; 2.* vas deferens; 4. prostate; 5. penis; 6. retractor of do. ; 

7. sac of the dart ; 8. glandular pouches; 9. ovary; 10. oviduct; 11. 
genital bladder; 12. duct of do. to the vagina; 13. division of the duct, 
enclosing the lower part of the genitalia; 14. retractor of the dart sac ; 
15. portion of the duct of the genital bladder, enclosing the cloaca; 16. 
cloaca. 

Fig. II. Lower part of the genitalia laid open. 1. Penis; 2. por- 
tion of the duct of the genital bladder, which encloses the lower part of 
the genitalia, laid open ; 3. vas deferens; 4. neck of the oviduct; 5. 
duct of the bladder; 6. the portion of do. to the vagina ; 7. dart sac ; 

8. glandular pouches ; 9. dart; 10. orifice of the vagina. 

Fig. III. a. the dart, the size of nature; b. do. much magnified. 

Figs. IV. — VK. H. ligeea. 

Fig. IV. Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. retractor of 
do.; 3. oesophagus; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 6. salivary gland; 7. 
hepatic duct. 

VOL. I. 32 



258 INTRODUCTION. 

Pig. V. Genitalia. Same references as Fig. I. 
Fig. VI. Animal with the penis and lower portion of the dart sac. 
Fig. VII. Dental plate. 

Fig. VIII. Genitalia of H. suppressa, magnified seven diameters. 
Same references as Fig. I. 

Figs. IX. — XI. H. concava. 

Fig. IX. Digestive apparatus. Same references as Fig. I. PL 
XI. 
Fig. X. Genitalia. Same references as Pig. VI. PI. IX., except 

1 1 , which is probably a dart sac ; 12. cloaca. 
Pig. XI. Dental plate, much magnified. 

PLATE Xin. 

Pig. I. — III. SucciNEA. 

Pig. L Viscera dissected apart. 1. Buccal body; 2. stomach; 3. 
intestine; 4. rectum; 5. anus; 6. salivary gland ; 7. ducts of do.; 8. 
liver; 9. testicle; 10. epididymis ; 11 . accessory gland of do. ; 12. pros- 
tate; 1.3. penis; 14. ovary; 15. oviduct; 16. genital bladder; 17. 
pulmonary chamber ; 18. heart; 19. renal organ. 

Fig. II. Genitalia. Same references as Pig. VI. PI. IX. 

Pig. III. Dental plate, a. Natural size; b. magnified; 1. mus- 
cle; 2. dental plate; 3. accessory plate. 

Fig. IV. Nerve centres of Helicina orbiculata, highly magnified. 
1. Supra-oesophageal ganglia; 2. stomato-gastric ganglia; 3. sub- 
ojsophageal ganglia ; 4. auditory vesicles. 

Pig. V. Spermatozoa from the epididymis, very highly magnified. 

PLATE XIV. 
Glandina truncata. 

Pig. I. Animal deprived of its shell. 1. Turbinate mass of vis- 
cera; 2. anterior third of the buccal body protruded as in eating; 3. 
mouth; 4. generative aperture ; 5. suiDcrior tentacles ; 6. inferior ten- 
tacles ; 7. external tentacles. 

Pig. II. Viscera dissected apart. 1. Buccal body; 2. oesophagus ; 
2.* exit of do. ; 3. stomach; 4. intestine; 5. rectum; 6. anus; 7. sali- 
vary gland; 8. ducts of do.; 9. liver; 10. hepatic duct; 11. testicle; 

12. epididymis ; 13. accessory gland of do. ; 12". vas deferens ; 14. pros- 
tate; 15. penis; 16. retractor of do.; 17. ovary; 18. oviduct; 19. genital 
bladder; 20. vagina; 21. cloaca; 22. pulmonary chamber; 23. pul- 



SPECIAL ANATOMY. 259 

monaryvein; 24. heart; 25. aorta; 26. renal organ ; 27. duct of do.; 

28. orifice of do. ; 29. retractor muscles of buccal body, tentacles, and 
podal disk; 30. supra-a'sophageal ganglia; 31. stomato-gastric gan- 
glia; 32. superior tentacles retracted ; 33. Distoma sacs. 

Fig. III. Inferior view of the protruded portion of buccal body. 
1. Mouth; 2. external tentacles. 

Pig. IV. Diagram of nervous centres. 1. Sub-oesophageal gan- 
glia; 2. supra-cesophageal ganglia ; 3. stomato-gastric ganglia. 

PLATE XV. 

Fig. I. Genitalia of Bulimus dealbatus. 1. Testicle; 2. epididy- 
mis; 3. accessory gland of do- ; 4. prostate; 5. vas deferens; 6. penis ; 

7. retractor of do. ; 8. ovary; 9. oviduct; 10. genital bladder ; 11. va- 
gina; 12. cloaca. 

Fig. II. — IV. Pupa incaxa. 

Fig. II. Viscera dissected apart. 1. Buccal body; 2. retractor of 
do.; 3. oesophagus; 4. stomach; 5. intestine; 6. rectum; 7. anus; 

8. salivary gland ; 9. liver; 10. pulmonary chamber; II. collar; 12. 
pulmonary aperture; 13. pulmonary vein; 14. heart; 15. aorta; 16. 
renal organ; 17. duct of do. ; 18. testicle; 19. epididymis; 20. acces- 
sory gland of do. ; 21. prostate; 22. vas deferens ; 23. penis; 24. retrac- 
tor of do. ; 25. dart sac (?) ; 26. ovary ; 27. oviduct ; 28. genital bladder ; 

29. an accessory gland joining the duct of the genital bladder by the 
duct 30; 31. retractor muscles ; 32. sub-cesophageal ganglia. 

Fig. III. Penis laid open. 1. Penis; 2. longitudinal fold; 3. re- 
tractor of penis; 4. vas deferens ; 5. orilice of do. 
Fig. IV. Dental plate, magnified. 

Figs. V. VI. Bulimus decollatus. 

Fig. V. Digestive apparatus. 1. Buccal body; 2. lingual pouch; 
3. retractor of buccal body ; 4. oesophagus ; 5. stomach ; 6. intestine ; 
7. salivary gland ; 8. ducts of do. ; 9. hepatic ducts. 

Fig. VI. Lower portion of the Genitalia. 

Figs. VII. VIII. B. virgulatus. 

Fig. VTI. Digestive apparatus. Same references as in digestive 
apparatus of Fig. II. 
Fig. VIII. Genitalia. Same references as Fig. I. 

PLATE XVI. 
Fig. I. NervoussystemofGlandinatnmcata, magnified. 1. Supra- 



260 INTRODUCTION. 

oesophageal ganglia; 2. sub-oesophageal ganglia; 3. stomato-gastric 
ganglia; 4. nerve to the upper lip; 5. to the integument of the superior 
tentaeulse; 6. to the lateral lips ; 7. supra-cesophageal, stomato-gastric 
ganglionic commissure; 8. superior tentacular nerve; 9. an accessory 
branch; 10. nerve to the inferior and external tentaculie; 11. gan- 
glionic enlargement of do.; 12. inferior tentacular nerve ; 13. external 
tentacular nerves; 14. nerves to the buccal body; 15. to oesophagus 
and stomach; 16. to salivary ducts and gland; 17. supra-oesophageal, 
sub-cesophageal, ganglionic commissures; 18. nerves to podal disk; 
19. nerves to collar and pulmonary chamber; 20. to retractor of buc- 
cal body; 21. follows course of aorta, and supplies the oviduct, ovary, 
testicle, etc. ; 22. supplies integument, collar, pulmonary chamber, and 
retractor muscles, at origin ; 23. to penis; 24. to cloaca and integu- 
ment in vicinity ; 25. numerous branches to integument on each side, 
and podal disk ; 26. to retractor muscles ; 27. to tail and podal disk; 
28. large branch to integument on each side. 

Fig, II. Supra-CESophageal and stomato-gastric ganglia of Helix 
albolabris. 1. Supra-oesophageal ganglia; 2. stomato-gastric ganglia. 
3. supra-oesophageal, sub-oesophageal, ganglionic commissures; 4. su- 
pra-oesophageal, stomato-gastric, ganglionic commissures; 5. superior 
tentacular nerve; 6. inferior tentacular do. ; 7. to commencement of 
olfactory sinus ; 8. inferior part of mouth and buccal body; 9. to inte- 
gument of lips; 10. integument at side of mouth, and generative aper- 
ture on the right side; 11. recurrent branch to superior tentacular 
muscle; 12. to retractor of podal disk; 13. to buccal body; 14. to 
oesophagus; 15. to salivary glands. 



INDEX TO VOLUME I. 



Academy of Natural Sciences, its 

Journal, 35. 
Acephiila, 92, 96. 
AcHATiNA, Lk. 128. 

grac-illima, Pf. 109, 128, 162. 
pellucida, 109, 128, 162. 
Acknowledgments to co-laborers, 23. 
Agatina variegata, Raf. 50. 

Aiscata, Kaf. 50. 
Agriculture, influence on species, 

132, 190. 
American Zoology, neglect of by 

Europeans, 56. 
Amnicola, 181. 

Analogues, use of the term, 77. 
Anatomy of terrestrial gasteropods, 

198. 
Ancylus, 97. 
Aorta, 238. 
Aplodon, Raf. 49. 

Aeion, 97, 163, 165, 168, 171, 172, 
203, 205, 209, 220, 236. 
bortensis, 109, 159, 198. 
Asiphoiiobranchiata, Bl. 95, 96. 
Atlantic region, features of, 103; spe- 
cies of, 109. 
Auricula, 97. 
AuriculidiB, 96, 97. 
Azeca, 168. 

Birds, destruction of species by, 134. 
Blainville, definition of Mollusks, 92. 
Blood, 239. 
Boston Society of Natural History, its 

Journal, 35. 
Buccal body, 206, in Glandina, 214. 
BuLiMUS, 97, 111, 124, 128, 163, 165, 
167, 171, 173, 202, 204, 229. 
acicula, 159. 



Bulimus acutus, Fer. 152, 159. 

dealbatus, 109, 122, 128, 162, 

199 213 229. 
decoll'atus,' 109, 128, 134, 152, 
158, 159, 188, 199, 213, 230. 
exiguus, 109, 128, 129, 140. 
fallax, 109, 128, 129. 
fasciatus, 109, 119, 128, 1.52, 
153, 246. 160, 162, 199, 213, 
216 229. 
harpa[ 109, 125. 126, 129. 
lubricus, 109, 128, 129, 137, 139, 

144, 151, 152, 157, 159. 
octona, 159. 
radiatus, 159. 
subula, 109, 128, 153, 162, 
serperastrus, 109, 128. 
undatus. 109, 119, 159. 
virgineus, 1-59. 
virgulatus, 109, 119, 128, 152, 

153, 199, 213, 230. 
zebra, 128, 152, 153, 160, 162. 
Cabinet specimens, insufHcient for 

study, 72. 
Calcareous rudiment, 200. 
Causes, influencing geographical dis- 
tribution of species, 99 ; mountain 
ranges, 110; rivers and lakes, 107; 
ocean, 108; climate, 110; geologi- 
cal structure, 112; vegetation, 113; 
humidity and dryness, 113; eleva- 
tion, 115; inundations of rivers, 
130 ; fires, 131 ; agriculture, 132 ; 
destruction by animals, 133; the 
sea, 135; local, 138. 
Central region, features of, 103 ; spe- 
cies of, 109. 



262 



INDEX. 



Cephalopoda, Cuv. 92, 96. 
Cervicobnuichiata, Bl. 95, 96. 
Chimotrenia, llaf. 49. 
Cliojco of specilic names, 77. 
Circular system of arrangement, 89. 
Circulatory apparatus, 235. 
Cirrhobranchiata, Bl. 95, 96. 
Classification, 84. 
Clausilia, Lie. 165, 167, 1G8, 169, 

172. 
Climate, influence on species, 110. 
Cloaca, in Limax, 220 ; in Arion, 
220; in Tebennophorus, 221; in 
Heli.x, 22S ; in Succinea, 231 ; in 
Glandina, 232. 
Concliology, auxiliary to geology, 69. 
Corvus corone, 76 
Cryptobranchiata, Desh. 95, 96. 
Cryptoicus, Leidy, 234. 
Cuba, genera in, compared with U. 

States, 171. 
Currents, agency of, in the introduc- 
tion of species, 152. 
Cuvier, division of Mollusks, 92. 
CycLOSTOMA, Lk. 97, 111, 124, 163, 
166, 167, 16S, 171, 174. 
campanulatum, 109. 
dentatum, 109, 119, 128, 153, 

162. 
distribution of species, 172. 
Cylindrblla, Pf. 97, 163, 165, 166, 
16S, 171, 172. 
jejuna, 109, 228. 
lactaria, Gould, 109, 119, 128, 
153, 162. 
Cyrena, 178. 
Dart sac, in Tebennophorus, 221 ; in 

Heli.x, 227. 
Dental plate, 206 ; in Pupa, 213 ; in 

Succinea, 213. 
Destruction of species by animals, 

133. 
Digestive apparatus, 206. 
Distoma vagans, 239. 
Distribution of genera and species, 
compared vv'ilh those of Eu- 
rope and South America, 163. 
of the nerves, 239, 241. 
D'Orbigny, genera in S. America, 

170. 
Dryness, influence on species, 113. 
Eggs, number of, 194 ; development 

of, 195 ; tenacity of life, 195, 196. 
Elevation, influence of, on species' 

115. 
Epididymis, 218, 232. 
Eumelus, Raf. 52, 53. 

nebulosus, Raf 52. 
lividus, Raf. 52. 
European naturalists, neglect of Ame- 
rican labors, 56. 



E.Kternal characters of equivocal spe- 
cific value, 67. 
Eye, structure of, 247. 
Faculties of land-mollusks, 187. 
Fires, influence on species, 131. 
Fossil land-shells, 180. 
Ganglia, supra-oesophageal, 239 ; 
sub-oesophageal, 240 j stomato-gas- 
tric, 241. 
Gasteropoda, 92, 93, 96 ; naked, 199 ; 

testaceous, 201. 
Genera and species. s;eographical dis- 
tribution of, 99, i28, 162; number 
of, 103; geological relations, 176. 
Generative apparatus, 201, 2i7 ; in 
Limax, 217; in Arion, 220; 
in Tebennophorus, 220 ; ia 
Vaginukis, 221 ; tissues of, 
232. 
bladder, 234; in Limax, 219; 
in Arion, 220; in Tebenno- 
phorus, 220; in Vaginulus, 
222 ; in Helix, 226 ; m Buli- 
raus, 229; in Pupa, 230; in 
Succinea, 231 ; in Glandina, 
231. 
Geographical distribution of genera 
and species, 99, 162 ; table of, 
109, 128. 
features of the country, 100. 
Geological relations of land-shells, 
176. 
structure, influence on species, 
112. 
Glandina, 97, 111, 114, 121, 124, 128, 
163, 166, 167, 171, 174, 202, 
214, 231, 242. 
truncata, 109, 128, 134, 162, 

199. 
Vanuxemensis, 109, 128. 
Gnathodon, 178. 

Habits and facuhies of land mollusks, 
187 ; diflerent from those of Europe, 
188. 
Hammocks of Florida, 118. 
Haste to describe species, an obsta- 
cle, 74. 
Hearing, organ of, 246. 
Heart, 235, 238 ; in Limax, 236 ; in 
Vaginulus, 237 ; pulsations of, 238. 
Helicodonta, 166. 
Helices described by Say, 59. 
Helicidte, 97, 192, 193, 195, 196. 
Helicina, 97, 111, 121, 124, 127, 163, 
166, 167, 171, 172, 174, 182. 
distribution of species, 172. 
chrysocheila, 109. 
occulta, 109, 181, 182. 
orbiculata, 109, 121, 128, 137, 
162. 



INDEX. 



263 



Helicina rubella, 128, 184. 

HhiAX, 97, HI, 124, 127, 128, 1G3, 166, 

167, 168, 171, 172, 173, 202, 

211, 223, 237. 
albociiicta, 109, 128. 
albolabris, 59, 109, 128, 129, 

199, 211, 223, 224, 225, 226. 
alliaria, 105. 
alternata, 59, 109, 123, 126, 

128, 129, 162, 199, 224, 225, 

226, 233 
appressa, 59, 109, 128, 129. 
aspersa, 109, 129, 151, 152, 159. 
arborea, 109, 128, 129, 199, 224, 

228. 
auriculata, 59, 109, 122, 128, 

162, 199, 211, 224. 
berlaiuleriana, 109, 122, 128, 

199, 226, 228, 229. 
bonplandj, Lk. 159. 
bufloiiiana, 109, 122, 128. 
cellaria, 109, 129, 152, 158, 159, 

188, 199, 211, 225. 
chersina, 59, 109, 128, 129. 
clausa, 59, 109, 128, 129, 181. 
coiicava, 59, 109, 128, 129, 134, 

199,211,224,226,228,229. 
cumberlandiana, 109, 123, 128. 
coluinbiana, 109. 
caliibniieiisis, 109. 
deinis.sa, 109, 128, 129. 
denlifera, 109, 129, 199, 224, 

228. 
depieta, Grat. 159. 
desertoruin, 196. 
dubia, 162. 

eleclrina, 109, 128, 129. 
elevata, 59, 109, 128, 129, 199, 

224. 
exolela, 109, 128, 129, 199, 211, 

216, 223, 226. 
fallax. 111, 121, 128, 129, 188, 

199, 228. 
fatigiata, 109, 128. 
fuliginosa, 109, 128, 129, 199, 

224,226,227. 
gularis, 109, 123, 128, 199, 224, 

226, 227, 228, 229. 
horieusis, 109, 126, 129, 137, 

154, 156, 159, 188. 
hirsula, 59. 109, 128, 129, 181, 

199,211.' 
inflecta, 59, 109, 128, 129, 181, 

199, 224, 228. 
interna, 59, 109, 128, 129. 
iudenlata, 109, 128, 129. 
inornala, 109, 115, 125, 128, 129. 
mtertexta, 109, 128, 129, 199, 

211,224,226. 
jejuna, 109, 128. 
labiosa, 109. 



Helix labvrintliica, 59, 109, 128, 129, 
140, 181. 
lactea, 152, 159. 
iigera, 59, 109, 128, 129, 199, 

211, 224. 
lineata, 59, 109, 128, 129, 181. 
leporina, 109, 123, 128. 
liniatula, 109, 129. 
lasmodon, 109, 123, 128. 
loriL-ata, 109. 
lucida, 109, 124, 129, 152, 158, 

159 
lucMibrata, 109, 121, 128. 
uiaxillata, 109, 128. 
minusc'ula, 109, 128, 129, 139, 

140, 154, 162. 
major, 109, 123, 128. 
inobiliana, 109, 121, 128. 
monodou, 109, 128, 129, 162, 

181. 
mullilineata, 59, 109, 115, 128, 

129, 199, 224, 225, 226, 233. 
muhidenlata, 109, 128, 129. 
neiijoralis, 134, 152, 159. 
nickliniana, 109. 
nuttalliana, 109. 
ottoiiis, 109, 119, 128, 1.53, 162. 
penn.-^vlvanica, 109, 128, 129. 
palliata, 59, 109, 123, 128, 129, 

199, 224. 
patuia, Desh. 59. 
perspecliva, 59, 109, 128, 129, 

199, 211, 224, 226. 
pisaiia, 152. 
profunda, 59, 107, 109, 128, 129, 

199, 224, 22.5, 226. 
pulfhella, 109, 128, 129, 142, 
151,152, 157, 159, 188, 199, 
228. 
pnstula, 109. 
rotula, 109, 123, 128. 
rhodoeheila, 109, 119, 128, 153. 
saxicola, 109, 128, 162. 
sayi, 109, 115, 129, 199,224. 
seleiiina, 109, 119, 121, 128, 

162. 
septemvolva, 59, 60, 109, 122, 

12S 1 37 
solita'ria, 59, 109, 128, 129, 199. 

224, 226, 233. 
spinosa, 109, 123, 128. 
striatella, 109, 128, 129. 
sub-plana, 109, 123, 128. 
suppressa, 109, 128, 129, 199, 

224, 226, 227, 228, 229. 
sportella, 109. 
slrigosa, 109. 
texa.siana, 109, 122, 128, 199, 

224, 228. 
thyroid us, 59, 109, 128, 129, 181, 
199, 228. 



264 



INDEX. 



Helix tridentata, 50, 109, 111, 115, 
121, 12S, 129, 199, 211, 224, 
225, 226, 228. 
Iriodonta, Jan. 162. 
towiisendiana, 109. 
tudiculala, 109. 
vancouverensis, 109, 
variabilis, C. 159. 
virgata, 1.52. 
Hemiloma, Raf. 52, 53. 

ovata, Raf. 53. 
Humidity, inttueiice on species, 113. 
Identity of species on botli conti- 
nents, 75. 
Inferobranchiata, Bi. 95, 96. 
Injuries, reparation of, 196. 
Intestine, 208 ; in Helix, 212 ; in Suc- 

cinea, 213. 
Introduction of foreign species, 150 ; 

agency of currents in, 152. 
Inundations of rivers, influence on 

species, 130. 
Invertebrate animals, 85. 
Kidney, in Limax, 236 ; in Arion, 236. 
Lakes, inlluence on the range of spe- 
cies, 107. 
Leidy, anatomy of terrestrial gastero- 
poda, 198. 
Limacidse, 97, 165, 171, 172, 192, 193, 

195. 

LiMAX, 97, 123, 128, 163, 165, 167, 

168, 171, 172, 173, 195, 202, 

203, 205, 206, 217, 220, 235, 

240. 

campestris, 109, 128, 129, 198, 

207, 208, 209, 210, 218, 219. 
agrestis, 109, 128, 129, 134, 1.52, 

1.58, 159, 188, 195, 198, 207, 

208, 218, 219. 
gracilis, Raf 53. 
variegatns, 109, 128, 129, 134, 

152, 158, 159, 1S8, 19S, 207, 
208, 213, 216. 

Limniadee, 76, 97, 178. 

Lintjual lamina, 206; in Glandina, 
215. 

Lininea, 97, 181. 

Liver, 209, 217 ; in Helix, 212. 

Local circumstances, influence on 
species, 138. 

Locality, a cause of variation of spe- 
cies, 65. 

Lung, in terrestrial gasteropods, 235. 

Maclurian Lyceum, its Contributions, 
35. 

Mantle of Mollusks, 199. 

Menoraphis, Raf. 49. 

Me.sodon, Raf 49. 

Mesomphix, Raf. 49. 

Mollusca, 90, 92, 90. 

Mollusks, Blainville's defmition of, 



92 ; Cuvier's division of, 92 ; to be 
studied with their shell, 69. 

Monopleurobranchiata, Bl. 95, 96. 

Mountain ranges, influences on spe- 
cies, 101. 

Mucous glands, 204. 
membrane, 216. 

Multifid vesicles, 229. 

Muscles, 205. 

Naiades, 178. 

Naked terrestrial gasteropoda, 199. 

Neritina, 178. 

Nerves, distribution of, 239, 241 ; 
structure of, 243. 

Nervous centres, 239 ; composition 
of, 242. 

New York Lyceum, its Annals, 35. 

Nucleobranchiata, Bl. 95, 96. 

Nudibranchiata, Cuv. 95, 96. 

Obstacles to the study of Zoology, 
63. 

Odomphium, Raf. 49. 

Odotropis, Raf. 48. 

Omphalina, Raf. 49. 

Orders of Mollusca, 94. 

Organs of sense, 243. 

CEsophagus, 207 ; in Helix, 211; in 
Buliinus, 213; in Glandina, 215. 

Otoconites, 247. 

Ovary, 233; in Limax, 219; in Te- 
bennophorus, 220; in Vaginulus, 
222 ; in Helix, 225. 

Oviduct, 234; in Limax, 219; in Te- 
bennophorus, 220 ; in Vaginulus, 
222; in Helix, 225; in Buliinus, 
229. 

Pacific region, features of, 102 ; spe- 
cies of, 109. 

Parmacella, 167, 168. 

Partula Otaheitana, 159. 

Pedal disk, 199, 201. 

Penis, in Limax, 218 ; in Arion, 220 ; 
in Tebennophorus, 220 ; in Vaginu- 
lus, 222 ; in Helix, 224 ; in Buli- 
mus, 229 ; in Pupa, 230 ; in Suc- 
cinea, 231 ; in Glandina, 231. 

Pericardium, 238. 

Philomycus, Raf 51, 53. 
flexuolaris, Raf 52. 
fuscus, Raf 52. 
oxyurus, Raf. 52. 
quadrilus. 51. 

Physa, 97. 

Plauorbis, 97, 181. 

Pneumobranchiata, Lam. 94, 96, 97. 

Points of origin of species, 141. 

Prioritjr, rule of, 22. 

Prostate gland, 233 ; in Succinea, 
231. 

Pulmonary cavity, in Limax, 235; 
in Arion, 236 ; in Tebennophorus, 



INDEX. 



365 



236; in Vagiiiulus, 237; in Helix, 
237. 
Pulmonary chamber, 199, 200, 202. 
Pulmonary orifice in Liinax, 235. 
Pulmonary rete, in Limax, 235; in 

Helix, 238. 
Pulsations of the heart, 238. 
Pupa, Drap. 97. 114. 124, 163, 165, 
167, 168, 171, 173, 201, 202, 
213 230. 
armilera, 109, 128, 129, 181. 
badia, 109, 124, 129. 
contracta, 109, 128, 129, 140, 

154, 162, 181. 
corticaria, 109, 128, 129. 
incana, 109, 119, 128, 153, 162, 

199, 216, 230. 
rupic-ola, 109, 128, 129, 140, 

154, 162. 
modica, 109. 

pontifica, Gould, 109, 128. 
servihs, Gould, 162. 
variolaria, 128. 
Pupadae, 97. 
Raiinesque (C. S.) notice of, 41; his 

works, 48. 
Rang, his definition of Gasteropoda, 

93. 
Rectum, 208. 

Renal organ, 236, 239; in Tebenno- 
phorus, 237; in Vaginulus, 237 ; in 
Helix, 238. 
Reproduction of injured parts, 196. 
Respiratory apparatus, 235. 
Retractor muscle, 202, 225. 
Rivers, influence on the range of spe- 
cies, 107, 130. 
Salivarv glands, 208, 217 ; of Vaginu- 
lus, 211 ; in Helix, 212; in Succi- 
nea, 214; in Glandina, 215. 
Say, (Thos.) his Conchology in 
Nicholson's Encyclopedia, 36 ; his 
life, 39 ; Helices described by, 59. 
Scutibranchiata, Bl. 95, 96. 
Sea, influence of its vicinity on spe- 
cies, 135. 
Sense, organs of, 243. 
Serial arrangements, 88, 97. 
Shells, to be studied with the animal, 

69; and at all ages, 71. 
Sight, organ of, 247. 
Silliman's Journal, its contributions, 

35. 
Siphonobranchiata, Bl. 95, 96. 
Smell, sense of, 246. 
Species, definition of, 64; variations 
of, 65 ; how to be described, 
68. 
on both continents, identity of, 
75. 



Specific names, choice of, 77. 
Spermatheca, 234. 
Spermatoztja, in Helix, 232, 234. 
State Surveys, 36. 
Stenosloma, Raf. 49. 
Stenotrema, Raf 49. 
Stomach, 207 ; of Tebennophorus, 
210; of Vaginulus, 210; in Hehx, 
211; in Bulimus, 213; in Pupa, 
213; in Succiuea, 213. 
Stomato-gaslric ganglion, 241. 
SucciNEA, 76, 97, 114, 124, 128, 163, 
16-5, 167, 168, 171, 196, 201, 
202, 213, 231, 233. 
amphibia, 159. 
aurea, 109, 128, 129. 
avara, 109, 128, 129. 
campestris, 109, 121, 128. 
lutcola, 109, 128. 
niunita, 128. 
nuttalliana, 109. 
obliqua, 109, 128, 129, 199. 
ovalis, 109, 128, 129. 
putris, 109, 129, 159, 162. 
rusticana, 109. 
Sub-Qjsophageal ganglion, 240. 
Supra-cESophageal ganglion, 239. 
Synonyms, an obstacle, 63. 

of species described by Say, 59. 
Synopsis of genera and species in 

each geographical section, 128. 
Table of Helices described by Say, 
59; of pneumonobranchiate mol- 
lusca, 97; of distribution of species 
in geographical regions, 109; of 
temperature, 110; of genera and 
species in each geographical sec- 
tion, 128 ; of foreign species ob- 
served in the United States, 1-59 ; 
of species inhabiting other parts of 
America, 162 ; of the number of 
species in each genus, 163; of 
terrestrial niollusks in the United 
States and in Europe, 167 ; of ge- 
nera, compared with those of South 
America and Cuba, 171. 
Taste, sense of, 246. 
Teeknnophorus, 53, 97, 111, 123, 128, 
163, 165, 167, 168, 171, 173, 
193, 200, 204, 205, 209, 220, 
236. 
carolinensis, 109, 128, 129, 198, 
205. 
Tegumentary covering, 203. 
Temperature, table of, 110; vicissi- 
tudes of, 127. 
Tentaculfe, 199 ; structure of, 244 
Terrestrial mollusks, anatomy of, 198. 
in the United States and Eu- 
rope, comparative table of, 167. 



VOIi. I. 



33 



366 



INDEX. 



Terrestrial mollusks, comparalive ta- 
ble of, in tlie United States and 
South America, 170. 

Testacella, 1G7, 172. 

Te.'^tis, 232 ; of Limax, 217 ; in Te- 
bennophoriis, 220; in Vaginulus, 
221 ; in Helix, 223, 232 ; in Suc- 
cinea,231 ; in Glandina, 231. 

Tissues of the genital organs, 232. 

Touch, organ of, 243. 

Toxotrema, Raf. 49. 

Triodopsis, Raf. 49. 

Trophodon, Raf. 49. 

Turbinated mass, 201. 

Va2:ina, in Helix, 227, in Bulimus, 
229; in Succinea, 231; in Glan- 
dina, 232. 

Vaginulus, 97, 124, 128, 163, 165, 
166, 168, 171, 173, 200, 210, 
216, 221, 233, 234, 237, 242, 
246. 
floridanus, 109, 119, 128, 198. 

Valvata, 181. 

Varieties, from locality, 65. 

Vas deferens, in Limax, 218 ; in Te- 
bennophorus, 220; in Vaginulus, 
221; in Helix, 223; in Bulimus, 
229; in Pupa, 230; in Glandina, 
231. 

Vegetation, iafliience on species, 113. 



Vertebrate animals, 85. 
Vertigo, 97, 124, 163, 16-5, 108, 171. 
decora, 109, 124, 129. 
gouldii, 109, 124, 129. 
milium, 109, 128, 129. 
ovata, 109, 12S, 129, 137. 
pentodon, 109, 128, 129. 
Vicissitudes of temperature, inllu- 

ence on species, 127. 
ViTEXNA, 97, 111, 116, 125, 126, 163, 
165, 167, 16S, 171, 173. 
pellucida, 109, 129, 144, 159, 
162. 
Xolotrema, Raf. 49. 
Zoological foci of genera and species, 
141. 
sections of country, 117; Flo- 
rida, 118; tertiary of the At- 
lantic, 120 ; Southern Inte- 
rior, 122; Norlhern Interior, 
123; Northwestern, 124; 
Northeastern, 125 ; table of 
species in, 128. 
Zoology, obstacles to the study of, 
63 ; neglect of American, by 
Europeans, 56. 
of Massachusetts, 3G; of New 
York, .36 ; in the United 
States, rise of, 31. 



END OF VOLUME I. 




I>r .ir.„j„,M 



/.l/l/l/.V /'/f//l'f/l////.l\ />,;l/> 



/nip ,i<* ./ f^&irui- // II.' /ii .Hiitih^rt,! *»'*' iimfti 




//.• .r/M.lu..M 



I — JV- Aritni /iiir/r/i,riir . v, \'i. /.i/mi.r rii/ii/ii',rf/7,i . 

W\ - IX / iii/ri'.r/i.r- 



Imp if^ .f. J)f/,truf 



FL.m. 




Or .rUi^Jel 



J(i^(m//('/>/ii'///.r ciiro/iTicrhi'i.i- 



Sufi- & JJMtirar Ate t/e iA SirnLiifru- J'^^iauvtrve €• 



PI/, rv. 




Dr J£c<tfy,def 



Fq^iTU/lu.r /?orcJi/nu,i 



&np iL' . / l/flitr/w ■ 







^SS^ /; 



Ih- J I-etJu J^ 



fiuhf/u/if /^/.Jvy////A/ 



ffw d^ .^ flfitrur . ff lir /.i Jttntktffnr . '**■ /wrtiav** t' 



11 0_o XI 



.-' VIII 




/>r .r r.riJu. iM 



//l'//.l • tl//>i >/<//>/ •/, I ■ 



fntf Jf i^-i^fliR'H 



pn^oVC!!. 




I» .' -'■'■/■' ■/./ 



I // ci'/Za/za 
VI, VII // /)i'/,iy>('f///i(/ . 



II — A . // tl/f('l7li//il 
VIII. // I'd //id /(I 



Imp iL' if Pf/iiriu-.B tff fii %tnt4U/nf S*"' fU'tu'iUftu- fi 



M-,-7ni. 




Dr J Leufif dW 






imp. tL' tf- Prlofuc ■ 




■fir JtMi&f. dtj 



V, VI // awiciilcitii VII- IX // pulcfu'Uo 



Jfnfi lie J. Iffiarut'. /t tL' la JC'tOiifrw , l./kvuvreVK' /' 




Pr JZditfy. <iV 



-111. // ('.vo/cliJ 



IV. V. I/. r/et>d((i 



Im/t. Jr •/■ Pr&iruf . 




£>r <r lettfy. JeJ. 



I — W. // ,\'(ii/i . V, VI. // /linn/ fa . 

vii-i\, // t/ii/r,)///ii,r. 



/m/f. Jf .f./>fiii/'ue,N-.fif la Mantiitf/if ,1'^ (ii'/ifrntivt' A*. 



8-.- 




Hr J U^ d'/ 



r - f(( // inter h'.ita- iv— vii // /u/cra 

VIII /I sii/ipre.rj-a- ix — xi f/. tonawn 



Imp lA' J fhliU-tu- 



PL. X!!llo 




1 - III cJ'mxuicu iwaUif ■ W /A'/.tf/tf ii//>iiiiJata 

\ ■ //('/i.r (ifJio/dhruf . 



Im/- ,/,■ ,fP,'l,u-ui\ U Ji< ll Mmkufltf .'"ik'lufui;- 



PL. miTv 




Dr.JJ^tify.d^ 



(rhwJr7t(f tru/u (Ua . 



Jmp Jf J fMiiru.- 



PI.. 2V, 




r ^-X^i^. Jt-i 



V, VI. Bu/anud- (/t'tu)//tihic>-. \ii, vin B uuyulatiur 



Imp Jc JJ)fAirttf . R dr LtJifanttUf'w J irfjusru'in.' t> 



i>t.z7?r. 




■■ tfL^iffy.dot 



I Cr/a/ti/ina /r/mrafa 



11 ffi'/t.r ai6/>/<j/jri,r 



Imp ti' J0ela/ve ■ 



hLl 



a% 



-^H 



\4^ 



j^\S^jjW 



iiri*- 



^\ 



^ ir 



>» w* 



