.6(^i 




WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 



I. JACK IN THE PULPIT 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

13 : 67-68. May 1912. 



[Reprinted from Journ.vl OF the New York Botanical Garden, May, 1912.J 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 
I. "Jack in the Pulpit" (Arisaema triphyllum (L.) Torr.) 

(With Plate XCIII.) 

When the trees are unfolding their fresh green leaves in May 
and June, and the violets and spring-beauties are in bloom, Jack- 
in-the-pulpit may be found in moist woodlands and on shady 
banks, where the earth is soft and loamy. It is a perennial herb, 
and if left undisturbed, it sometimes lives many years and attains a 
height of three feet, with a subterranean corm as large as an apple. 
This corm has given to the plant the name of "Indian turnip" 
though it is not edible, when raw, for it has an acrid taste, 
irritating to the tongue, on account of the acicular crystals of 
calcium oxalate which it contains, known as raphides. It propa- 
gates by forming smaller secondary corms around the older ones 
and in this way new plants are started. It often bears no fruit 
in the vicinity of New York, not only on account of the depreda- 
tions of children, but because it is dioecious and the proper insect 
visitors, on which it is dependent for pollination, seem to be 
lacking. Usually the leaves turn yellow and the plant disappears 
in June and July, though this varies in dififereni: porrions of its 
range, which extends throughout the Eastern and Central states, 
as far north as Nova Scotia and Ontario and south to Florida 
and Louisiana. It bears what would appear to most children 
to be a single large flower, but is really a cluster of small simple 
flowers, borne at the base of a fleshy club-shaped spadix, which 
is enclosed by the convolute base of the spathe, the summit of 

• Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 



68 

which arches over it, and is either pale green or a dark glossy 
brown, often striped with white. 

There are usually two leaves, which are three-parted, graceful 
in shape and beautifully veined. The leaf-stalks are sheathing 
at base and enclose that of the flower-cluster. The staminate 
plants are often smaller and paler than the pistillate and wither 
as soon as they have discharged their pollen. Their flowers 
consist of only 2-4 almost sessile, white or purple anthers, borne 
on the fleshy mucilaginous base of the spadix. The pistils are 
crowded together, without calyx or corolla, green, globose and 
tipped with a sessile white stigma; occasionally a few stamens 
may be found above the pistils. The fruit cluster, when ripe, 
is usuaUy prostrate, from 1-3 inches long and the berries are 
bright scarlet. 

Plukenet appears to have been the first to figure this plant 
and he described it in his Phytographia in 1691 as "Arum 
triphyllum minus atrorubente" from plants sent to him by Ban- 
nister from Virginia. Linnaeus in his Species Plantarum, 1753, 
quoted this description and called it "Arum triphyllum." It 
resembles some of the European species of Arum and belongs 
to the Araceae, a family of plants, most of which are tropical 
in their distribution and which includes about 105 genera and 
over 900 species, many of them being large and showy plants 
often climbing on trees and rocks. 

Elizabeth G. Britton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
II. SPRING BEAUTY 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

13 : 91-92. June 1912. 




•SPRING BEAUTY" 
(Claytonia virginica L.) 



[Reprinted from Journal OF the New York Botanical Garden, June, 1912.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 
2. "Spring Beauty" (Claytonia virginica L.). 

(With Plate XCV.) 

In wet meadows, on grassy banks and even shady woodlands 
the Spring Beauty covers the ground in May with quantities of 
white flowers. It blooms consecutively for two or three weeks, 
opening a new blossom each day, gradually lengthening out its 
racemes, till sometimes they have borne as many as fifteen flowers. 
These measure half an inch or more across, have five white or 
pale pink petals, veined with rose-color; the stamens are five 
with pink anthers, and the style is three-lobed. There are two 
fleshy spreading sepals and the pedicels lengthen gradually from 
one half to an inch in length and become reflexed as the three- 
angled capsule matures. Half-way down the stem below the 
raceme, two narrow fleshy leaves, three or four inches long, 
clasp the stem, and a few basal ones arise from the large tuberous 
root which is buried rather deeply in the ground. Usually only 
the flowering stems are picked, so that the plant survives, but 
it will make no seed and stand little chance of spreading. The 
seeds are brown, reniform, slightly roughened, and the embryo 
is curved. 

The Spring Beauty was named by Linnaeus in 1753 in honor 
of John Clayton, an American botanist and correspondent, who 
wrote, in 1743, a flora of Virginia. It was first figured by Plu- 
kenet in his Phytographia in 1691. There are about twenty-five 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 

91 



92 

species of Claytonia known to grow in northern North America, 
of which three occur in the eastern United States, one of these 
with broader leaves, C. caroliniana Michx., having about the 
same range as C. virginica, from Nova Scotia southward along 
the Alleghanies to Georgia and Texas. 

They belong to the Purslane family, or Portulacaceae, with 
which they agree in their fleshy leaves, and flowers that bloom 
for a short time. The family is a large one, but the plants are 
usually small, few of them with showy flowers like Portulaca 
grandiflora, which occasionally escapes from cultivation. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 




■i> v^^^ 



\ 



■>.=^~- 



"WILD PINK" 
(Silene caroliniana Walt.) 



[Reprinted from Journal OF the New York Botanical Garden, July, 1912.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 
3. "Wild Pink" (Silene car oliniana Walt.). 

(With Plate XCVII.) 

Before the trees cast much shade, while their greens are still 
so exquisitely fresh and varied, a bright flash of color will attract 
the eye to the Wild Pink, growing in hilly places on rocks or often 
in their cracks and crevices with the Saxifrage. The beautiful 
rose pink and size of its flowers renders it very conspicuous, for 
it often makes a large patch or cushion with a number of stems 
about six to ten inches high, each bearing from three to five 
showy flowers more than an inch across. Each petal is wedge- 
shaped, with a long, pale white, basal claw enclosed in the tubular, 
5-notched calyx and crowned at the summit of each claw by 
two erect, white appendages. The stamens are immersed in the 
tube, ten in number, five long and five short with purple anthers 
and slender white filaments attached at the base of the ovary 
which terminates in three short styles. The pod is stipitate, 
developing in the upper half of the withered calyx, splitting at 
apex into six recurved segments. The seeds are borne on a 
central column and are small and numerous, kidney-shaped and 
brown, with a rough surface. 

The whole plant is viscid with glandular hairs forming a ciliate 
margin to the leaves, which are opposite, clasping at base a 
swollen joint of the stem; usually each stem has three pairs of 

1 Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes' Fund for the Preservation of Native 
Plants. 

109 



no 

leaves decreasing in size upward. The basal shoots have longer 
leaves, all gracefully recurved, and forming a crowded cluster 
at the summit of a long strong fibrous tap-root, which often 
penetrates deep down into some crevice and breaks off when 
uprooted. For this reason the plant frequently survives, in spite 
of its showy blossoms, though it is not abundant any longer, 
where it is frequently picked. 

The Wild Pink was described by Thomas Walter in his Flora of 
Carolina in 1788, and redescribed by Andr4 Michaux in 1803 as 
Silene Pennsylvanica. It often grows in sandy or rocky soil on 
the borders of woods from Maine to Georgia in the Eastern States, 
along the Alleghanies, and flowers from April to June. 

It belongs to the pink family or Caryophyllaceae a large family 
of about seventy genera and over 1,500 species, which are widely 
distributed, mostly in temperate regions. The generic name 
Silene was given by Linnaeus in 1753 in reference to the viscid 
hairs and about 250 species are known of which many are showy 
graceful plants, the showiest perhaps being the Fire-pink, Silene 
virginica, and the most graceful, the Starry Campion, Silene 
stellata. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



'1 


■ A 








• . 1, 




'O. il) 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
IV. WILD COLUMBINE 



ELIZABETH G. BRITtON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 
13 : 123-124. August 1912. 



Journal of the New York Botanical Garden. Plate XCVIII. 




WILD COLUMBINE. 



[Reprinted from Journal of the New York Botanical Garden, Aug., 1912.J 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.i 

4. "Wild Columbine" {Aquilegia canadensis L.). 

(With Plate XCVIU.) 

Nodding in the cool winds of spring-time, and so lightly poised 
on its slender stems, that it is almost impossible to take its 
photograph, the wild columbine adorns the rocks and ledges in 
May with its gay, red and yellow blossoms and occasionally is 
found in fields at middle elevations where it blooms until July. 
The flowers are pendent, about 1-2 inches long, bright red, the 
five short red sepals overlapping five tubular spurs which ter- 
minate below in thickened honey-sacs and broaden out above 
into five short yellow petals attached around a long-exserted, 
cluster of slender yellow stamens, about fifty in number. These 
are attached in five rows to a disc at the base of the ovaries, 
which are five in number and hairy with five long slender styles; 
they develop into five follicles with long spreading points. Each 
follicle contains about fifteen shining black seeds attached along 
the ventral suture. 

The basal leaves are pale green beneath, three-parted and each 
leaflet again divided into three, toothed lobes; smaller, short- 
stalked, simpler leaves also grow on the flower stalks and diminish 
into bracts above. The stems vary in height from one to two 
feet and are smooth or slightly hairy above. The root is fibrous 
and easily uprooted and for this reason the plant largely depends 
on its seeds for reproduction and is likely to be quickly exter- 

' Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 



124 

minated on account of Its showy flowers. Occasionally plants 
are found with pale yellow blossoms growing among the normal 
ones. 

It ranges from Nova Scotia to Northwest Territory south to 
Florida and Texas and ascends to high altitudes in the Alle- 
ghanies and the Rocky Mountains. 

It was first described and figured by Cornuti in 1635 and was 
called Aqtiilegia canadensis by Linnaeus in 1753. The generic 
name refers to a fancied resemblance of the spurs to the talons 
of an eagle; on this account and the wide range of the genus 
throughout the United States, it has been strenuously advocated 
for the honor of being called the national flower. About fifteen 
species of Aquilegia are known from the United States, ranging 
through the Rocky Mountains into Mexico and the western 
states; all have showy flowers varying from white to yellow and 
blue, and are greatly prized in cultivation. 

This genus belongs to the crowfoot family, Ranunculaceae, 

of which about thirty-five genera and one thousand and fifty 

species are distributed throughout the temperate regions of the 

world. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
q. "BIRD'S-FOOT VIOLET" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 
13: 135-136. September 1912. 




BIRD'S-FOOT VIOLET' 

(Viola pedata L.) 



[Reprinted from Journal of the New York Botanical Garden, Sept., 1912.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 

5. "Bird's-foot Violet" (Viola pedata L.). 

After the spring is well advanced, and most of the other 
violets have been in bloom for nearly two weeks, the bird-foot 
violet comes to show how lovely a violet can be! Its flowers are 
larger and more delicate in color than any other of our wild 
species, the petals spread with a jaunty air, like a pansy, and 
vary in color from deep violet to pale lavender or white. They 
stand above the leaves on long stout pedicels and when 
growing in masses, as they used to on the Hempstead Plains of 
Long Island and Todt Hill on Staten Island, are as showy as any 
of the Alpine violets of Europe, comparing favorably with the 
long-spurred pansy of the Alps, Viola calcarata. 

The leaves give the plant its specific and common name from a 
fancied resemblance to a bird's foot. They are palmately 
divided almost to the base, into narrow segments which are entire, 
or again divided into 3-5 wedge-shaped subdivisions. There is 
great variability in the shape and size of the leaves and they also 
vary from nearly smooth to quite hairy. The rootstocks are 
erect and stout, scaly above, and bear a large number of leaves 
and flowers on each, so that the temptation is to pull up the 
whole plant at once. When growing luxuriantly, they sometimes 
reach a foot in height with a dozen or more flowers open at once. 
The leaf-stalks and pedicels are tinted with purple and vary from 
2 to 6 inches or more in length. The two upper petals are bent 
backward over the short spur, the two lateral ones are spreading 

' Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 

135 



136 

and the lower is broader and keeled, paler and veined with dark 
purple stripes, the base projecting to form a spur, in which a 
fragrant honey is found. The stamens are five, the two lower 
ones spurred, and all bear an orange-colored prolongation beyond 
the anthers, which project and surround the green club-shaped 
stigma, with a very small central stigmatic surface. The ovary 
is superior, one-called, three-angled, three-parted when ripe and 
bears the seeds in three rows on the walls. The five sepals also 
are unequal, thickened at base and auricled. The peculiar 
structure of the stamens and the fact that two of them have 
claws extending down into the honey-bearing spur are evidently 
aids in the fertilization by insects, and many of the violets are 
known to hybridize. 

Viola pedata was named by Linnaeus in 1753 in his Species 
Plantarum but it was first described and figured by Plukenet in 
1 69 1 as " Viola virginiana tricolor, foliis multifidis, cauhculo 
aphylla." In the vicinity of Washington, D. C, and Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania, the form known as hicolor, in which the two upper 
petals are dark purple, is more common. About one hundred 
and fifty species of violets are known from all the temperate 
parts of the globe. A few occur at high altitudes in the tropics. 
The Violaceae comprise fifteen genera and three hundred species, 
widely distributed ; some of them are trees. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
6. "WILD AZALEA" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

14 : 79-81. April 1913. 



.nllNC AND ' 



5 FUNO 



Journal ok the New York Botanical Garden 



Plate CXIV 




WILD AZALEA 



[Reprinted from Journal of the New York Botanical Garden, Apri.l, 1913.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION* 
6. "Wild Azalea" (Azalea nudiflora L.) 

With Plate CXIV 

About the end of May, when the snow-balls are in bloom and 
the dandelions have gbne to seed, with their exquisite balls of 
fruit standing up tall among the grasses and buttercups; when 
the wild cherries scent the air with their bitter-sweet fragrance, 
then the wild azaleas brighten the gloom of the woodlands with 
their exquisite colors. In the region about New York City, it is 
known as "wild honeysuckle" from the shape of its flowers, 
which have a long tube filled with nectar. The flowers vary in 
color from pale pink to deep rose-color and grow about ten in 
a cluster at the summits of long naked branches, which usually 
arise in clusters from the stem. These shrubs sometimes attain 
a height of from two to six feet, and once were abundant in 
open woodlands in Greater New York, particularly in the, Bronx 
and on Staten Island, though on account of their showy color 
and fragrance they are often ruthlessly broken. The flowers are 
large with long exserted stamens and with the tube, the pistil 
and the filaments darker-colored. The 5-parted limb of the 
corolla is unequally lobed, the two upper divisions spreading, 
the lowest being the broadest and overlapping the two narrower 
lateral ones. The pedicels and tube are quite hairy as well as 
the short green calyx. The ovary also is hairy and the style is 
over two inches long, curved upward and terminating in a disc- 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 

79 



80 

shaped stigma. The five long stamens are inserted with the 
corolla at the base of the tube, and a deep hairy groove extends 
down the center of each lobe of the corolla to the nectar, at its 
base. The leaves are oval or obovate, tapering to a short petiole 
and unequal in shape and size; usually five to seven are borne 
at the summits of naked branches, like the flowers forming an 
unsymmetrical rosette. 

Azalea nudiflora was described by Linnaeus in 1762 in the 
second edition of his "Species Plantarum" and he cites Peter 
Kalm's description. In Kalm's travels under the date of May 5, 
1749, he says: "Early this morning I went to Rapaapo, New 
Jersey which is a great village, inhabited by Swedes. . . . The 
Mayflowers, as the Swedes call them, were plentiful in the woods 
wherever I went to-day; especially on a dry soil, or one that is 
somewhat moist. The Swedes have given them this name, be- 
cause they are in full blossom in May. Some of the Swedes and 
the Dutch call them Pinxterbloem (Whitsunday flowers) as they 
really are in blossom about Whitsuntide. The English call them 
Wild Honeysuckles; and at a distance they have some similarity 
to the Honeysuckle, or Lonicera. Dr. Linnaeus, and other 
botanists, call it an Azalea. Its flowers were now open, and 
added a new ornament to the woods, being little inferior to the 
flowers of the Honeysuckle and Hedysarum. They fit in a circle 
round the stem's extremity, and have either a dark red or a lively 
red color; but, by'standing for some time, the sun bleaches them, 
and at last they get a whitish hue." 

This species ranges from Maine to Florida and Texas, ascends 
to 3,000 feet altitude in Virginia and has been reported from 
Canada. About forty species of Azalea have been described from 
North America and Asia, many have been cultivated for their 
beauty, and many hybrids are known. Seven species are known 
to grow in the United States, of which the orange-colored Flame 
Azalea of the Southern States is the showiest and the White 
Swamp Azalea the most fragrant. The Heath Family or Erica- 
ceae, to which they belong, includes about fifty-five genera and 
one thousand and fifty species, widely distributed, mostly in cool 
temperate regions in which the Laurel and Rhododendrons are 



81 

our most familiar and exquisite members of this most charming 

family of plants. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
7. "PINK MOCCASIN FLOWER" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

14 : 97-99. May, 1913. 



JOLKXAL OF THE XKW YORK BOTANICAL GaKDEN PLATE CXVI 



^^Hp 






\ 




y*'! EatSfv. 



PINK MOCCASIN FLOWER 



[Reprinted from JouRNAi of i )ik. Nkw Yokk Koianicai (Jakdin, May, I'lS-J 



WILD PLANTS NEEDIXG PROTECTION* 
7. "Pink Moccasin Flower" {Cypripedium acaule Aiton) 

With Plate CXVI 

From the middle of May to the middle of June the "Stemless 
Pink Moccasin" or "Two-leaved Lady's Slipper" may be found 
blooming in moist woods and on the borders of swamps or on 
drier hillsides in pine woods. It comes when the orchards are in 
bloom, beginning with the violets, anemones and wake-robins 
and in colder, more northern, hilly regions may still be found when 
the laurel and the roses are just unfolding. 

It is probably the most common of all the Cypripediums, 
having the greatest range, extending through British America 
from Newfoundland to Winnipeg and North West Territory, 
and is even supposed to have been one of the species recorded by 
Dr. Richardson from Arctic America. It also occurs sparingly 
in the United States from Minnesota to Kentucky and Tennessee. 

The flower is large and showy, pendent on a long stalk, about 
a foot high, with two large basal leaves : they taper down to and 
clasp the base of the flower stalk and are in turn enclosed in a 
thin brown bract; there are five prominent parallel veins and 
both surfaces of the leaf are pubescent with short glandular 
hairs. Arching over the flower at the top of the scape is a single 
lanceolate bract, about 2 inches long, covering the ovary 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native 
Plants. 

97 



98 

which is curved, strongl}^ ribbed and glandular hairy; the 
large brown calyx is composed of two united sepals, the 
two lateral petals also are brown, narrow and twisted. The 
lip is a large showy pouch, 2-3 inches long, of a bright 
purplish pink color veined with darker lines, it is deeply split 
above with the aperture closed by the downward and inward 
curving of the sides; there are also minute short glandular hairs 
on the outside, but within the hairs are white and longer, becom- 
ing rigid and bent downward as they approach the anthers, 
serving to attract and direct the movements of insect visitors 
who come in search of nectar. When the insects reach the 
anthers, the two viscid sacs adhere to their backs and are thus 
carried off to some other flower, where they are brushed against 
the roughl}^ papillose stigma and thus accomplish cross-fertiliza- 
tion. One sterile stamen is expanded into a heart-shaped bract, 
which is bent downward and inward covering the stigma and 
effectually preventing all exit, except by the apertures on each 
side of the anthers. The capsules when mature, are large, 
about 1-1.5 inches long and produce numerous small seeds, but 
they are nowhere very abundant, as the very showiness which 
insures fertilization by insects, defeats its object through the 
greediness of children and some selfish older people, who pick 
all they can find no matter how few there may be! 

Cypripedium acaule was named by Aiton in a catalogue of the 
plants grown at Kew in 1789 from plants introduced by Wm. 
Hamilton, Esq., in 1786, from North America. He cites Pluke- 
net's figures and description published in 1769 who described 
it as " Helleborine Calceolus Marine dicta Caroliniensis , bifolia." 
Catesby in his Natural History of North Carolina in 1748 
figured it in colors and says of it: "This plant produces the most 
elegant flower of all the Helleborine tribe, and is in great esteem 
with the North American Indians for decking their hair, etc. 
They call it the Moccasin Flower, which also signifies in their 
language, a shoe or slipper." 

It was formerly found in the wilder portions of Greater New 
York, on Staten Island and in Van Courtland Park, but is 
becoming extinct, on account of its showy flowers, which are 



99 

usually picked close to the root, as in the accompanying illustra- 
tion. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 

8. "AMERICAN OR MOUNTAIN LAUREL" 

[Kalmia latifoiia L.) 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

14 : 121-123. June, 1913. 



JOUKXAL OF THE NEW YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN 



PLATE CXVII 




.}i».i-'».,. I 






y ♦ 



* «. 



4, 





A^.E.En.C»Tv 



AMERICAN OR MOUNTAIN LAUREL 



[Reprinted from Journal OF the New York Botanical Garden, June, 1913.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION* 

8. "American or Mountain Laurel" (Kalmia latifolia L.) 

With Plate CXVII 

In the beginning of June, when the days are long and warm 
and the daisies and clover in the tall grass are waving in the 
breeze, when the tulip-trees are in bloom and the roses and 
paeonies fill the gardens with their perfume and color, then the 
flowers of the laurel may be found, rivalling in their delicacy of 
color and perfect symmetry of form any of the more showy 
blossoms of cultivation. It seems as if the climax of all that is 
dainty and lovely had been reached in this beautiful American 
wild flower. 

But where the laurel once was abundant it is rapidly becoming 
scarce or extinct. On account of its evergreen leaves, it is 
gathered in winter for Christmas decorations and other festivities ; 
all the year round it is used to decorate fruit-stands and its wood 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native 
Plants. 



122 

is eagerly sought for rustic furniture, for tools and as a substitute 
for making brier-wood pipes. It once grew abundantly on the 
banks of the Harlem River at High Bridge and Inwood; there is 
still a little of it left in Bronx Park, but it seldom blooms, which 
probably accounts for there being any of it still indigenous. 
The flowers grow in clusters at the ends of last year's branches, 
forming large cymes of white and pale pink. Each flower is a 
study in itself and most difficult to draw or paint, on account of 
the numerous ridges and projections on the outside of the buds 
and the delicate curves and depressions of the open flower. 

The pedicels are about one inch long, and glandular hairy; the 
calyx is also glandular and small, with five narrow sepals; the 
corolla has a short basal tube and ten prominent dorsal ridges, 
five of which are longer and also glandular, the limb is five-lobed 
with shallow notches between the lobes and ten dark red blotches, 
marking the indentations in which the anthers are held; the 
filaments are white and curved. They spring upward around 
the pistil, if suddenly released by the visit of a bumble-bee, or 
other large insect, dusting his back with a white pollen which 
escapes from the anthers, through two apical pores. The 
pistil is at first curved, later becoming erect, with five greenish- 
yellow stigmatic surfaces and a superior glandular ovary, which 
develops into a five-lobed capsule. An unusual form of the 
laurel has been found near Deerfield, Massachusetts, with the 
corolla divided to the base into five long narrow petals. This 
freak has been cultivated, though not nearly as beautiful, and 
produces seed. 

The leaves are thick and glossy and keep their dark green color 
and brilliancy throughout the winter. They are from two to 
five inches long and sometimes nearly two inches wide and when 
young have minute black glandular hairs on the upper surface; 
the petioles are short and thick, opposite or alternate and clus- 
tered at the ends of the branches, which are stout and woody, 
often spreading and usually making a small dense shrub about 
two to six feet high. Rarely, in sheltered inaccessible valleys of 
the southern Alleghanies, it is said to become a tree having a 
trunk thirty to forty feet high with a diameter of i8 inches; but 
this is probably a thing of the past. 



123 

The laurel is usually found on rocky or barren soil in hilly 
regions, ranging from New Brunswick and Ontario southward to 
Florida and Louisiana and blooms in May to July according to 
its range. 

The earliest account of Kalmia latifolia appeared in 1705 in the 
"Almatheum Botanicum" of Plukenet, who figured it very 
poorly and it was named by Linnaeus in 1753. It was also 
described and figured in a colored plate by Marc Catesby in 
1 771 in his Natural History of Carolina, Florida and the Bahama 
Islands, who introduced it into cultivation. The following is 
his account: 

"As all plants have their peculiar beauties, it is difficult to 
assign to any one an elegance excelling all others; yet, considering 
the curious structure of the flower, and beautiful appearance of 
this whole plant, I know of no shrub that has a better claim to it. 
After several unsuccessful attempts to propagate it from seeds, I 
procured plants of it at several times from America, but with 
little better success; for they gradually diminished, and pro- 
duced no blossoms, till my curious friend, Mr. Peter Collinson, 
excited by a view of its dried specimens and description of it, 
procured some plants of it from Pennsylvania; which climate 
being nearer to that of England, than from whence mine came, 
some bunches of blossoms were produced in July, 1740, and in 
1 74 1, in my garden at Fulham." 

The laurel belongs to the Ericaceae, or Heath family, as do 
the azaleas, rhododendrons, blueberries and arbutus, and it 
has been conclusively shown by Mr. Coville, Botanist of the 
United States Department of Agriculture in Washington, that 
what they need for successful cultivation, is an acid soil and an 
abundance of leaf mould. The arbutus has been grown in pots 
from seed and it may be that at no distant date, it may be forced 
as tulips and hyacinths are now, for Easter. Rhododendrons and 
laurel are being shipped in carload lots by dealers from the moun- 
tains of Pennsylvania and the southern Alleghanies, who supply 
florists and nurserymen from wild sources. How long can they 
last? 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
g. -FLOWERING DOGWOOD" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

14 : 133-134. July, 1913. 



Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 



Plate CXX 



^' 




FLOWERIXG DOGWOOD 



[Reprinted from Journal of the New York Hotanical Garden, July, 1913] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION* 

9. "Flowering Dogwood" (Cynoxylon floridum) 

With Plate CXX 

One of the new enemies of the dcgwccd is the automobile. 
It is not unusual in the vicinity of New York to see great branches 
torn off, with all the flowers drooping, being borne into the city, 
by people in automobiles. Such ruthless anc wanton destruction 
of this most decorative tree of our woodlands and hillsides is 
unpardonable and should be punished as a misdemeanor, for it 
is undoubtedly true, in most cases, that the depredators do not 
own the trees that they destroy, and have taken the branches from 
either some public park or private land. 

The dog\\'ood attains a height of about ic-20 feet with a 
maximum trunk of 40 feet usually with low and bread, spreading 
branches. At the summit of each twig there is a cluster of small 
yellowish green flowers about twenty to thirty in number, sur- 
rounded by four large showy white bracts, which sometimes 
attain 2-3 inches in length and 1-2 inches in breadth. They 
are formed by the expansion of the involucre v^hich surrounds the 
flowers in the bud. They are usually notched at the apex, 
often tinted with red and occasionally quite pink. The flowers 
are small, crowded together, with four recurved greenish yellow 
petals, attached in the mouth of the tubular 4-lobed calyx; the 
stamens are four, attached to and falling with the corolla and 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native 
Plants. 

133 



134 

the ovary is inferior with two cells and the summit bears a fleshy 
yellow disc, surrounding the base of the pistil. The fruit is an 
ovoid drupe, bright scarlet when ripe, usually five to six in a 
cluster. They are eagerly eaten by birds in the autumn, and 
in this way the seeds are widely disseminated. The leaves are 
opposite, borne in pairs on lateral branchlets, with short petioles; 
they are ovate or oval, acute with a strong mid-vein and con- 
spicuous lateral veins and quite entire. They are minutely 
hairy on the upper surface when young and pubescent particu- 
larly on the veins, beneath. The wood is fine-grained and is 
sometimes used as a substitute for box-wood. 

The dogwood ranges from Maine to Florida, and in the Central 
States from Ontario to Texas, ascending the mountains of Virginia 
and in the Sierra Madre in Mexico. It was named by Linnaeus 
in 1753 rom plants collected in Virginia and Carolina and was 
described by Plukenet in 1691 in his Phytographia probably 
from plants collected in Virginia by John Bannister. It has 
been in cultivation in England since 1730 and is greatly prized 
not only for its showy white masses of blossom in spring, but 
for the brilliant color of its foliage and fruit in the autumn. 
The rose-colored form was figured by Marc Catesby in 1771, 
and is highly esteemed in cultivation, occurring sparingly wild. 

Elizabeth G. Britton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
10. "LIVER-LEAF" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal op the New York Botanical Garden 

17: 55-56. April, 1916. 



Journal of the Ni.w York Botanical Garden Plate CLXIX 







LIVER-LEAF 



Reprinted from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 17 : 55-56. April, 1916. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION* 

10. "Liver-leaf" {Hepatica Hepatica (L.) Karst.) 

(With Plate CLXIX) 

This most delightful of early woodland blossoms is rapidly 
being exterminated from our hillsides by fires and the dying out 
and cutting down of the chestnuts which have sheltered them 
for many years. They prepare their lovely blossoms and silvery 
leaves the year before and are ready to come forth with the 
slightest encouragement, so that in sunny sheltered places they 
have even been known to blossom in December and are generally 
found in this vicinity in March and April, though sometimes 
lingering in cool places at higher elevations till May. 

The plant derives its common name from the dark purplish, 
red color of the under side of the leaves, which are bluntly 3-lobed 
and hardy, lying flat on the ground during the winter, their 
upper surface green and shining and their leathery texture pro- 
tecting them from the cold and snow. They are seldom more 
than 2-3 inches wide and 1.5 inches long, with 3 blunt lobes, 
though occasionally notched again on the lateral lobes. The 
young leaves, as they unfold, are covered with long silky white 
hairs as are also the stalks of the flowers. The stems are usually 
prostrate and subterranean, densely covered with strong fibrous 
roots, forming an underground rootstock; the growing tip being 
protected by a few large white sheathing bracts. The flowers 

* Illustrated by the aid ot the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants 

55 



56 

arise singly or in clusters from among these bracts, and vary in 
color from white, through pale shades of blue and pink to deep 
violet, with stalks also varying in length from 2-5 inches; they 
are subtended by three small sessile green leaves, forming an 
involucre to each blossom and enclosing it in the bud, so that 
both the leaves and blossoms are well protected during the 
winter by their silken covers. The colored segments of the 
flower are usually 6 in number and variable in length as are also 
the stamens. The anthers are white and the achenes are beaked 
and also covered with silky hairs. 

The Hepatica is widely distributed in the east from Nova 
Scotia to Florida and west in the central part of Canada to Mani- 
toba and in the United States to Iowa and Missouri. A closely 
related species, Hepatica acutiloha overlaps and intergrades with 
it and both are known from Europe and Asia. They take kindly 
to cultivation and increase in size and the number and color of 
their blossoms, but should be mulched only with well-rotted 
leaf-mold. 

The hepaticas belong to the Crowfoot or Buttercup family, 
of which about 35 genera and over a thousand species are known 
mostly from the temperate regions of the world. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
II. "BLOODROOT" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journa. or the New York Botakicax. Garden 

17 : 63-64. May, 1916. 



Journal of the Xkw York Botaxical Garden 



CLXXI 



Platf. 







BLOODROOT 



Reprinted from the Journal of the New YoKK Botanical Garden 17 : 63-64. May, 1916. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION* 
II. "Bloodroot" {San guinaria canadensis h.) 

(With Plate CLXXI) 

This is another of the early spring flowers, whose stems are 
protected by being buried in the earth, forming a subterranean 
rootstock, abundantly nourished by strong fibrous roots. It is 
this red, underground, stem, which gives the plant its common 
name, for like many others of the Poppy family, to which it 
belongs, it contains a milky orange-colored sap, which flows 
freely from it when broken. The stems give rise, at intervals, 
to clusters of pale sheathing bracts, from which the leaves 
emerge and unroll, showing the white pearly blossoms within. 
The base and veins of the leaves and the stalks of the flowers are 
also tinted with the red coloring matter of the stems. When 
fully expanded, the leaves often measure 6-12 inches across, 
being wider than they are long, variously lobed or toothed and 
borne on stalks often 10-14 inches in height. The leaves are 
fleshy and pale green in color with a waxy bloom when young 
and disappear soon after the fruit matures. The blossoms open 
sometimes in March but usually in April and early May and the 
flowers are generally borne singly on stalks longer than the leaves, 
though rarely two are found on one stalk; they are large and 
usually pure white, though sometimes tinged with purple or 
pale pink, and measure from 1-2 inches across, having 8-12 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 



64 

petals, which last only a day or two. The calyx falls off as the 
bud expands, a characteristic of other members of the Poppy 
family. The anthers are bright yellow and the stamens numer- 
ous, varying in length and attached at the base of the ovary 
which later develops into a two-valved pod, at the top of which 
the persistent stigma remains till it ripens. 

Owing to the variations in the lobing of its leaves Sanguinaria 
has been variously named, but it is generally considered a 
monotypic genus, widely distributed in the east from Nova 
Scotia to Manitoba and southward to Arkansas and Florida, 
occurring also at higher elevations in the AUeghanies. 

The Poppy family is widely distributed in the north temperate 
zone and 26 genera and 200 species are recognized, many of 
which have been used medicinally and are popular in cultivation 
on account of their showy flowers and beautiful foliage. 

Elizabeth G. Britton 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
12. "FRINGED GENTIAN" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of 

17 : 81-82. June, 1916. 



CLXXII 



Journal or the Nkw York Botanical Gardi:n Plate 




1 

FRINGED GENTIAN 



Reprinted from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 17 : 81-82. June, igi6. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION* 
12. "Fringed Gentian" (Gentiana crinita Froel.) 

(With Plate CLXXII) 

All lovers of wild flowers, love the "fringed gentian,'' love it 
to death! and ask, innocently enough, why they do not find it 
where it used to be abundant. How can an annual grow again 
in the same place, if all the flowers are taken and none allowed to 
go to seed? Pull up one of the plants and see the small roots, 
note that there are no fleshy root-leaves or rosettes, and that all 
the strength of the plant has been thrown into those showy 
flowers with fringed, purple petals to insure pollination by in- 
sects; and also remember, that of all the wild flowers, gentians 
last the longest when picked, opening and closing for weeks after 
they are brought home from the country, in a last vain efl^ort to 
set their seed on which they have staked their whole life! Bum- 
ble-bees often rob them of the nectar by piercing through the 
flattened, sheathing calyx, and thus defeat the object of that 
exquisite 4-leaved table spread so temptingly for the last floral 
feast ! 

The fringed gentians used to grow in large colonies around the 
lake in Van Courtland Park and in the swamp at the southern 
end of Woodlawn Cemetery, usually among goldenrods near 
the tall bushes of winter berries, that once fringed those bogs, 
but with the moccasin-flower and other lovely wild flowers they 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 

81 



82 

have all disappeared from the parks of the Bronx. The last 
that I saw were sent to the Garden by a well-intentioned Scotch 
foreman of Van Courtland Park, who had great sods of them 
dug up hoping that we might be able to preserve them. 

The plants are often i to 3 feet high, usually much branched, 
with the branches erect and 4-angled, with opposite ovate-acumi- 
nate leaves. The parts of the flower are in 4, including the 
white stamens, and the stigma is also white, 4-parted and sessile 
on the tapering ovary; the seeds mature in October or November. 
The flowers bloom late and all are familiar with Bryant's ex- 
quisite lines: 

"Thou waitest late and com'st alone, 
When woods are bare and birds are flown." 

The plant is eastern ranging from Quebec to Minnesota, south 
to Iowa and Georgia. 

The genus was named for King Gentius of Illyria and 300 
species are known, mostly natives of the north temperate zones, 
ranging into alpine regions of Europe and America, also in the 
Andes of South America. They are not often found in cultiva- 
tion and are rapidly becoming rare or extinct. Besides many 
alpine genera, various other beautiful and showy species and 
genera occur at sea-level and in the tropics, notably the Sab- 
batias or star-pinks, which are also rapidly disappearing from 
our eastern sea-coasts. A few are aquatic or semi-aquatic. 
Some of the plants have a bitter sap, which renders them a 
valuable tonic, and they are still in use medicinally. 

Elizabeth G. Britton 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 

i^. "GREAT LAUREL OR ROSE BAY." 

J 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 
23: 137-138. October, 19^2. 



Beprinted from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden, Vol XXIII, 
No. 274, October, 1922. 



WILD FLOWERS NEEDING PROTECTION^ 
14. Great Laurel or Rose Bay {Rhododendron maximum L.) 

{With plate zyf) 

This is the tallest of our native rhododendrons, as its specific 
name implies. Its generic name refers to the rose-color of 
the flowers and the tree-like habit of many of the species, which, 
though usually shrubby, sometimes attain a height of 20 to 40 
feet in this country and in China reach 50 feet and constitute 
large areas of the forest, mixed with wonderful groves of Mag- 
nolia. Some of these new Chinese species have yellow flowers, 
thus adding a new color series in this already wonderful genus, 
and making possible an entirely new series of hybrids, perhaps 
as varied and beautiful as those of the yellow Azalea, which 
by many students is classed with the Rhododendron. 

The rose bay is native only in eastern North America, ranging 
from Nova Scotia and Ontario, southward along the Alleghanies 
to Georgia, often growing in dense impenetrable thickets, in 
wet woods and in shady ravines, being particularly abundant 
in the mountains of Pennsylvania and Virginia. Its southern 
relative, R. Catawhiense, is abundant on Roan Mt., N. C, and 
gives its name to that summit, from the deep purplish-pink 
color of its flowers. Both these species grow readily from seed 
and hybridize freely having been the source of many showy 
cultivated varieties which are replacing their parents in gardens. 
Still, car-loads are often shipped to dealers from the southern 
states, and their valuable wood and decorative masses of ever- 

1 Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Nativ 
plants. 



138 

green foliage render them still more liable to depredation in 
all unprotected localities where they grow wild. Their showy 
trusses of flowers open from June to July, maturing their anthers 
before their stigmas, and bending them upward, so that any 
insect visiting the flower for its nectar will be dusted by the 
pollen. By this means cross fertilization is accomplished. One 
of the lobes of the corolla is spotted and the necter is secreted at 
the base of the lobe, so that the markings are recognized as 
insect-giiides. In this way many natural variations have been 
produced. About 350 species of Rhododendron are known to 
occur in the colder temperate regions of the northern hemis- 
phere, 16 of which, if we include the Azalea, have been de- 
scribed from North America. All prefer a sour soil and leaf mold 
and should be heavily mulched with rotten leaves, as they detest 
raw manure. They also like a cool, moist climate and partial 
shade when they attain their best growth. 

A beautiful illustrated book on the Rhododendron by J, G. 
Millais has recently been published in England, and some of 
the colored illustrations of English gardens show the perfection 
to which these shrubs attain in that moist temperate climate. 
Many beautiful species and showy hybrids are described and 
figured in colors, which have originated either from crossing 
the Indian {R. arhoreum) and the North American species or 
are 2d or 3rd crosses whose records have been lost. Species 
from Java and those recently discovered from China promise 
still greater choice of color and form for the future. Some few 
of the species are epiphytic and still otliers in the alpine regions 
of Western China are dwarfs and take the place of heaths in 
other countries. Still others are too tender to be grown except 
in green-houses. Some few of the evergreen species are fragrant 
and most of the azaleas have this added charm. Perhaps the 
new restrictions against importing these beautiful plants may 
encourage our own students and horticulturists to try experi- 
ments in crossing, which will add new treasures to this already 
rich and sumptuous genus. The accompanying illustration is 
of a plant grown at the New York Botanical Garden. 

E. G. Brixton 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 

14. "VIRGINIA COWSLIP" or "BLUEBELLS" 
(MERTENSIA VIRGINICA) 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Eeprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of The New York 
Botanical Garden 30: 209-211. pi. 304. S€ptember, 1929. 



Journal of The New York Botanical Garden Plate 304 




VIRGINIA COWSLIP or BLUEBELLS 



lAOprintfd, witlioiU cli.-iiiiii' cjf |i;iniiijr, fr<ini the JoniXAL oF TiiE New York 
FSOTAXUAi, (iAKDK.v 30: i!0!i-21]. /)/. oOi. Sc'i.tciiihcr, 1i)2!». 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION^ 

14. " Virginia Cowslip " or " Bluebells " 
[Mertensia virginica (L.) DC] 

( With plate 304) 
This is one of the most beautiful members of the Borage Fam- 
ily, which includes also the Forget-me-nots and that attractively 
repellent weed, naturalized from Europe, the "Blueweed" or 
"Viper's Bugloss." The exquisite delicacy and grace of their 
pendent clusters of flowers and their dainty coloring, varying 
from pink in the bud to pale blue when fully opened, render this 
one of the most attractive of our American wild flowers. Their 
beauty has only recently begun to be appreciated and at last they 
have been discovered by our commercial dealers and the "fash- 
ionable, feminine landscape architects." This may spell their 
decimation or doom, for the commercial supplies all come from 
wild sources, and, as far as we know, no one has attempted, in 
the trade, to raise them from seed. Eight North American spe- 
cies of Mertensia have been described, ranging from Hudson Bay 
to Alaska, and in the Rocky Mountains from Colorado and Utah, 
south to Wyoming and New Mexico. Our eastern species occurs 
from Ontario to Minnesota, south to Nebraska and Kansas and 
seems to be more abundant in the Middle States, in Ohio, Illinois, 
and Indiana. Though fine illustrations, like the one accompany- 
ing this article, have been made from photographs taken in Penn- 
sylvania, we know of only one station near New York City where 

1 Illustrated by the aid o£ the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of 
Native Plants. The last previous number (Jour. New York Bot. Gard. 
23: 137, 138. pi. 277. 1922) of this series was erroneously numbered 14. 

209 



211 



it grows in such abundance. It used to grow on the Orange 
Mountains near Montclair, Xew Jersey, hut has long been gone 
from that locaHty. It prefers damp and shady places along 
streams and wet hillsides, and apparently seeds freely and grows 
readily from seed. If planted in shady nloist places along streams 
or even in low swampy woodlands that are frequently overflowed 
in springtime, it will flourish and pro\'e a permanent decorative 
feature. 

It has a thickened storage rootstock which enables it to with- 
stand ill treatment for a while, but it will ultimately dwindle and 
disappear if planted in uncongenial locations, or with unsuitable 
companions. If associated wdth tulips which have to be lifted 
and replaced each year, the Mertensias, if grouped around them, 
are sure to suffer and ultimately disappear. Their delicacy and 
charm are enhanced by natural surroundings and the ideal loca- 
tion is a shady bed of ferns, which gradually unfurl their fronds 
and hide the yellow and dying leaves of the "Bluebells." For 
Mertensia virginica blooms early, from March to May, and dis- 
appears entirely when the trees are in full leaf. The taller spe- 
cies, M. paniculata and M. lanceolaia, bloom from June to August, 
but they also prefer thickets and woodlands and are entirely un- 
suited to sunny dry borders. 

The flowers are clustered at the top of the stems, and have a 
tube with a lobed corolla, and a very short 5-parted calyx. The 
stamens also are free and inserted on the tube of the corolla. 
There are four round nutlets in each fruit. 

Dr. Southwick has successfully established a group of them, 
brought from the colony on the Raritan River in New Jersey. 
They are planted in shade along one of the rills at the northern 
end of the Rock Garden, an ecological habitat much like their 
natural one. 

There are several exotic species, which are said to be "not 
easy to cultivate, but are offered by some American dealers." 
These are natives of Siberia and Kashmir and prefer high moun- 
tain districts, as do several of our Rocky Mountain species. 

Elizabeth G. Britton. 



l^ 



^v York. N-l> 



N«w York Botanical Garden Library 

Britton Elizabeth/Wild P'ants needina p 



3 5185 00099 4499 



