no. % 

FLORA OF PERU 





BOTANICAL SERIES 

FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 

VOLUME XIII, PART IV, NUMBER 2 

NOVEMBER 28, 1958 



PUBLICATION 861 



THE LIBRARY OF. THE 

DEC 1 9 1953 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 



To renew call Telephone Center, 333-840O 




FLORA OF PERU 



BY 

ROGERS MCVAUGH 

CURATOR OP VASCULAR PLANTS, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 




BOTANICAL SERIES 

FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 

VOLUME XIII, PART IV, NUMBER 2 

NOVEMBER 28, 1958 

PUBLICATION 861 



Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 36-10426 



PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BY CHICAGO NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM PRESS 



FLORA OF PERU 



ROGERS MCVAUGH 

MYRTACEAE. Myrtle Family 

Shrubs or trees or rarely subherbaceous. Leaves simple, oppo- 
site (except in some introduced genera), exstipulate, entire or rarely 
crenate, punctate with resinous or pellucid glands, usually pinnately 
veined. Mid vein usually elevated and prominent on the lower sur- 
face. Principal lateral veins usually uniting distally into a "marginal 
vein" which extends nearly the length of the blade and more or less 
parallel to the margin but somewhat separated from it. Flowers 
borne on axillary (or rarely terminal) branches, solitary or in spe- 
cialized bracteate inflorescences with opposite branching, these mod- 
ified in various ways, e.g., by elongation of the axis and reduction of 
the lateral axes to one flower each ("racemes"); by suppression of 
the axis and reduction of the lateral axes to one flower each (flowers 
in "glomerules" or "umbelliform clusters"); by reduction of the 
lateral axes to one pair, these arising just below the flower which 
terminates the central axis ("dichasium") ; by potentially indefinite 
elongation of both central and lateral axes, this resulting in a "pan- 
icle" with proximal branches elongate and a transition from these 
to short simple branches and terminal triads of flowers. Flowers 
regular or essentially so, hermaphrodite or rarely by abortion uni- 
sexual. Ovary inferior, the hypanthium adnate to the ovary its 
whole length or prolonged beyond it so that the stamens, petals and 
calyx-lobes appear to arise from the distal margin of a short tube 
surrounding the summit of the ovary. Calyx-lobes usually 4 or 5, 
distinct and imbricate, or the calyx calyptrate and circumscissile, or 
rupturing irregularly in anthesis. Petals usually 4 or 5 (sometimes 
reduced in number or size, or wanting). Stamens usually indefi- 
nitely many, in one-many series about the margin of the usually 
thickened calycine disk, usually inflexed in the bud. Filaments 
usually filiform and distinct in Peruvian species. Anthers usually 
short, versatile or basifixed, bilocular, opening (at least in Peruvian 
genera) by longitudinal slits. Style simple, elongate, with small 
capitate or peltate stigma. Ovary 2- to many-locular, the placentae 
affixed to the axis or parietal and coalesced into a central axis, the 
ovules 2 or more. Fruit fleshy or capsular. Embryo various. 

569 



570 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

The genera now referred to Myrtaceae were divided by DeCan- 
dolle among three tribes, namely, Chamaelaucieae (with dry uni- 
locular and usually indehiscent fruit), Leptospermeae (with dry 
multilocular and usually dehiscent fruit), and Myrteae (with fleshy 
multilocular fruit). This system was set forth in detail in the 
Prodromus 3: 207-288. 1828. Essentially the same arrangement 
was followed by Bentham, in Benth. & Hook. f. Gen. PI. 1: 690- 
720. 1865. Niedenzu, in Engler & Prantl, Nattirl. Pflanzenfam. Ill 
(7): 57-105. 1893, erected two subfamilies; the first, Myrtoideae, 
comprised the one tribe Myrteae, and the second, Leptospermoi- 
deae, included the two tribes Leptospermeae and Chamaelaucieae. 

The subfamily Leptospermoideae is especially developed in the 
Australian region and to a lesser extent elsewhere in the southwest 
Pacific. The total number of species approaches 1000, including 
according to some authors nearly 500 species of the vast Australian 
genus Eucalyptus. The only American member of the subfamily is 
the endemic Chilean species Tepualia stipularis (Barn.) Griseb. All 
the native Peruvian Myrtaceae are members of the tribe Myrteae, 
but several species of Eucalyptus have been introduced for shade and 
for ornament, and at least one has become widespread. 

Key to the Tribes (Peruvian representatives only) 

Fruit dry, capsular, consisting of the capsule immersed in the hard- 
ened hypanthium, the valves sometimes projecting beyond the 
rim of the hypanthium; petals and calyx-lobes united into an 
operculum which is dehiscent at anthesis; flowers usually in 
pedunculate axillary umbels; adult leaves glabrous, lanceolate 
and long-petiolate, and mostly alternate, the juvenile ones often 
broad, subsessile and more or less opposite. 

Tribe I. Leptospermeae 

Fruit fleshy (a few- or many-seeded "berry") ; petals and calyx-lobes 
free, or in a few genera united into an operculum; flowers vari- 
ously arranged, never in pedunculate axillary umbels; leaves 
opposite, rarely markedly long-petiolate .... Tribe II. Myrteae 



Tribe I. LEPTOSPERMEAE DC. 
1. EUCALYPTUS L'Her. 

Glabrous trees or shrubs, the leaves alternate, leathery, usually 
elongate, lanceolate and 8-12 cm. long or more, markedly petiolate 
and often hanging vertically; juvenile foliage (of seedlings or shoots 



FLORA OF PERU 571 

from felled trees) often broad, subsessile and more or less opposite, 
rarely hairy; flowers usually in pedunculate axillary umbels, some- 
times forming panicles; bracts and bracteoles deciduous so early as 
to be seldom seen; ovary usually 3- to 4-locular, immersed in and 
surrounded by the fleshy hypanthium which hardens in fruit and is 
prolonged beyond the summit of the ovary into a rim which bears 
the numerous stamens; petals and calyx-lobes united into an oper- 
culum which is continuous with the rim of the hypanthium in bud 
and circumscissile at anthesis; stamens widely spreading in anthesis 
and forming the showy part of the flower; style about as long as the 
operculum; ovules and seeds numerous, but only a few in each locule 
fertile. 

A large and almost exclusively Australian genus at one time sup- 
posed to include nearly 500 species; some recent authors have sug- 
gested that the actual number is somewhat smaller. A recent account 
of the Northern Australian species, by S. T. Blake in Austral. Jour. 
Bot. 1: 185-352, pi. 1-36. 1953, includes 50 species in this part of the 
continent; J. M. Black, in Fl. South Austral, ed. 2, 612-632. 1952, 
lists 52 species. 

Numerous species have been introduced into the tropical and 
warm-temperate regions of America for ornament, for purposes of 
reforestation, for wood and for lumber; only the following seems to 
have been entirely successful. 

Eucalyptus globulus Labill. Voy. 1: 153, t. 13. 1799. 

A large tree, said to reach a height of 75-90 meters, with pale 
deciduous bark and yellowish green angled branchlets; adult leaves 
alternate, lanceolate and often falcate to narrowly ovate, 2-3 (-6) 
cm. wide at base, 12-25 cm. long, (3-) 5-8 times as long as wide, 
attenuate from base to the slenderly pointed apex, the base often 
obliquely unequal-sided, abruptly rounded to the flexuous petiole 
2-4 cm. long; mid vein pale, flat or concave above, convex beneath; 
leaf-margins bordered by heavy cartilaginous veins about equal to 
the midvein but compressed at right angles to the plane of the leaf 
and often standing somewhat above and below it; lateral veins deli- 
cate and inconspicuous, joining an equally slender and nearly straight 
submarginal vein just within the cartilaginous border; foliage with 
numerous small dark glands on both surfaces; juvenile shoots and 
leaves conspicuously whitened and waxy-glaucous, their leaves oppo- 
site, sessile, ovate to oblong, cordate, abruptly short-acuminate at 
tip, 4-5 cm. wide, 7-15 cm. long; flowers large, subsessile, solitary or 



572 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

rarely 3 in an axil, on a massive, broadly 2-angled peduncle up to 
5 mm. long; buds 1.7-2.5 cm. long, conspicuously whitened by a 
heavy waxy-farinose coating; hypanthium about 1 cm. long, trun- 
cate at base, strongly 4-angled, obpyramidal, irregularly and coarsely 
warty-roughened especially on the angles and the thickened margin; 
calyptra dome-like, roughened like the hypanthium, usually with a 
broad knoblike or acute central beak; stamens 1.5 cm. long (the 
flower when expanded 3-4 cm. across), borne on the inner edge of 
the disk which projects about 3 mm. beyond the thickened margin 
of the hypanthium; style 8-10 mm. long; fruit 2-2.5 cm. broad and 
high, flat-topped or the surface convex, the 4-5 valves not exserted 
but nearly plane with the surface; seeds 1-3 mm. long, very numer- 
ous, prismatic, irregularly several-angled. 

A native originally of Victoria, New South Wales, and Tasmania, 
this species is now extensively planted and naturalized from Cali- 
fornia to Argentina and Chile, especially in high semi-arid regions; 
it is a valuable timber tree of rapid growth, and now forms a charac- 
teristic feature of the landscape in many parts of Latin America. 
According to Acosta Solis, "El eucalipto en el Ecuador," in Flora 
(Quito) 15-16: 149-194. 1945, E. globulus was introduced into Ecua- 
dor in 1865 and has become a valuable resource in the inter-Andine 
region of that country. It has likewise become abundant in Peru, 
as in Cuzco, where, according to Herrera in Contr. Fl. Depto. Cuzco, 
ed. 2, 148-149. 1921, it was introduced about 1880 and subsequently 
became general in all the provinces of that Department. 

Amazonas: Chachapoyas, 2,700 meters, Williams 7562. Junin: 
Tarma, 3,000-3,200 meters, Killip & Smith 21870. "Eucalipto." 

Another species, Eucalyptus camaldulensis Dehnh., Cat. PI. Hort. 
Camald. ed. 2: 20. 1832 (E. rostrata Schlecht., 1847, non Cav., 1797), 
has been collected near Yucay, Cuzco, by Soukup (no. 840). The 
inflorescence is a 6- to 10-flowered axillary umbel, on a peduncle 1-2 
(-3) cm. long, the pedicels 3-8 mm. long; buds ovoid, 5-10 mm. long, 
the calyptra longer than the base (up to 3 times as long), abruptly 
narrowed to a stout straight beak 1-6 mm. long; fruit nearly hemi- 
spheric, 4-6 mm. high, 5-8 mm. broad, the 3-4 deltoid or narrowly 
pointed valves projecting 1.5-3 mm. beyond the equator. 

Tribe II. MYRTEAE DC. 

Classification of the subtribes of the Myrteae has been based 
principally upon characters of the mature embryo. Such a classifi- 






FLORA OF PERU 573 

cation appears to be in the main a natural one, but practically it 
presents many difficulties. Members of this family are usually col- 
lected when in flower, at a time when it is impossible to ascertain the 
structure of the embryo. Flowers and fruits are rarely found on the 
same plant at the same time, so that any usable system of classifi- 
cation must utilize characters of flower and inflorescence in addition 
to those which may be found in the mature fruit. The subtribes 
accepted in the present treatment are those proposed by Berg, and 
the arrangement of genera follows in the main that of his "Revisio 
Myrtacearum Americae," in Linnaea 27: 1-472. 1855-56. The sub- 
tribes are characterized as follows: 

1. Subtribe Myrciinae Berg. Cotyledons foliaceous, contortu- 
plicate. Radicle elongate. 

2. Subtribe Eugeniinae Berg. Cotyledons fleshy, distinct, or 
somewhat or completely fused, or conferruminate; radicle very short. 

3. Subtribe Pimentinae Berg. Embryo spiral, subspiral or un- 
cinate-curved. Radicle elongate; cotyledons very short. 

Key to Flowering Material 

Inflorescence compound, usually many-flowered (flowers often 30- 
200 or more), with branches compound and opposite near the 
base of the panicle, becoming irregularly ternate or solitary near 
tips; calyx-lobes, if developed, usually 5; bracts and bracteoles 
usually deciduous at anthesis or before. 

Calyx-lobes evident in bud and in anthesis, usually with thin dis- 
tal and lateral margins which are imbricate or at least con- 
tiguous at base; central axis of the inflorescence well developed 
and about as long as the primary lateral branches .... Myrcia 

Calyx closed in bud or merely the tips of the lobes free, either cir- 
cumscissile or splitting irregularly between the lobes; central 
axis of the inflorescence often aborted at the node where the 
lowest lateral branches emerge, and the panicle as a whole 
seeming to consist of two nearly equal parts. 

Calyx closed in bud, calyptrate, circumscissile; petals minute or 
often wanting; malpighiaceous hairs often present and con- 
spicuous; bracts mostly deciduous Calyptranthes 

Calyx closed in bud or the tips of the lobes free, the buds open- 
ing by irregular longitudinal splitting between the calyx- 
lobes nearly or quite to the summit of the ovary; petals 



574 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

small, usually present; malpighiaceous hairs usually not 

apparent; bracts sometimes persistent Marlierea 

Inflorescence not as above, 1- to several-flowered (flowers rarely as 
many as 30), racemose, regularly dichotomous or the flowers 
solitary, sub-umbellate or glomerate; calyx various, the lobes 
usually 4 and distinct if the flowers are more than 7; bracteoles 
often persistent. 

Cymes lateral on old wood, thrice dichotomous, 2-3 cm. long, with 
persistent paired bracts and a central sessile flower in each 
fork; calyx-lobes 4; flowers red; stamens 4-8, 1.5-2 cm. long. 

Myrrhinium 

Inflorescence racemose or dichasially branched, or the flowers 
glomerate or solitary; cymes, if occasionally twice or thrice 
dichotomous, irregularly branched and in leaf-axils near the 
tips of twigs; flowers mostly white or cream-color, rarely pink 
or red; stamens usually shorter and far more numerous. 

Calyx closed or essentially so in the bud, opening at anthesis by 
irregular longitudinal slits. 

Flowers about 4, nearly sessile, glomerate (in a much abbrevi- 
ated raceme), the clusters appearing involucrate because 
of the relatively large persistent bracts; calyx-lobes 4; 
ovary bilocular, the locules 2-ovulate Plinia 

Flowers 1, or 3-7 in a dichasium, pedicellate or the dichasia 
pedunculate, not involucrate; calyx-segments usually 5; 
ovary 2- to 7-locular, the locules many-ovulate . . Psidium 

Calyx-lobes normally developed even in the bud, the calyx at 
anthesis not or scarcely splitting beyond the bases of the 
lobes. 

Calyx-lobes 5. 

Small or prostrate shrubs or subshrubs with coriaceous vac- 
cinioid leaves 1-2 cm. long or less; flowers solitary; 
bracteoles foliaceous and persistent; Andean paramos. 

Anthers sagittate, the connective dilated Ugni 

Anthers oblong or subrotund, not sagittate, the filaments 

filiform Myrteola 

Shrubs or trees with larger leaves; flowers solitary or in 
small dichasia; bracteoles deciduous; middle and low 
elevations. 



FLORA OF PERU 575 

Leaves coriaceous, subsessile, suborbicular, 1.5-7.5 cm. 
long and wide; dichasium stout, 3- to 7-flowered; 
Lima, on Pacific slopes .... Myrcianthes. quinqueloba 

Leaves membranaceous or chartaceous, petiolate or elon- 
gate or both, 1.5-3.5 times as long as wide; flowers 
solitary or in slender 3 (-7) -flowered dichasia; culti- 
vated and escaped, otherwise mostly Amazonian 
lowland. 

Flowers usually 4, in two decussate pairs at the lowest 
nodes of an axillary branch; calyx-lobes broadly 
rounded, 3-6 mm. long, spreading after anthesis; 
mature petioles 10-15 mm. long; 3-4 lowest pairs 
of veins in the leaf closely grouped, the succeeding 
ones increasingly distant Campomanesia 

Flowers 1-7 in an axil; calyx-lobes, if developed, 3 mm. 
long or less (in one species with narrow terminal 
appendages 6-14 mm. long); mature petioles 10 
mm. long or usually less; veins of leaf uniformly 
spaced, the lower ones not markedly aggregated. 

Psidium 
Calyx-lobes 4. 

Stamens 25-50, the filaments 15-22 mm. long, red; style 
15-22 mm. long, about three times as long as the 

petals; plants heavily villose or tomentose Acca 

Stamens much more numerous, or much shorter, or white; 
style rarely more than 15 mm. long (usually much 
less), usually less than twice as long as the petals; 
plants various. 

Inflorescence a raceme, the flowers in opposite decussate 
bracteate pairs; central axis of raceme abortive at 
tip (the terminal flower wanting) and the axis often 
so much abbreviated that the flowers appear glom- 
erate or umbellate. 

Calyx-tube much prolonged above the ovary, circum- 
scissile at base after anthesis; flowers usually 4, 
small (buds in our species 5 mm. long or less) and 
nearly sessile, with conspicuous paired persistent 
involucre-like bracteoles; ovules 2 or 4 in each 
locule Myrciaria 



576 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Calyx-tube little or not at all prolonged, not circum- 
scissile, persistent with the lobes in flower and 
fruit; inflorescence various; ovules 2 or many. 
Flowers glomerate (in clusters of about 4-6), mostly 
pubescent, medium-sized (buds in ours 5-12 
mm. long), the clusters appearing involucrate 
because of the relatively large persistent bracts; 
calyx in the bud very shortly 4-lobed at sum- 
mit, and later splitting irregularly; ovules 2. 

Plinia 

Flowers glomerate to racemose, not involucrate; 
calyx-lobes free their whole length, or loosely 
coherent at base; ovules mostly numerous. 

Eugenia 

Flowers solitary or in simple or compound dichasia, the 
primary axis of the inflorescence if once-forked with 
a sessile or nearly sessile flower in the fork. 
Small or prostrate shrubs or subshrubs with coriaceous 
vaccinioid leaves 1 cm. long or less; flower soli- 
tary; bracteoles foliaceous, persistent; paramos in 

the Andes Myrteola 

Shrubs or trees with larger leaves; flowers various; 

middle and low elevations. 

Flowers 3-7, in a dichasium; calyx-lobes 1.5 mm. 
long, ciliate, deciduous at anthesis with the 
bracts and bracteoles; southern Ecuador. 

Blepharocalyx salicifolius 
Inflorescence various; calyx-lobes not ciliate and 

deciduous. 

[Stigma peltate?; placentation parietal, the pla- 
centae introrse, bilamellate?] ; flowers 1 or 3, 
large, long-pedunculate, the calyx-lobes 7-9 
mm. long; Amazonian lowlands. .Psidium sp. 
Stigma small and simple, hardly broader than the 
style; placentae simple, axillary; flowers and 
inflorescence various. 

Flowers, if more than one, in simple or com- 
pound dichasia; if solitary only, then oc- 
curring in many or most of the mature leaf- 
axils, not confined to the basal nodes of a 
new branch Myrcianthes 



FLORA OF PERU 577 

Flowers, if more than one, in elongate or 
much abbreviated racemes; if solitary only, 
then mostly confined to the 1-2 lowest 
nodes of a new branch, and often in the 
axils of much reduced bracts Eugenia 

Key to Fruiting Material 

Cotyledons foliaceous, contortuplicate; radicle elongate; testa mostly 
membranaceous, fragile; calyx-lobes, if present, usually 5; in- 
florescence compound, usually many-flowered, with branches 
opposite near base and irregularly ternate or solitary near tips; 
bracts and bracteoles rarely present (i.e., deciduous about the 
time of anthesis). 

Calyx-lobes normally developed and present on the fruit, their 
basal margins contiguous; central axis of the inflorescence 
well developed and about as long as the primary lateral 
branches Myrcia 

Calyx wanting (the tip of the fruit umbilicate) or represented by 
a shrunken calyptra attached at one side, or the calyx longi- 
tudinally ruptured below the base of the lobes and the latter 
irregularly margined proximally in fruit; central axis of the 
inflorescence often aborted at the node where the lowest lat- 
eral branches emerge. 

Calyx closed in bud, calyptrate, circumscissile, the calyptra 
sometimes persistent in fruit or, if deciduous, the fruit um- 
bilicate; [malpighiaceous hairs often present and conspic- 
uous; bracts mostly deciduous] Calyptranthes 

Calyx closed in bud or the tips of the lobes free; lobes at ma- 
turity separated by irregular longitudinal ruptures extend- 
ing nearly or quite to the summit of the ovary; fruit 
crowned by the unevenly margined (usually 5) often re- 
flexed lobes, or these irregularly deciduous; [malpighiaceous 
hairs usually not apparent; bracts of the inflorescence often 
persistent on the branches after the flowers fall] . . Marlierea 
Cotyledons not as above, but small and fleshy, or large and plano- 
convex, or the embryo undivided; inflorescence 1- to several- 
flowered (flowers rarely more than 30), not branched as above; 
calyx-lobes usually 4 and distinct if the flowers are more than 7; 
bracteoles often persistent. 



578 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Cymes lateral on old wood, thrice dichotomous, 2-3 cm. long, with 
persistent paired bracts and a central sessile flower in each 
fork; calyx-lobes 4; embryo arcuate, the cotyledons hardly 
distinct, the testa hard, bony Myrrhinium 

Inflorescence racemose or apparently the flowers glomerate, or 
dichasially branched, or the flowers solitary; cymes, if occa- 
sionally twice or thrice dichotomous, terminal and irregular. 

Inflorescence a raceme, the flowers in opposite decussate brac- 
teate pairs; central axis of raceme abortive at tip (the 
terminal flower wanting) and the axis itself often so much 
abbreviated that the flowers appear glomerate or umbel- 
late in the axils; calyx-lobes usually 4. 

Seeds small, numerous, with curved embryo, long radicle and 
short cotyledons of Subtribe Pimentinae Acca 

Seeds few, one or two filling the entire fruit; embryo undi- 
vided or the cotyledons large, free, plano-convex. 

Cotyledons free, plano-convex; flowers glomerate, mostly 
pubescent, the clusters appearing involucrate because 
of the relatively large persistent bracts; calyx splitting 
irregularly longitudinally, the lobes persistent . . Plinia 

Embryo undivided or the cotyledons partly separated; 
flowers, if glomerate, not involucrate; calyx various, 
if closed in bud then not splitting irregularly. 

Calyx-tube prolonged above the ovary, circumscissile at 
base after anthesis and leaving a circular scar on the 
fruit; flowers small and nearly sessile, usually 4. 

Myrciaria 

Calyx-tube not circumscissile, scarcely or not at all pro- 
longed, the lobes persistent; flowers glomerate or in 
racemes Eugenia 

Flowers solitary or in simple or compound dichasia, the primary 
axis of the inflorescence if once-forked with a sessile or 
nearly sessile flower in the fork; calyx-lobes 4 or 5, or the 
calyx irregularly longitudinally dehiscent. 

Seeds one or two; embryo undivided or the cotyledons plano- 
convex and distinct, longer than the radicle; testa thin; 
calyx-lobes 4, usually distinct and persistent. 
Embryo undivided; flowers solitary, or racemose in some 
axils Eugenia 