






M if A 






















/ 










I . , 






THE 


MAMMALS OF AUSTRALIA, 


RHYIT/TF? FT 

MISS HARRIETT SCOTT, AND MRS. HELENA EORDE, 

FOR THE 

Council of education 

WITH 



A SIIOET ACCOUNT OF ALL THE SPECIES HITHERTO DESCRIBED. 


GrERARD KREFFT, F.L.S., &c. 

CUEATOE AND SEOEETAEY OF THE AXJ STBALIAN MUSEUM. 



SYDNEJ : 

THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. 


1871. 



PREFACE 


The following plates representing some of our Mammals, for which these brief descriptions have been written, were 
published, in the first instance, by the Council of Education, as Object Lessons, for the use of their Schools. 

Mr. A. W. Scott, M.A., was entrusted with their execution, and his talented Daughters, Miss Scott and 
Mrs. Helena Eorde, lithographed them. Most of the Drawings were taken from life-photographs, and the rest 

from the best mounted specimens that could be procured. Only 16 Animals are represented herein ; but a 

general summary is given of those which are not figured. It is to be hoped that the Council of Education will 

continue this very useful Work to completion. 

The letter- press supplies all the most necessary information, including remarks on the anatomy and the 
geographical distribution of the animals referred to. The price of Mr. Gould’s elaborate Work places it beyond 
the reach of ordinary means, and Mr. Waterhouse’s “Natural History of Mammalia” — the best treatise on the 
Marsupiata ever published — has been long out of print, so that the present Book may be considered the only 

one of its kind now available. 

A general summary of our Vertebrata will be found in that useful publication “ The Industrial Progress 
of New South Wales” — but it is too short to be of much use to the Student, though sufficient to dispel many 
popular errors. Works of this kind deserve more encouragement ; and it may not be out of place to mention here 
that a valuable series of Plates illustrative of our fossil Mammals, drawn by the same artists, together with 
Geological Maps of the Wellington Caves and the surrounding country, by Professor Alexander M. Thomson, 
Dr., Sc., of the Sydney University, are in the hands of the Trustees of the Museum, ready for publication so soon 
as the necessary funds shall have been provided. 

The Council of Education will perhaps allow me this opportunity to appeal to residents in the Country 
Districts for contributions to our national collection. The Echidna and the Ornithorhynchus, shot during August, 
September, and October, but especially their young, being the most desirable donations. Other specimens, such as 
Eossil Remains of all kinds, sun or smoke-dried Skeletons, Skins of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Eishes, and Small 
Animals in brine, Insects and Shells in spirits — will be thankfully received and duly acknowledged by the Trustees. 
A most valuable gift, the young of an Echidna or Spiny Ant-eater (not larger than a Erench bean), was lately 
presented by Mr. Sydney Hill, being the second specimen of so small a size ever obtained, and yet the Echidna 
was discovered nearly a century ago, and described so far back as 1792. It is strange, but true, that not a single 
very young Ornithorhynchus, or Duck-mole, is in one of the Museums in Australia ; the specimens which Dr. 
Bennett captured in 1834 were unfortunately lost, and I am not aware that others have been secured since. 
These facts show sufficiently that the study of Natural History, in which many persons feel interested, is still 
much neglected. No doubt everybody is desirous of finding new or curious objects, but the consequence is that 
the more common specimens are exceedingly 1 rare in collections, and cannot be referred to when required. 

What, for example, is of greater value to the Earmer, the Breeder, or the Veterinary, than a series of 
skeletons of our domestic animals, showing the differences in their bony frame ; or sets of skulls to illustrate the 
changes which the teeth undergo. Certainly there are books on these subjects, but the examination of such 
specimens is more instructive than many pages filled with description. Objects of this kind are easily prepared on 
large Stations, and would form more desirable gifts to the Museum than the malformed animals which are so 
frequently presented in the mistaken belief that they are the most appreciated by the public. But there are better 

reasons why the teeth in particular should be well studied. The sufferings which result from disregard of natural 

laws should be forcibly impressed upon children; and they should frequently be reminded that the second set of 
teeth which they receive from a bountiful Creator is also the last. 

Ready at all times to give information to visitors to the Museum, I specially invite Teachers to come, 
with their school-children, and inspect the Objects of Natural History and Ethnography exhibited. The collection is 
the most complete, as regards Australian specimens, ever brought together either here or elsewhere ; the only great 

want now being the Catalogue, which doubtless will be provided so soon as the Trustees find the means of 

publishing it. 


Australian Museum, 

Sydney, 28 October, 1871. 


GERARD KREEET. 



lammals of Australia. 


TABLE OE CONTENTS. 


a. Animals without a Pouch or Shin-folcl for the protection of their young, forming the Order of 

PLACENTALIA. 

PLATE I. — Flying Fox, and general account of Australian Bats, 

PLATE II. — Dingo, or Australian Native Dog. 

PLATE III. — Seal, and list of Seals inhabiting the Antarctic Ocean. 

PLxhTE IV. — Water B ats, and general list of Australian Eats and Mice. 


h, Animals supplied with a Pouch or Shin fold for the protection of their young, which are 
very small when horn, forming the Order 

MARSUPIALIA. 

PLATE V. — Tasmanian Wombat, with account of other species. 

PLATE VI.— Native Bear. 

PLATE VII. — Ring-tail Phalanger, and account of Phalanger Family 
PLATE VIII.— Vulpine Phalanger. 

PLATE IX. — Tasmanian Phalanger. 

PLATE X.— Kangaroo. A 

PLATE XI. — Kangaroo, and account of the Family; also account of the Bandicoots, 
PLATE XII. — Tasmanian Tiger, and account of the Dasyurkbe or Native Cat Family. 
PLATE XIII. — Native Cats. Short account of common species. 


Animals destitute of teeth, or ichen these are present formed of a horny substance. The female of one 
genus (Echidna) is supplied with two small pouches without nipples, in which the young are carried. 


MONOTREMATA. 


PLATE XIV. — Ant-eater. 

PLATE XV. — Duck-billed Platypus. 









































INTRODUCTION. 


The Patina of Australia is as peculiar as its Plora ; and comparing the Mammals with the inhabitants of other 
Countries, the observer is struck by the total absence of the great groups of Ruminants, Pachyderms, and Placental 
Carnivores, with which the plains and forests of Europe, Africa, and America abound. Australia is pre-eminently 
the land of the Marsupials, or Pouched Animals, the more highly organized Placentals being feebly represented by 
a species of Dog, a few Seals, many species of Bats, and numerous Rodents or Rats. Reviewing these families, 
we cannot hut notice that two groups, namely, the Seals and Bats, have peculiar advantages in their mode of 
locomotion, and may have reached the Great South Country with little difficulty. The Dog has always been 
considered to he introduced by Man, and if so, our race must have visited Australia at an early age, though it 
is more likely that the Dog, the Rats, and the Pouched Animals existed together long before Man made his 
appearance in this part of the World. 

There can he no doubt that the Australian Continent was much larger at one time, and that the 
numerous islands scattered over the Banda and Arafura Sea, such as Aru, Ceram, New Guinea, and, farther east, 
the Solomon’s and New Hebrides Islands, formed, with New Holland proper, a more or less compact mass, in 
which the Marsupial Pauna was predominant. 

The smaller islands are either destitute of Mammals (except Bats), or, if they possess any, they belong 
to the pouched tribe. Prom New Guinea, a Pig (Sus papuensisj has been recorded, also a small Placental 
Insectivore fParadoxurus 'hermaphroditaj ; the Marsupials amount, however, to eight genera and ten species. Besides, 
the interior of New Guinea, with its high tableland, and snowy peaks of over 13,000 feet in height, is still a 
sealed hook to the geographer and the naturalist ; though, with all our scant knowledge, some of the most peculiar 
forms of marsupial life, the Tree-kangaroos, have been discovered in its sombre forests. Who can say how many 
more of the Creator’s wondrous animals may yet he found when this the largest island of the Globe is brought 
under the influence of civilization. There are several Marsupials which New Guinea, the Aru Islands, and 
Northern Australia have in common, so that the supposition of these islands being at one time joined to the 
Australian Continent is more than probable. 

Before we consider the recent Pauna of Australia, it is necessary to go hack to the evidence of fossil 
remains which many caves and alluvial deposits have yielded up. These remains prove clearly that the Country was 
inhabited in former ages by animals often larger than, hut always similar in structure to, our present Kangaroos 
or Phalangers. The first group, the grass-eating Kangaroos, Wallabies, Kangaroo-rats, Phalangers, and Wombats, 
abounded; there is evidence even of the Koala, or Native Bear, and of a small Plying Phalanger not larger 
than a Sugar Squirrel (BelideusJ ; hut there is also clear proof of gigantic creatures roving over our plains, 
or perhaps inhabiting the ancient swamps and rivers, which in size can only be compared to the Rhinoceros 
or the Hippopotamus. The teeth of these large species, in their form, number, and distribution, resemble, with 
some modification, those of the Phalangers ; and the usual formula, which holds good in recent species, varies but 
slightly in the large fossil ones. When we examine the dentition of a Diprotodon, the largest of the tribe, we find 
six incisors above and two below (that is, three and one respectively in each ramus). We also notice one premolar 
and four molars or grinders in each ramus, above and below. The tusks, or first pair of upper, and the two 
incisive lower teeth, are coarse, not very regular, and evidently designed for the cutting of thick, rank herbage, 


2 


such as reeds m twigs, on which these animals probably browsed. When by a change of climate, or horn other 
causes, the bogs, with their rich vegetation, disappeared, the great Dvprotodons must have found it hard to make 
a living, and naturally succumbed to the altered circumstances, and became extinct. The smaller Kangaroos, with 
their admirable dentition and scissor-like lower jaws, nipped the grass if it was ever so scanty; and many of 
these ancient species having successfully fought for existence, . still live on. There must have been many more 
Herbivorous Marsupials than at present, because many of the remains discovered differ much from recent bones and 
teeth. Sometimes portions of skeletons are noticed, however, which clearly indicate animals of the Kangaroo and 
Phalanger tribe, identical with living ones; but all the gigantic species have ceased to exist. We gather from 
the fossil remains that the bulkier kinds stood low on their legs, and that they progressed in the same way as the 
Wombat; in fact, the skeleton of a Diprotodon must have resembled that of a Wombat or “Native Bear” in 
many points. 

The extinct Kangaroo tribe is principally distinguished by having shorter and stronger tarsi than the 
living Kangaroos, and their mode of progress must have been therefore slower. 

Another gigantic animal, the Zygomaturus, first described by the late Mr. W. S. Macleay, M.A., belongs to 
the same group as the Dvprotodon; its incisor teeth are however more feeble, and bear a still closer resemblance 
to those of the Phalangers. Numerous lower jaws in our collections indicate at least fifteen or more large species 
of either Diprotodon or Notothermm, so that we cannot enumerate less than twenty gigantic grass-eating Marsupials 
belonging to our extinct Pauna. If we add to these at least fifty species of Kangaroos, Wallabies, and Kangaroo 
Bats, and twenty species of Wombats, with a few Phalangers, we bring the Herbivorous Marsupials of Post- 
pleiocene Australia in round numbers to eighty-five species. It is generally considered in confor mi ty with the laws 
of the Creator, that the undue increase of prolific animals should be checked by beasts of prey, and this duty 

appears to have been assigned to a few small but very ferocious species, the remains of which occur in large 

quantities at the Wellington Caves. These Carnivores comprise the Thylacinus and Sarcophilus , probably two species 
of each, which are now completely extinct on the Australian mainland but still exist in Tasmania. Besides these 
large Dasyures, several small ones, from the size of a “Tiger Cat” (D. maoulatus) to that of a small Mouse 
(Antechinus) inhabited the country then as they do now. To these species we must add a Dog, fossil remains of 
which have been found in limestone caves, but no formidable Carnivore equal in power to a Dion or Tiger has 
yet been discovered. 

The Thylacoleo carnifex, a Marsupial with very peculiar dentition, and about as large as a common Bear, 
was evidently a true Phalanger, and of course proportionately carnivorous ; it certainly was not the predacious 

Carnivore which checked the undue increase of the Diprotodons. 

The last group of Marsupials, which in dentition resembles the Dasyures, and in the formation of its hind 
feet, the Kangaroos, has also been found in a fossil state — we allude to the Bandicoots. A few fragments of leg 
bones point even to the presence of an Echidna or Ant-eater of the Order Monotremata , as yet peculiar to 

Australia, whilst other not determined specimens may throw additional light on the extinct Eauna of this wonderful 
Country, which continues to startle the World with important discoveries. It will be as well to recapitulate our 
extinct Eauna before noticing the recent one in detail. 

OBDEB PLACENTALIA. 

Eamilt C'ANiDiE ( Dog tribe). 

Bemains of a Dog have been found at Wellington, but not many specimens were obtained. 

DSt 


3 


Family Rodentia (Hat tribe). 

From six to ten species of fossil rodents have been discovered, all of which differ much in their dentition 
from other Rats, but resemble some living' Australian species. 

ORDER MARSUPIALIA. 

Family Phascolomyidie ( Wombat tribe). 

Twenty fossil species, including the four still living- ones. 

Family Piialangistidje (Hhalanger tribe). 

Phalangers, Native Bears, Flying Squirrels, &c., from fifteen to twenty gigantic species, including the 
genera Biprotodon, Nototherium,* Zygoma turns, and Thylacoleo ; all of which are classed with the Phalangers, which 
they resembled in the structure of their limbs and in the position and function of their teeth. 

Family Macuopodiile ( Kangaroo tribe). 

Together about fifty fossil species, some of which are still living. 

All the gigantic Kangaroos, with short and stout tarsal bones, are now extinct. 

Family Pebameliile (Bandicoot tribe). 

About five or six fossil species, which cannot be distinguished from living ones. 

Family Dasyekedab ( Native Gat tribe). 

Four large and as many small species, the latter identical with living ones. Two large Dasyures, the 
Thylacinus and Sarcophilus , still exist in Tasmania, but are extinct on the mainland. 

Section Monothemata (Ant-eater and Buck-bill tribe). 

One or two species of the Echidna probably existed; remains of the Platypus have not yet been found. 


* The two genera Nototherium and Zygomaturus which Professor Owen considers to be identical, differ principally in the form of their molar teeth. The first genus is founded 
upon nothing but lower jaws, the grinders of which resemble in their horizontal section, at the base of the crown, a loop or the figure co , but less contracted in the middle ; 
the last grinder is always the largest. The genus Zygomaturus, founded on a perfect skull, possesses teeth a section of which at their base would form a square, the last hit one 
being the largest tooth of the series. I have classed all the large genera (Diprotodon, Nototherium , and Zygomaturus) with the Phalangers, because like these their teeth are inserted 
by tapering fangs. The Kangaroos and Wallabies have molar teeth — the fangs of which enlarge at the end, and, in aged animals, grow into the substance of the jaw, so that their 
removal is impossible without breaking the bone. The Wombats, again, possess teeth without roots, differing in their shape from both the Phalangers and the Kangaroos, and closely 
resembling the teeth of certain rodents. 

















































•* 

























c 
















\ 


































































*- 














{ 




Helena Forde , del. et lith. 


From a photograph from life by Victor fL. C Front . 


THE FLYING FOX. 


(Pteropus Poliocephaltjs.) 



Sydney, N. S. W. — Thomas Richards, Government Printer. — 1869. 




The Flying 1 Fox. 

(PTEROPUS POLIOCEPBALU S.) 

Twenty-five species of Bats are known to inhabit Australia, five of which are Fruit Bats, or “ Flying Foxes.” The 
last-mentioned animals have not yet been found in any other part, except on the east coast, where they range from 
Cape Howe to Cape York. The figure represents the most common one — the grey-headed Fruit Bat, or “ Flying Fox,” 
which is peculiar to the New' South Wales coast districts. 

The food on which the “Foxes” principally rely, when garden fruit is not in season, consists of honey-bearing 

blossoms, and the small native figs, abounding in the coast-range scrubs. They pass the day suspended from the 

branches of gigantic fig-trees, as shown in our figure, and in this position they feed. The number of these creatures is 

almost incredible : they' swing in clusters and festoons, like swarms of bees, holding on one to the other, and the weight 

of their bodies frequently brings down great limbs, killing many, but not appreciably diminishing them. Thousands may 
be noticed, at dusk, silently winging their way to some orchard, which they invade in spite of the farmers’ guns, and 
destroy' more fruit than they eat. The ground is strewn in the morning with bushels of half-devoured fruit, because they 
are rather dainty, and drop every pear or peach they have tasted, if it is not sufficiently sweet. The “Foxes” appear 
only during certain seasons in the cultivated districts, and after a few weeks’ sojourn retire to the mountain forests. 
During this period they select a regular camping-ground, where the day is spent ; and when such a place is discovered, 
a general battue takes place and they are killed in large numbers. These Bats are found on the east coast only, but 

during very dry seasons they occur as far w r est as the neighbourhood of Melbourne. The vegetation on the plains of 

the interior does not appear to suit them, as they are seldom seen west of the coast range. 

The general colour is a glossy, grizzly black, with the exception of a broad rusty-red collar, covering the back 

of the head, neck, breast, and shoulders ; the face is light grey ; the ears and wing-membrane are black. 

The skull is thin, almost transparent, and very light, as in all animals formed for flight ; it is provided with 
very powerful canine teeth, which are grooved, and differ in this respect from the smooth canines of real carnivorous 
animals. It is highly probable that the Flying Fox is able to subsist on insects as well as on fruit. Too little, however, 
is known of the economy of these animals to prove this ; they are observed only when fruit is plentiful, and how' they 
subsist in the dense mountain forests can only be conjectured. The fruit of the fig-trees, and some sweet blossoms, 
must form their principal food at that time. The dentition consists of incisors — canines — , premolars . molar= — 

3-2 r— X r 2 2 

— 34 teeth. The number of young seldom exceeds one at a birth. 

The name of Vampire Bat has been given to this fruit-eating animal, and many dismal tales of its blood-sucking 

propensities have been rife among the ignorant, but there is of course not a grain of truth in these statements. The 

largest species occurs in the island of Java, where it is knowm by the name of “Kalong,” and is much esteemed as an 
article of food, The flesh of our “Flying Foxes” has been represented to be palatable food; it is necessary', however, 
to steep the males for some hours in vinegar, to take away any unpleasant smell. The following table wall show the 
number of Bats and their habitat in Australia : — 

FAMILY OF BATS. 

Cheir6ptera. 

(a.) Fruit-eating Bats, Kalongs or “ Flying Foxes”: — 

Common Flying Fox. Pteropus poliocephalus. Brushes of New South Wales. 

Spectacled Kalong. Pteropus conspicillatus. North Australia. 

Funeral Kalong. Pteropus funereus. North Australia. 

Cape York Kalong. Pteropus scapulatus. Cape York. 

Dwarf Kalong. Petalia. (?) North-east Coast. (Not larger than a common Bat.) 


2 


(b.) Insectivorous Bats : — 

Australian Molussus. Molossus australis. Victoria. 

Wilcox’s Molussus, Molossus ivilcoxii. East coast of Australia. 

Australian Taphozous. Taphozous australis. Northern Australia. 

Great-eared horse-shoe Bat. Rhinolophus megaphyllus. 

Fawn-coloured horse-shoe Bat. Rhinolophus cervinus. Cape York. 

Orange horse-shoe Bat. Rhinolophus awantius. Coburg Peninsula. 

Geoffroy’s long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus geoffroyi. West Australia. 

Gould’s long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus gouldi. New South Wales. 

Tasmanian long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus unicolor. Tasmania. 

Timor long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus timoriensis. West Australia. 

Australian long-eared Bat. Nyctophilus australis. New South Wales. 

Gould’s short-eared Bat. Scotophilus gouldi. Southern Australia. 

Chocolate-coloured short-eared Bat. Scotophilus morio. Southern and Western Australia. 
Small-toothed short-eared Bat. Scotophilus microdon. Australia. 

Pied short-eared Bat. Scotophilus picatus. South Australia. 

Queensland short-eared Bat. Scotophilus nigrogriseus. Queensland, 

Grey’s short-eared Bat. Scotophilus greyi. Port Essington. 

Small short-eared Bat. Scotophilus pumilus. New South Wales. 

Great-footed Bat, Vesperti/io macropus. South Australia. 

Tasmanian Bat. Vespertilio tosmaniensis. Tasmania. 




■mm 




f 



B. 


8 * 


&« 


d 

§ 

H 

o 

0 

£> 


o 

$ 

6 


3Q 

W 

& 

< 

O 


o 

H 

W 

Eh 



mo 

<» 




Sydney, N. S. W.— Thomas Richards, Government Printer. — 1860 


The Dingo, or Native Dog. 

(CANIS DINGO.) 

There has been much discussion among naturalists with regard to the Australian Native Dog, as to whether the animal 
is indigenous, or has been introduced into the Country. This is certain, however, that a species of dog existed in 
Australia many ages ago. Fossil remains of dogs have been discovered at the Wellington Caves, and in other localities, 
and it must therefore be accepted as a fact that the Dingo is indigenous. 

The subject of the illustration represents the light-yellow or tan-coloured variety ; colour is, however, of little 
importance, as the real wild Dingo is subject to as much variation as any other kind of dog. The most common 
shades are sandy, or tan, with whitish belly, and the inner portions of the legs and feet white ; black and tan varieties 
are rarer. 

In one of the oldest publications on Australia, “ Collins’ Voyage,” the author, speaking of the Dingo, says, — 
“ The dogs of this Country are of the jackall species ; they never bark ; are of two colours, the one red, with some 
white about it, the other black; some of them are very handsome.” Mr. Gilbert, writing from Swan River, states,- — 
“ The Dingo is very common over all parts of this Colony. There are a very great number of varieties, marked from 
reddish brown to black, white, light brown, and black and white.” The general belief is that a thorough-bred native 
dog is of two colours only, that it is rarely spotted, and never barks. Several real Dingos have, however, been seen 
with white and yellow fur, and one, which only howled before, began to bark after being chained up near an excellent 
watch-dog for a short time; the voice of the Dmgo is short and snappish, and can be distinguished at once from that of 
a well-bred domestic dog. Much has been said and written about the Dingo’s cunning, his tenacity of life, and dangerous 
bite ; it is stated that he frequently feigns death, and that he has recovered and escaped after being beaten to such an 
extent that one would imagine every bone in his body had been broken. A single Dingo will cause great damage to 
a flock of sheep, and experience proves that the wounds inflicted by its bite are generally fatal. In a case where a 
number of goats — ten or fifteen — had invaded a garden a tame Dingo was despatched to drive them away; but he ran 

from one to the other, snapping and biting right and left, and every goat bitten by him died within a few days. 

The Dingo is remarkable for power, agility, and grace. A tame one which was being hunted reached his 
kennel long before the hounds, fairly outrunning the whole pack ; and during the chase was seen frequently to clear a 
three-rail fence at a bound; even with a heaVy chain he could jump six feet off the ground. He was very suspicious 

with regard to his food, and would sooner starve than touch a piece of meat hung up on a string, neither would he 

take it if it had the least unusual smell. The aborigines of Australia use the Dingo for hunting purposes, and thoroughly 
tame it ; it is no wonder, however, that they succeed in this, as they think as much of their dogs as they do of their 
children, and treat them as well. A “ lubra ” will not hesitate to rear a Dingo pup with her own offspring. A gentleman 

who succeeded in taming several Dingos, found that in one case only would the dog follow at the call of his master. 

The experiment of taming the Dingo is, however, always hazardous, as the acknowledged master only is respected, and 
everybody else snapped at furiously. The Dingo howls before rain sets in, dislikes music, and cannot bear the sound 
of bells ; he exhibits, in fact, many traits of the domestic dog, with which he freely breeds. The aboriginal name of 
the Australian dog is “ Warrigal ” in most parts of New South Wales, and “Dwer-da” in Western Australia. 

The dental formula is as follows : — Incisors — , canines — premolars — , molars — — 42 teeth. 

3-3 1-1’ r 4-4 3-3 




















J 




/ 


































■ 























































































































■ 














** 








« 



































V- 



Sydney, N. S. TV.— Thomas lliclii'rds. Govqromeut Printer.-- -1S09. 


The Sea Leopard. 

(STENORHYNCHTJS LEPTONYX.) 

Comparatively few Seals inhabit the Southern Ocean, and only two species occur on the Coast of New South 
Wales. The figure represents the largest kind, the well-known Sea Leopard, so named on account of its spotted fur, 
the general colour of which is a silvery grey washed with yellow ; the markings are irregular, sometimes lighter than the 
ground colour, with a darker border, and a few uniform black spots interspersed. Young specimens and females occur 
without them. 

This Seal grows to a considerable size, and one specimen in the Australian Museum measured fully io feet 
in length ; it was taken at Shoalhaven, in the Illawarra Distridl, and the stomach contained a full-grown Platypus, — a 
proof that the animal must have gone far up the River into fresh water. A second (female) specimen, 7 feet in length, was 
obtained in October, 1870, at Double Bay, near Sydney, and kept alive for several days in the Museum grounds, where 
it fed on grass, no other food being at hand. It is not certain that a fish diet is absolutely necessary for the subsistence 
of this animal, and it is to be regretted that no experiments were made to settle this point. Dr. J. E. Gray, F.R.S., 
states, in one of his numerous papers on the Seal tribe, that the stomach of one contained the remains of fishes, a 

quantity of sea-weed, and some feathers of gulls. Our specimen would probably have subsisted on butcher’s meat or fowls; 

but unfortunately before the trial could be made, the taxidermist had killed the creature. This Seal moved rather 

quickly, not unlike a snake, and turned to the right or left in an instant when in fear of attack. Water was 

thrown over her, but she appeared to dislike it, and lay shivering till quite dry again. The same species occurs on the 
coast of Tasmania. The mother produces a single young, which she protects with fin or flapper, and defends against 

the numerous enemies which are always in pursuit of such young creatures. It is stated that the female will not leave 

the spot whence her young has been taken, and grows furious in vainly attempting to save its life. 

The occasional appearance of Seals in rivers or in lagoons, where they may have remained after a flood, has 

probably given rise to the fable of the “ Bunyip.” On one occasion a so-called Bunyip’s skull was presented to the 

Australian Museum, but proved to be that of a malformed foal. At another time some terrified Murray natives pointed 
out their dreaded enemy on the other side of the river. There was certainly a large animal in the water, making a 

curious noise, but the night being dark it could not be seen. After a vain attempt to induce the natives to come 

across in their canoe, a shot was fired, the noise ceased, and a venerable lie-goat was tracked the next morning to 

the scrub, where he had died of his wound. 

It is to be deplored that such really beautiful and intelligent animals as Seals should have been destroyed so 
indiscriminately as they have been on this Coast. Collins, in his “ Yoyage to New South Wales,” published in 1798, 
mentions that the rocks in Bass’ Straits and Other localities were covered with Fur Seals of great beauty, but at the 
present time they are rarely met with in these localities. The total number of species which visit the east and south 
coast does not exceed three or four. The following is a list of the Seals on record as taken in the Antarctic Ocean 

1. The crab-eating Seal. Lobodon carcinophaga. On the packed ice, South Antarctic. 

а. False Sea Leopard. Leptonyx weddellii. Antarctic Ocean. South Orkney. 

3. Ross’s large-eared Seal. Ommatophoca rossi. Antarctic Ocean. 

4. Sea Leopard. Stenorhynchm leptonyx. Coast of New South Wales, Antarctic Ocean, and Port Nicholson, 

New Zealand. 

5. Sea Elephant. Morunga elephantina. Antarctic Ocean. 

б. Hooker’s Seal. Arctocephalus hooheri. Antarctic Ocean. 

7. Cowled Seal. Arctocephalus hiatus. North-west coast of Australia. (Hautman’s Abrolhos.) 

8. Falkland Seal. Arctocephalus falhlandicus. Antarctic Ocean. 

9. Grey Seal. Arctocephalus cinereus. South Coast of Australia, Kangaroo Island, Western Port. 

The teeth of the Seals are generally hollow, more or less lobed (except the incisors and canines), and number 
6 cutting teeth above and 4 below, 4 canines, 1 in each ramus, and from 20 to 24 grinders. The incisors or cutting teeth 
vary considerably in number. 























































‘ 












■ 












* 



































■ Y 

■ 


i 






















- 









Golden-bellied and White-bellied Beaver Bat 


(HYDROMYS CHRYSOGASTER AND HYDROMYS LEUCOGASTER.) 

It is a strange fact that Beaver Rats have not yet been found beyond the Australian region, though they appear well 
adapted to lead an aquatic life, and seem able to cross the narrow straits dividing the mainland from New Guinea and 
the various groups of islands not strictly Australian. Whatever may be the cause, however, they do not inhabit other 
parts of the World, and are as peculiar to our Country as the Kangaroo. 

These rats have their grinders reduced to a pair in each ramus, above and below, and differ therefore from 

all other Rodents. It is difficult to determine how many species there are, and we believe that the four or five which 

naturalists choose to class as distinct, on account of a difference in fur, are in reality mere varieties of one kind. 

We have selected two well-marked species for representation, — the one bright orange, the other dirty white, 
beneath ; the upper parts are much alike, and of a grizzly brown or black colour. The tip of the tail is white in 

all species but one — Macleay’s Beaver Rat (Hydromys lutrilla). 

Trvo kinds are considered particularly doubtful, namely, the Fulvous Beaver Rat ( Hydromys fulvolavatm ), from 
the Murray River, and the Sooty Beaver Rat ( Hydromys fuliginosus) , from West Australia. The western animal is known 
to the aborigines of Perth as Ngoor-joo, whilst those who inhabit the country near King George’s Sound call it 
Ngoio" -ir-ri-gin. A third species was discovered by the late Mr. W. S. MacLeay, in front of his residence at Elizabeth 

Bay. This last rat has a uniformly dark tail, and is smaller than the others; but it is probably only an immature 
Hydromys leucogast.er. The original specimen in the Australian Museum has lost much of the fur, and its characteristics 
cannot be described with that certainty which is desirable when new species are under discussion. 

Beaver Rats are found in almost every part of Australia where there is permanent water; they become rare 

towards the tropics, and occur in large numbers in the southern streams and lagoons ; are shy and nocturnal in 

their habits ; dive well, but are soon drowned when unable to find a resting-place in the water. We have 

frequently tried the experiment in a large tank, and found them succumb in less than an hour. This fact may throw 

some light on the limited distribution of the genus. Their food consists of crustaceans, fish, and water insects, but 

principally of a small bivalve of the genus Cyclcis, which our talented artist, Mrs. Forde, informs us is to be found in 

the rivers of the interior in such large quantities that refuse-heaps of the empty shells always line the banks. The 
number of young is four at a Utter, and the mother provides a burrow' in the river-bank for them. The young ones 

are often feasted upon by snakes, and in one instance a dozen of them were taken from the stomach of a single reptile 

The bone caverns of this Country, w'hich have been most carefully examined, did not yield remains of these 
curious animals, though they have afforded proof that the Terrestrial and Arboreal Rodents lived in large numbers 
at a former age. It is not possible to add descriptions in this paper of the numerous rats and mice that inhabit 
Australia ; but w r e furnish a Ust of all the supposed species, w'hich may be found interesting. When more consideration 

is devoted by describing authors to teeth and structure of skeleton, and less to colour and texture of fur, these 

numerous species will suffer a heavy reduction, because one half of them are, no doubt, immature specimens, or local 
varieties. 

The dentition of the genus Hydromys is as follow's : — Incisors -, molars = 1 2 teeth. All other Australian 

rats and mice have- — -Incisors molars — , = 16 teeth. 

2 3-3 

The Rodents, Gnawers, or Rats, of Australia are conveniently divided into three groups, which we name — 1st, the 
genus Hydromys, comprising the water rats just enumerated; and, the genus Hapalotis , or the slender-eared and long-tailed 

rats; and, 3rd, the genus Mus, comprising the ordinary rats and mice. 

Genus Hapalotis. 

(a.) Tree Rats, representing the Squirrels in Australia; tail long, and generally pencilled at the tip: — 

1. White-footed Tree Rat. Hapalotis aibipes. New South Wales. 

1. White-tipped Tree Rat. Hapalotis apicalis. New South Wales. 

3. Black-tipped Tree Rat. Hapalotis penici/lata. North Australia. 


2 


4- Elsey s Hapalotis, or Tree Rat. Hapalotis hemileucura. North Australia. 

5- Great Hapalotis, or Tree Rat. Hapalotis hirsutus. North Australia. 

6. Spotted-tailed Tree Rat.* Hapalotis (or Mus) macropus. North Australia. 

7. Building Hapalotis. Hapalotis conditor. This curious rat was first discovered by the late Captain Sturt, on 

the Murray and Darling, and the gallant explorer gives the following description of it : — “ The Building Rat 
inhabits the brushes of the Darling, but was not found beyond latitude 30°. It builds a nest of small 
sticks, varying in length from three to eight inches, and in thickness from that of a quill to that of 
the thumb, arranged in a most systematic manner, so as to form a compact cone, like a bee-hive, about 
four feet in diameter and three feet high. Those at the foundation are so disposed as to form a compact 
flooring, and the entire fabric is so firm as almost to defy destruction, except by fire. The animal, which 
is like an ordinary rat, only that it has longer ears, and the hind-feet are disproportioned to the fore-feet, 
lives in communities, and traverses the mounu by means of passages leading into the apartments in the 
centre. One of these nests or mounds had five holes or entrances at the base, nearly equidistant from- each 
other, with passages leading from them to a hole in the ground beneath, in which I am led to conclude 
they had their store. There were two nests of grass in the centre, with passages running up to them 
diagonally from the bottom ; the nests were close together, but in separate compartments, with passages 
communicating from the one to the other.” Many years have passed since the gallant Captain explored 
these regions. Then only fleet-footed Wallabies disturbed the Building Rat; now herds of cattle tramp 
heavily over the country, and the little architect has been obliged to quit his dwelling, which is however 
often reoccupied by another rat the W hite-tipped Hapalotis. \\ e have had an opportunity of examining 
many of the curious structures described above ; but out of at least fifty, only one contained a solitary 
“ Kohl, the aboriginal name for the Building Rat. The nests so examined were not empty, but, as 
already stated, they frequently harboured a family of the W hite-tipped Hapalotis, a smaller and very gentle 
species — so gentle indeed as to be encouraged to share our frugal meals when we have been encamped for 
a few months near their habitations. 

The Building Rat has large slender ears, and not a pencilled tail; it may belong to another section, 
but it is enumerated here for want of a better place at present. 

(b.) Jerboa-like Rats. Two distinct species of jumping mice inhabit Australia; the larger is found on the West Coast, 
and the smaller on the Murray and Darling. These mice or rats progress on their hind legs, like the Kangaroo. 
They form burrows in the sandhills, which the aborigines soon find out and trace to the very end, for the purpose 
of obtaining the inhabitants to roast them, when they cannot procure larger game : — 

8. Long-tailed Jerboa. Hapalotis longkaudata. “Kor-tung” and “ Gool-a-wa ” of the aborigines of Moore’s River, 

Western Australia. 

9. Mitchell’s Jerboa. Hapalotis mitehellii. “ Kahlpere ” of the Murray natives; “ Djir-dow-in ” of the aborigines 

near Perth; “ Mat-tee-getch ” of the Moore’s River tribes. 

Genus Mus. 

The common rats of Australia, that is, species with moderate ears and tails, are numerous, and difficult to classify. 
We enumerate them as follows : — 

Dusky-footed Rat. (Mus fuscipes.) Western Australia, South Australia, Islands of Bass’s Straits, New South 
Wales, and probably Tasmania. 

Tawny Rat. (Mus vel/orosus .) A long-haired species, from South Australia. Only one specimen in existence. 

Long-haired Rat. (Mus longipilis.) Probably identical with the above. A single specimen in the Australian 
Museum, from the Victoria River. 

Buff-footed Rat. (Mus cervinipes) A Queensland and New South Wales species, named “ Corrill ” by the 
aborigines of Stradbrook Island, Moreton Bay, and “ Cunduov ” by the Richmond River natives. 

Allied Rat. (Mus assimilis) “Moor-deet” of the King George’s Sound tribes. 

White-footed Rat. (Mus manicatus .) An allied species, from Port Essington. 

Sordid Rat. (Mus sordidus .) “Dil-pea” of the aborigines of the Darling Downs District, New South Wales. 

Plain Rat. (Mus lineolatus.J ‘War-lie ” of the aborigines of the Darling Downs. 

Gould’s Rat. (Mus goiddi.J “ Kurn-dyne ” of the aborigines of Moore’s River, West Australia. 

Little Rat. (Mus nanus.) “Jib-beetch” — aborigines of Moore’s River, West Australia. 

Greyish-white Mouse. (Mus albocinereus) “Noo-jee” — aborigines of West Australia, Perth District ; “ Jiip-pert” — 

aborigines of Moore’s River, West Australia. 

New Holland Field Mouse. (Mus novar-hollandue.) New South Wales. 

Delicate-coloured Mouse. (Mus delicatulus) “ Mo-lyne-be ” — aborigines of Port Essington. 


* Tliis gigantic Rat lias a more or less spotted tail, which is without a brush at the tip. It is a new discovery, and has been described as JTapaloiis caudimaculaia by Krefft, ail’d 
under another name by Dr. Peters. It grows as large as the common Bandicoot — Perameles nasuta. 




; mBrnm 

§11 






: sSv 


iBaSWiM KMMai^ 

iliMw 

■ ■ ,: ■. '• ‘ '■ ; ."■ - 







The Tasmanian Wombat 


(PHASCOLOMYS WOMBAT.) 

Our figure represents the Tasmanian Wombat, which is rather smaller than the New South Wales species, but closely 
resembles it in the skeleton. The specimen which served as a model was a remarkably tame one. General colour 
dusky-grey or brown, more or less mottled with light hairs, so that the fur appears grizzly; lower part of the body 
greyish. 

All Wombats have 2,4 teeth, arranged as follows : — Incisors j, premolars molars These teeth are 

without fangs, are more or less curved, and resemble the teeth of the common Hare. The food of the Wombat consists 

of grass, herbs, roots, young twigs, and other vegetable products, so that their flesh is palatable. 

All the different species form extensive burrows, in which they pass the day, coming out to feed after dark. 
The female produces only one young at a birth. The feet are constructed like those of the Phalangers or Opossums, 
to which family the Wombats are closely allied ; the fore-feet have five toes, and the hind ones the same number, the 

inner or first toe being a small nailless thumb. 

The pouch is directed upwards, as in the other marsupials that progress on all-fours, and contains four mamma?. 
Our present species is peculiar to Tasmania and the islands of Bass’s Straits. 

The New' South Wales Wombat ( P hascohnnys pfa/yrhinmj is found on the East and South Coast, extending 
even as far as Victoria, where also a brown variety occurs. This eastern Wombat differs little from the Tasmanian one, 

except that it is larger, and grows to over 80 lbs. in weight. Its colouration resembles the Tasmanian animal. 

The third species inhabits the western parts of Victoria and the eastern border of South Australia. Fur sandy 

or yellowish, the muzzle covered with hair (all other species have this part of the head naked). Professor Owen 
was the first to point out the difference between this and the eastern species, and proposed the name “ Broad- 
faced Wombat” ( Phosjeolmnys kitifronx) for it. 

A fourth variety, having brown or black, soft and silky fur, inhabits the neighbourhood of Port Lincoln, 

in South Australia; and for this animal the name of “Black Wombat” ( Phascolomijs niger) has been proposed. A very 
fine specimen of this new' species is in the Museum collection ; and, having examined the skull, and compared it with 

that of the other Wombats, we have arrived at the conclusion that it is distinct. One very decided feature of the 

Black Wombat’s skull is the great contraction between the orbits. 

Wombats were much more numerous in olden times than they are at present, and varieties existed that were 

twice the size of our living species. We do not know how far these animals range to the north ; the temperate 
regions of Australia appear to be their head quarters. They have not yet been observed on the West Coast. 


3 r J /7 