J HE DEVELOPMENT 



ANIMAL KINGDOM: 



A PAPER 



UKAP AT THE FOX Kl'H MEETlN<i OK IHK 



ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF WOMAN 



By (JRACEAXXA LEWIS. 




Irinted by the Committee on Science 




NANTUl'KET : 

HT SSEY ,v H()BINS(JN. PRINTEKS— INQUIKEK AND MIRROR OFFICE. 

1877. • 



THE DEVELOPMENT 



ANIMAL KINGDOM 



A PAPER 



IJKAU AT THE FOTHTH MEETTNG OF THE 



ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF WOMAN 



By GRACEANNA LEWIS. 



Printed by the Committee on Science. 



NANTUCKET : 

HUSSEY & ROBINSON, PRINTERS— INQUIRER AND MIRROR OFFICE. 
1877. 






The Devclopmeiii of the Aiiiuial Kinodom. 



Naturtalists, whatever may be their opmions on the 
question of P]vohition. unite in beheving in the exist- 
ence of ;in Order of Relationship in the animal 
world. To trace this order and to seek its cause is one 
of the most interesting occupations which can engage 
the human mind, and is one well worthy of honest 
study through life, even if but little a])parent progress 
should ))e made therein. 

It is not possible to study Animal Life effectively 
without a general knowledge of its co-related branch, 
Vegetable Life ; nor tlie System of Life as a whole 
without some attention to the Mineral Kingdom ; nor 
can either Kingdom be fairly understood without due 
consideration of the Laws which control matter. The 
Physicist must aid the Biologist; and on their con- 
clusions both the Botanist and Zoologist are largely 
dependent. Each' science enriches the other, and we 
who can devote ourselves to but one gladly acknowl- 
edge our indebtedness to all who ])estow their help. 



That Power which called us into being has endowed 
us with the desire to grasp thread after thread of 
knowledge, that we may hold them as clues to guide 
us through the labyrinths of unrevealed mysteries. We 
are obeying the dictates of the Soul when we follow 
their leading. The faculties which distinguish between 
thinors which are like and those which are unlike 
make of us classifiers, and we think of the class, rather 
than of the individuals which compose it. Thus we 
are enabled to take a general survey of Nature. 

When we speak of the mineral kingdom, the vege- 
table kingdom, or the animal kingdom, we remember 
that, in fact, vegetable and animal organisms are not 
distinctly separable, and that no man knows the con- 
ditions necessary for the production of either from 
their chemical components. We are also reminded 
that the distinctions ])etween animate and inanimate 
matter cannot ]:>e too strongly insisted upon. 

Protoplasm, formed by the combination of so many 
atoms of Carbon, Hydrogen, Oxygen, and Nitrogen, — 
inanimate gases, — exists in all animate forms, whether 
these be of the vegetable or of the animal kingdom. 
Mineral compounds may lie formed with exactly the 
same chemical constitution. Where does life arise, and 
whence comes its activity ? The mind goes beyond 
these compounds to find that activity in the Motions 
belonQ-inu' to atoms of matter. 

The Atom is understood to be the material represen- 
tative of Divine Energy, — the Germ of Being, — and 
to contain, in combination with other atoms, all the 
possibilities of the whole Life-System. If we adopt the 
idea that ntoms partake of the eternal energy of the 



Supreme Ruler of the Universe, who both called them 
into being and planned for them an infinity of combi- 
nations, we are prepared to consider the multiplicity 
of forms which are in existence, and to find in them 
all some binding principle of relationship. 

Atoms, like magnets, are supposed to possess attrac- 
tive and repellant poles, and to retain in combination 
both vibratory and rotary motions. Atoms which are 
held together b}' their a.vrs of rotation are believed to 
give lines of Magnetic Force. Molecides, formed of 
atoms, possess similar polarities ; as do particles and 
masses of matter. 

Magnetism acts end to end, and, since it holds mat- 
ter to a central axis, it is a Cextripetal Force. Oth- 
er forces distribute from a centre, and are Centrifit- 
OAL Forces. 

Light is electro-magnetic, and may combine in itself 
both the centripetal and centrifugal forces, moving in 
accordance with these dual forces, all mjitter on which 
it acts. 

The Crystallizing Forces, which arrange mineral 
substances in definite order, according to the attractive 
and repellant ])olarities ot their molecules, act so simi- 
larly to Light as to suggest the operation of either 
identical or analogous laws. 

The Vital Forces, which control the system of 
life, operate in harmony with Light, and also with the 
Crystallizing Forces. 

Therefore it may be understood that tlie centripetal 
and centrifugal forces in nature, similarly, act upon 
mineral, vegetable, and animal forms. It may indeed 
be assumed that all forms are modifications of the 



6 

sphere resulting from the action of these two classes 
of forces. 

The primary structural Forms which are built up 
under their action are the crystal in the mineral, and 
the cell in the vegetable and animal kingdoms. Min- 
eral masses are Iniilt of crystals ; and cells form every 
higher structure in the vegetaljle and animal king- 
doms. 

Crystals are united in masses under laws which gov- 
ern the primary forms : animate beings cannot escape 
from the action of the polarizing forces, although 
these may be modified by the action of the Vital 
Forces. 

In the water-crystal the main axis is perpendicular 
to the plane of crystallization, or, in other words, it is 
at right angles to the hrdnches. In their plane of 
crystallization snow-crystals may present a series of 
triang:les. A snow-crystal of six ravs may be a dou- 
ble triangle. There may be twelve or more points, 
the beauty usually depending on the complexity of 
design. Each point has its own axis, which governs 
the symmetrical disposition of the parts, but the de- 
sign is similar in circles of six rays each. In the 
crystal the centripetal and centrifugal forces are mod- 
ified by molecular action. 

In the flower, the essential parts, the stamen, pistil, 
and ovary, are in the axis of growth. The less im- 
portant corolla diverges from the centre, as do the 
rays of the snow-crystal. In the fruit, the line con- 
necting the stem and blossom ends, corresponds to the 
perpendicular axis of the snow-flake, the seeds being 
disposed by various methods around that axis. 



In the tree, the main trnnk is the axis of growth ; 
the l)ranches diverge from this axis under the same 
hiw which sends the molecules of water on their di- 
vergent paths of crystallization. Each Ijranch of the 
tree has its special axis, from which the minor hranches 
diverge ; and leaves ray from the branch as the branch 
rays frou) the stem, the ribs of the leaf following the 
same general law of divergence. In the plant we see 
the action of centripetal and centrifugal forces, con- 
trolled l)v (Jrowth Force. 

A large proportion of the Protozoans and Radiates 
resemble crystals in form. Some of them, especially 
among Rhizopods, are strikingly similar to crystals. 
The limbs of animals correspond to the branches of 
plants. They bud at right angles to the axis of growth, 
but may be modified so as to ))ecome parallel with it, 
as in the lower extremities of man. 

In the Groups of animals, as well as in the individ- 
ual forms, we lind evidence of the operation of the 
same laws. There is a well-defined axis, and there is 
a circle of radiation in every great group. The branches 
of such groups are related to each other by characters 
which make it impossible to confound them with mem- 
bers of a higher circle. 

These circles — or, more accuratelv, coils of ascendino; 
spirals — represent the disposition of the rays of a 
color disk, the plane of crystallization of a water-crys- 
tal, the Ijranches of trees, the disk of a flower, the 
seeds of a fruit, the symmetrical parts of a radiate 
animal, — all alike due to the great law of Phyllotaxis, 
resulting from the dual action of the centripetal and 
centrifnu'al forces in nature. 



8 

The Order of Dea^elopment in the animal king- 
dom, is from the lower to the higher. The coils of 
ascent around a central stem are formed by a system, 
of dicliotomoiis branches at right angles to each other. 
The alternating pairs of ))ranches compose one circle 
of four rays of related animals, with a central stem 
of hiirher forms. The hiodier stem is analogous to the 
perpendicular axis of the snow-flake ; to the trunk of 
a tree ; to the earth's axis of rotation ; to the centre 
of rotation of the planetary system ; and to ever}' 
axis of rotation in nature. 

Beyrinninu- with the lowest organisms, the Plastides 
of Haeckel may be considered as the root of the ani- 
mal kingdom. These organisms are scarcely, if at all, 
separable from Plant-Life, and barely removed from 
the mineral kingdom. From this root diverge four 
great groups of Protozoans. The first pair of 
branches are the Polycystines and Sponges, together 
comprising the Actinozoolds. The Polycystines, among 
annuals, represent the Diatoms of the vegetable king- 
dom ; and the Sponges are also analogous to plants. 
The Diatoms, Polycystines, and some of the Sponges 
are siliceous, when there are hard parts. Prof. Agassiz 
went to his grave (loul)ting whether the Sponges 
should be classed among Plants or Anhnals. These 
doubts are not generally shared by naturalists, and 
some consider the Sponges among the more highly 
organized of Protozoans. 

The next pair of branches are the Rhizopods or 
Root-footed animalculaj, and the Infusoria. The 
Rhizopods, in certain external characters, foreshadow 
the Mollusca, especially the cephalopods. They are 



9 

sometimes called Mn/dcazooids because, like the mol- 
luscs, their hard part-< are of car})onate of lime. In 
like manner the Infusorian-; sugg-est the Articulates, 
and are known as EutoDiozouids. 

The Polycystines connect with their neighbors the 
Rhizopods ; and in the same way the Sponges connect 
with the Infusorians, thus completing the coil of ascent, 
as the Infusorians are, clearly, the most highly organ- 
ized of Protozoans. 

The Protozoans appeared enrliest in Time, the old- 
est of known fossils beiui^- Eozoon. belono'inu" to the 
rocks of the Pre-Cambrian Period. 

From the Protozoans arise a central stem of Meta- 
zoAXs, of which the branches lowest in structure are 
the C(ELEXTKHATA ( Conds aud Allies), iind the Eciii- 
NODERMATA ( Star-Fislies, c^c. ) This pair of branches 
constitute the '• Radiata," although the Echinoderms 
and even the higher (Juelenterates manifest a degree 
of bi-laterality. 

The succeeding pair of branches in this inverte))rate 
circle, are the Molli:s("a and Artki^lata. Of these 
Agassiz remarks,"' We cannot i)redicate absolute superi- 
ority or inferiority of organization of either group as 
compared with the other ; they stand on one structu- 
ral level, though with different tendencies." This is 
entirely consistent with the idea that they are oppo- 
site and complementary members of one pair, in a 
system of dichotomous Ijranching. 

The Coelente rates (through the Polyps) connect so 
closely with the Sponges below them that the best 
palieontologists hesitate to say of certain ancient forms 
whether they are sponges or (*(^i-al. 



JO 

The Mollusca, on one side connect with the Coelen- 
terates, throngh the branches known as Molhiseoidea, 
and especially by the Polyzoa ; and on the other side 
the Cephalopods rest npon an Echinodennatons base. 

The Worms by their lowest branch, the Rot if era ^ 
tonch npon the Infusoria ; they also through other 
forms connect with ancient Echinoderms, while by 
their complete circulation the highest l)ranch, the 
Anit€H(Ja, approaches the vertebrates. 

Molluscan and Articulate forms sometimes resemble 
each other so closely that it has required the most 
profound research to distinguish lietween the two. 

All four of these invertebrate branches diverge from 
a connnon stem : hence these resemblances to each 
other, and to their Prott)zoan stock. 

The Articulates appeared in the Lower Cambrian ; — 
in America, with the genus Par ado. mules. The lower 
Molluscs and Radiates foUowed during the deposition 
of rocks of the Camljrian and Lower Silurian Periods, 
bnt it was not nntil later, at the base of the Upper 
Silurian, that the Cephalopods entered upon existence. 

With the Upper Silurian, the Vertebratp: Stem 
budded from the invertebrate base. 

Some of the earliest vertebrates of the family Ceph- 
alaspklxe remind us cnriously of l)Oth the Trilobites 
and the Orfhoceratidce, — that is, of both Articidate and 
Molluscan forms. 

The vertebrate which is lowest in structure, but 
which belongs to a later period, appears to have taken 
its rise from the opposite side and to be derived from 
the Coelenterates and lower MoUuscans. 

All molluscs, articulates, and vertel)rates are bilateral 



II 

in stnu'tiuv ; that is, their parts are synniiotrieally ar- 
ranged on either side of a longitudinal axis. Two end- 
edves^ has gained the mastery over the sphere. There 
are here an (interior and a j/ostcrior pole, and these 
usnally correspond to the head and tail of the animal, 
although the lower mollusoa are headless. 

The great stem of the Veijtebijata divides, primari- 
ly, into four lateral hranehes, with a fifth central stem, 
destined to produce the most important vertebrate 
forms. The primary whorl, composed of these lateral 
))ranches, includes fish-like animals which are entirely 
distinct from the true fishes. The lowest in u'rade of 
these generalized vertel)rates is the Lancelet, or Ani- 
jiltio.riis. forming the division Piiaryxgobranchii, or 
Leptocakdia. This is the animal which durino- its em- 
Itrvological develo))ment recalls the ( 'Oelenterata and 
lower Mollusca, and reaches maturity with no resem- 
blance to any but an embryonic vertebrate. It is with- 
ont vertebra, possessing only the noto-chord which is 
transitory in other vertebrates. Xo fossil Leptocardia 
are known. It is reasonable, but not necessary, to 
conclude that it must have come into existence early 
in time. In many other instances, forms low in struc- 
ture have ap])eared at ('()m|)aratively late geologic 
eras. 

The Marsipobkanciiii, or the Lamprey P]els, are the 
next in order. Although no fossil forms are known, 
they, in some respects, jipproximate the earliest of the 
Silurian vertebrates. 

The Elasmobranchii (Sharks. Rays, and Chimoeras), 
unlike the Leptocardia and Marsipobranchii, came ear- 
ly into existence, occurring in the Upper Silurian 



12 

rocks, and continuing l)y successive forms to the pres- 
ent time. 

These are followed in structural order by the Dip- 
noi, or Mud-Fishes, animals which Ijreathe by true 
lungs, as do the Reptiles. The spmal column and the 
Ihnbs of the Dipn<jans a})proxhnate to those of the 
most ancient of the (Jrossopterygian Ganoids, and the 
annuals approach the x\mphibians even more closely 
than they do the true Fishes. 

These four branches of generalized vertebrates form 
a coil around a central stem of Ganoids, which, as Icii- 
THYOPSIDA, lead up to the more highly specialized ver- 
tebrate classes. 

From this main stem of the Ganoids, in the Carbon- 
iferous Period, animals with amphibian tendencies be- 
ti-an to branch, but it was n(jt until a vast interval of 
time — in the Cretaceous, that the true bony fishes came 
upon the scene. The whole group of Ichthvopsida, 
including the Fishes and Amphibians, appears to arise 
intermediately between the Elasmo))ranchii and the 
Dipnoans. The Amphibians, although on a higher 
plane than the Fishes, seem to express the possiljilities 
of structure residing in a group whose root is between 
the Leptocardia and the Dipnoans, whilst the fishes 
lean to the side of the Elasmobranchii. 

Below the Permian, no Sauropslda are known. 
Branching from the (ranoid stem, they developed in 
force during the Triassic and Jurassic Periods, and 
gave rise to modern reptiles and birds. 

The Mammalian stem ])egan to })ud in the Triassic, 
with Vromatherhiw ^ and at least eleven genera of 
mammals were in existence before the appearance of 