

HEIR HAVNTS 



-NRLF 




B M 313 Otfi 







- V 




MABEL- OSGOOD WRIGHT 



The Gift of Beatrix Farrand 

to the General Library 
University of California, Berkeley 



Ex 

Libris 

BEATRIX 
JONES 

LANDSCAPE 

ARCHITECTURE 




REEF POINT GARDENS 
LIBRARY 



FLOWERS AND FERNS 
IN THEIR HAUNTS 







STAND &Y THAT GfeAT 

PLACE SN TRUTW A H A UN T OF TH E ^ 



FLOWERS AND FERNS 
IN THEIR HAUNTS 




BY 
MABEL OSGOOD BRIGHT 

Author of "BlRDCRAFT," "CITIZEN BIRD," "THE FRIENDSHIP 

OF NATURE," Etc., Ete. 



Illustration* from BHjotoerap|>0 

BY THE AUTHOR 
AND J. HORACE McFARLAND 



fforft 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

LONDON : MACMILLAN & CO., LTD. 
I9OI 

All rights reserved 



COPYRIGHT, 1901 
BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 



$@ount {pleasant printer? 

J. HORACE MCFARLAND COMPANY 
HARRISBURG PENNSYLVANIA 



LANDSCAPE 

ARCHITECTURE 



US 
W6 

LANDSCAPE 

ARCH. 
LIBRARY 




Booft 10 >rUicatfl> to 

dStogtm > $V Ponp 

(bp to|)o0e name t&ere i)anc0 a tale) 
in recognition of our frien&0|>ip of 
fifteen pearu, anU of |)er intelligence in 
ftnotoing tol^rn to stanti still 




INVITATION 

ILL you stroll with me awhile across 
the fields and round the wood edge 
in search of flowers and ferns ? 

I offer no apology, and no new 
thing as lure, save perhaps the point 
of view the flower in the landscape. 
Wild flowers taken from their surround- 
ings and considered as aggregations of 
calyx, corolla, stamen and pistil are wholly dif- 
ferent from the same flowers seen in their native 
haunts. Wild Roses clustered in a crystal bowl, 
like their more robust garden sisters, are beautiful, 
but they lose the shy loveliness that they wore 
before you gathered them from beside the mossy 
bars of the old pasture. 

The Cardinal Flower, that shows its red 
hood along the waterways or stands sentinel to 
guard the Closed Gentian where it drowses in 
moist shade, looks dull and lifeless when massed 



Vlll INVITATION 

in your stateliest jar. Anemones hang their heads 
and the Blue Gentian closes its "fringed eye- 
lids " on leaving home. 

The flower in its haunt is a part of the 
landscape, a tint on nature's palette not to be 
heedlessly removed. The great patches of red 
and gold Samphire are the glory of the autumn 
marshes; plucked, they are but leafless plants of 
curious structure, chiefly valued in their green 
state by the natives for pickling. 

Perchance you are a botanist, knowing all plants 
by name and attribute, apt in Latin and techni- 
calities; have you ever in a purely friendly sense 
visited the flowers and ferns in their haunts ? I 
do not mean, have you gone in search of a 
particular plant that you wished to study, trans- 
ferred it triumphantly to your vasculum; toiled 
over it patiently and finally stowed it away with 
its life pressed out, though very neatly labeled. 
This sort of acquaintance is that of the reporter 
with the person he must of necessity interview to 
gain special information, the other the after friend- 
ship of those between whom the door is never 
closed. 



INVITATION IX 

The wild flower and fern is only to be truly 
known where it creeps, clings or sways untroubled 
in its home. If you may not follow the trail 
either afoot, awheel or on horseback, spare an 
idle hour to look with the eye of the mind and 
the camera at a few of the flowers and ferns in 
their haunts. 

M. O. W. 

WALDSTEIN, March 30, 1901 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

I. THE COMING OF SPRING i 

II. ALONG THE WATERWAYS . .... 33 

III. ESCAPED FROM GARDENS ..... 63 

IV. IN SILENT WOODS 93 

V. SOME HUMBLE ORCHIDS . . . . . 123 

VI. POISONOUS PLANTS . 157 

VII. THE FANTASIES OF FERNS. . / . . 185 
VIII. FLOWERS OF THE SUN ., ... . . 219 

IX. A COMPOSITE FAMILY 243 

X. WAYFARERS . . .... . . . 273 

XL THE DRAPERY OF VINES . , . -, r . 295 

XII. AFTERMATH , . ... 321 

INDEX AND GLOSSARY ..*... 343 



ILLUSTRATORS' NOTE 

THE thanks of the illustrators for valuable 
assistance are due to Miss Mira Lloyd 
Dock, Miss Martha Buehler, Professor 
F. A. Waugh, Captain Charles Mcllvaine, and 
particularly to Mr. O. P. Beckley. 

The full -page plates are engraved directly from 
the photographs. The text cuts, with but two 
exceptions, have been drawn over the original 
photographs, showing that mechanical accuracy 
and artistic effect are not incompatible. The 
initials of the illustrators indicate the part taken 
by each in the work. 

LIST OF FULL -PAGE PLATES Pac|ng 

page 

A Fern Haunt (frontispiece) M. O. W. . 

The Coming of Spring False Hellebore, 

Skunk Cabbage, etc J. H. McF. . 4 

Jack-in-the-Pulpit, Wild Ginger, etc. . . 

Spring Beauty 

Wild Mandrake 

Dutchman's Breeches 

Shadbush 



Large Blue Flag 



12 
19 

22 

27 
30 

37 



(xiii) 



XIV ILLUSTRATIONS 

Facing 

Pickerel Weed and White Water Lilies . M. O. W. . ''44 

The Lower Pond Lizard's Tail " .48 

Purple Closed Gentian J. H. McF. . 53 

Rose Mallow " . 60 

"The Kenilworth Ivy that Clings" ... " .64 

Bouncing Betsy M. O. W. . 69 

Elecampane J. H. McF. . 76 

Jerusalem Artichoke, or Earth Apple ... " -83 

The Flag of Truce Flowering Dogwood . " -94 

"The White Wood Trilliums" " .96 

Mountain Laurel " . 101 

Indian Pipe M. O. W. . 108 

Oak-leaved Gerardia " . 113 

Tree-bridge " . 128 

Showy Orchis J. H. McF. . 134 

Yellow Moccasin Flower " .139 

Calopogon . 145 

Fly Amanita M. O. W. . 160 

Stramonium, or Jimson Weed J. H. McF. . 176 

The Unfolding of Osmunda .185 

A Glade of Cinnamon Ferns " . 192 

Rock Polypody M. O. W. . 197 

Christmas Ferns . 204 

The Silvery Glint of Spleenwort J. H. McF. . 209 

Beech Ferns in the Open . 215 

Maidenhair M. O. W. . 218 

Prickly Pear J. H. McF. . 228 

Butterfly Weed and Toad Flax " .236 

Common Silkweed . 240 

Sunflower Lane M. O. W. . 246 

Black-eyed Susan J. H. McF. . 251 

Cat-tails and Swamp Goldenrod . 256 

Brook Sunflower . 260 

New England Aster " . 264 



ILLUSTRATIONS XV 

Facing 
page 

Ragged Goldenrod J. H. McF. . 269 

Thorns by the River . 274 

A Wild Hedge Red-berried Elder ... . 279 

Elder Flowers .282 

Wild Bergamot . 287 

Wild Lettuce .291 

Staghorn Sumac . 294 

Clematis Virgin's Bower . 299 

Virginia Creeper "Throwing its lovely 

draperies" . 302 

The Frost Grape M. O. W. . 305 

Balsam Apple J. H. M"cF. . 308 

Great Bindweed, or Wild Convolvulus . . M. O. W. . 316 

Cat-tails Gone to Seed J. H. McF. . 321 

Silkweed . M. O. W. . 325 

"The Frost Traceries Upon the Window 

Panes" " .332 



LIST OF TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 

Nell (dedication) M. O. W. . T 

Hepatica (initial) J. H. McF. . vii 

Pussy Willow (initial) . . I 

Skunk Cabbage M. O. W. . -* 

Marsh Marigold J. H. McF. . n 

Trailing Arbutus . 14 

Red Wake Robin .15 

False Solomon's Seal . . . " . 17 

Violets M. O. W. . 23 

Wild Columbine . 25 

Spring Beauty, Bloodroot and Dutchman's 

Breeches " . 28 

Wild Geranium J. H. McF. . 32 



XVI ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 

Turtlehead (initial) J. H. McF. . 33 

Button-bush M. O. W. . 40 

Pitcher-plant J. H. McF. . -^ 

Arrowhead M. O. W. . 4 

Swamp Loosestrife, growing -49 

Swamp Loosestrife, detail -5 

Marsh Samphire . 51 

Sweet Pepper-bush 52 

Seaside Gerardia . 59 

The Lilac House " . 63 

Orange Hawkweed . 68 

Live-forever and Cypress Spurge M. O. W. . 71 

Catnip and Thyme -75 

Blackberry Lily J. H. McF. . 78 

Coronilla M. O. W. . 81 

Red Day Lily " . 82 

The Ruined Chimney " . 85 

Shinleaf (initial) J. H. McF. . 93 

Shooting Star " . 95 

Wild Sarsaparilla " .103 

Four-leaved Milkweed " .109 

Wild Blue Phlox " . m 

False Beech Drops M. O. W. . 112 

Pipsissewa II 5 

Black Cohosh J. H. McF. . 116 

Ragged Orchis (initial) M. O. W. . 123 

Pink Moccasin Flower J. H. McF. . 132 

Yellow Moccasin Flower . " .187 

Twayblade M. O. W. . 138 

Calopogon J. H. McF. . 142 

Yellow Fringed Orchis " .150 

Ladies' Tresses, Fringed Gentian and Marsh 

Shield Fern M. O. W. . 153 

Rattlesnake Plantain " . 154 



ILLUSTRATIONS XVli 

Page 

Showy Lady's Slipper J. H. McF. . 156 

Poison Hemlock (initial) M. O. W. . 157 

Poison Ivy . .162 

Poison Ivy and Virginia Creeper .163 

Poison Sumac .168 

Jimson Weed (seed pod) J. H. McF. . 175 

Climbing Nightshade M. O. W. . 177 

Black Nightshade J. H. McF. . 178 

Pokeberry . 179 

Staggerbush . 181 

Wild Cherry .183 

Climbing Fern M. O. W. . 185 

Walking Fern .188 

Brake and Colic-root . . J. H. McF. . 191 

Royal Fern " -194 

Evergreen Wood Fern M. O. W. . 196 

Christmas Fern .198 

Lady Fern . 199 

New York Fern " .200 

Sensitive Fern . 201 

Grape Fern . 203 

Spinulose Shield Fern . 204 

Silver Spleenwort . 205 

Hay-scented Fern . 207 

Maidenhair Spleenwort . ' .211 

Ebony Spleenwort . 216 

Slender Iris (initial) . 219 

Sundrops . 226 

Yellow Star Grass . . . . J. H. McF. . 227 

Canada Lily, Late Meadow Rue and 

Meadow Sweet Spirea J. H. McF. 229 

Red Wood Lily M. O. W. . 231 

Turk's Cap Lily .232 

Meadow Lilies . 233 



XV11I ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 

Purple Gerardia M. O. W. . 241 

Blue Fringed Gentian . 242 

Brook Sunflower (initial) " . 243 

Boneset and Joe Pye . 245 

Blue-stemmed Wood Goldenrod . 249 

Silver Rod and Fragrant Goldenrod ... .251 

Early Purple Aster J. H. McF. . 256 

White Heath Aster M. O. W. . 257 

White Wood Aster J. H. McF. . 266 

Seaside Goldenrod M. O. W. . 269 

White Wreath Aster " .270 

Blazing Star J. H. McF. . 271 

Wild Crab Apple " .273 

Tansy M. O. W. . 275 

Choke Cherry " .278 

Meadow Sweet Spirea . 280 

Rabbit's Foot Clover " .285 

Steeplebush and Wild Carrot " .286 

Bayberry and Sweet Fern . 289 

Purple- flowering Raspberry . 290 

Pink Knotweed . 292 

Wild Convolvulus J. H. McF. . 295 

Climbing Hemp weed M.O.W. . 297 

Hyacinth Bean 300 

Trailing Wild Bean " -303 

Trumpet Honeysuckle . 306 

Mountain Fringe J. H. McF. . 309 

Wild Yam M. O. W. . 310 

Carrion Flower 3 I 3 

Climbing False Buckwheat " .314 

Jack-in-the-PuIpit Berry and Winterberry 

(initial) .321 

Dogwood Berries J. H. McF. . 324 

Virginia Creeper M. O. W. . 327 



ILLUSTRATIONS XIX 

Page 

Bittersweet J. H. McF. . 329 

Partridge Vine M. O. W. . 331 

Spicebush Berries 333 

Witch Hazel J. H. McF. . 334 

Cedar Berries M. O. W. . 336 

Catbrier - 339 

The Fire Logs Finis .341 



I 



THE COMING OF 
SPRING 

'HEN Time o' Year padlocked his 
cabin door and with his trout pole 
under his arm wafted across the 
meadow path until he vanished like a 
shadow between the willows, the hillside 
people knew that, whatever other signs might 
fail, Spring was surely at hand. 

Time o' Year made no pretentions to weather 
prophecy in fact, he was altogether an unpre- 
tentious mortal, coming, going, and biding his 
own time silently, like the spirit of some straight 
white frost -shaft. Yet his smile was never frosty. 
It came far back from his deep -set eyes and quiv- 
ered among his wrinkles whenever he was ques- 
tioned about the state of the woods, the height of 
the river at the remoter bridges or the prospect of 
trout catching, until the questioner always felt that 
the old man was possessed of secrets told him by 
no one but the Magician himself, and which he 
was pledged not to reveal. 




2 THE COMING OF SPRING 

It was his favorite saying, his apology for any 
halt in the progress of things, that had given him 
the name of "Time o' Year," by which alone I 
first knew him a name also in full accord with 
his cheerful temper and his loyalty to outdoor life. 

"The river 's a leetle overcrowded beyond the 
glen, but none too full for the time o' year. Trout 's 
few as yet, and what 's come down 's too skart and 
dazed with the flood to see a fly, but that 's what 
I allus reckon on, this time o'year!" 

If, however, you spoke of the nesting place of a 
shy bird or the haunt of some elusive flower, his 
attitude would instantly change and he would subtly 
begin to sift your motives. No rustic gossip he, 
to tattle of woodland doings to the merely curious. 
If he deemed his questioner a collector, seeking to 
despoil the woods of flower and feather either for 
gain or private hoarding, that person's fate was 
sealed. Should a botanist appear, provided with 
microscope and vasculum, his contempt was hardly 
less deep, and he would reveal the location of noth- 
ing rarer than a field of Buttercups, perhaps, feign- 
ing ignorance of plant lore, yet muttering to him- 
self: "Schoolma'ams! I know 'em! poking their 
fingers into posies' mouths to feel their teeth, and 
splittin' 'em open to count their ribs! Then like 



THE COMING OF SPRING 3 

as not yanking the rest up by the roots to dry 'em 
into hay. Yes, I 've caught 'em at it and seen it 
done ! 

"Sometimes they say they want my flowers to 
paint 'em into pictures. 'Paint away,' sez I, 
'they 're here ready to sit for ye from frost -leaving 
to frost -coming, but look out ye don't spoil the 
pictures God 's filled the earth with, in so doin'.' 

"The names they give 'em, too! Long enough 
to make a man think the woods is full of diseases 
like what the town doctor fetches over to the hill- 
top folks when they have colic!" 

By "hilltop folks" he meant the summer people 
a half day's ride away, who were the bane of his 
usually placid life. It was they who, eager for 
"local color," insisted in intruding upon his cabin, 
snapping their impertinent little cockney cameras at 
everything within range. Asking questions as to 
where he obtained his delicate fishing rod, how he 
learned the art of tying flies of original design; also 
probing his past and present hermit way of life 
ruthlessly. Why had he let his farm on the hilltop 
go into other hands? Was it still his, or had he 
given it up for taxes? 

Alack ! Why is it that money and good breed- 
ing are accumulated in an inverse ratio? The peo- 



4 THE COMING OF SPRING 

pie who come out to conquer the land by purchase 
so often have only the one, the people born on the 
soil the other. The native New Englander certainly 
has a highly developed bump of curiosity, which 
properly cultivated is neighborliness, but before it is 
placed the right of the individual to privacy. 

Doubtless there were many things that the 
hilltop folk desired to know concerning the old 
man, whose forbears for two centuries had tilled 
the soil that now lay a fallow waste of wild grass 
and field flowers. The middle-aged remembered 
his young wife, the daughter of the glen miller, 
and their only child, a restless, questioning boy 
who had disappeared short of forty years before, 
some said with a peddler, others to go to the civil 
war. Was he alive or dead? No one knew. Par- 
cels were left at the cabin at rare intervals by the 
carrier, and the old man had many little things 
not of local origin, like his fishing rod and gun. 
But his neighbors asked him no questions, and 
he had remained a myth of the fifteen -mile circle 
that swings around Tree -bridge, Lonetown, the 
Glen and the Hollow. 

One day in middle April, after a winter so long 
and cold that it had almost numbed even the 
memory of growing things, Nell and I went out to 




THE COMING OF SPRING 
False Hellebore Adder' s-Tongue Skunk Cabbage 



THE COMING OF SPRING 5 

look for Spring. That is to say, I did the looking 
and Nell, being a pony, the walking, a comfortably 
cooperative arrangement, for like many prospectors 
we went far afield for what we might have found 
close at hand. But when the Spring thirst for 
outdoors comes upon one, the hunting cools the 
fever of longing nearly as much as the finding. 

Up and out of the house! Away from houses! 
Away from the pleasantness of the planted and 
sheltered garden things that do not indicate the 
pulsings of wild nature! Nell snorted and pranced 
with joy, experiencing a sort of horse second - 
childhood as the keen breeze scattered tiny tufts 
of her loosened winter coat to feather wayside 
briars and offer early birds rare bargains in all- 
wool nest lining. Myrtle warblers flitted along 
the waysides mingling the remains of winter worn 
Bay and Poison Ivy berries with fresh ants in a 
sort of Spring salad. Fox sparrows and white- 
throats sent up an occasional retrospective melody 
from pastures where the snow had held the seeded 
grasses against the wind's caprices, and quail ran 
noiselessly by through the undergrowth or told 
their names boldly from a fence rail. It was still 
two hours before noon when we found ourselves 
over the hills and well within Time o' Year's 



6 THE COMING OF SPRING 

country, on a sunny cross-road that led through 
Lonetown. 

Ah! the silence! Yet after all the deepest 
quiet is made by the perfect harmony of subdued 
sounds. Dry leaves scurried along the fences; 
then the rush of the distant mill stream separated 
itself from the stillness; next the trickle of a 
near-by brook that in its spring madness had lost 
its reckoning for a space and, after turning a low 
meadow into a pond, gropingly found its rocky 
pathway through the woods again. Two gray 
rabbits crossed the road with long leaps, and a 
light footstep overtook us. It was Time o' Year 
with his trout pole, emerging from a furry -clawed 
clump of Pussy Willows, that skirt the meadow, to 
follow the brook again. 

I ventured to ask him, "Does Arbutus still grow 
in the woods by the Hollow road?" Dropping 
his rod so that he rested on it like a staff, he 
looked at me critically, the shrewd expression that 
came over his face as he spied my camera and 
appurtenances changing to one of undoubted satis- 
faction as he discovered neither spade, trowel, basket 
or tin box; yet he would not commit himself, and 
merely said, "Did it use to grow there?" moving 
on as he spoke. 



THE COMING OF SPRING ^ 

There was no time to be lost, so I quickly 
told him that I had not come to pull to pieces or 
transplant, that the flowers of those woods and 
hillsides were old friends of mine whose names 
were written long ago in both brain and heart. 
That now I only came to see them in their 
haunts; my quest being of the bird in the tree, 
the flower in the landscape, the spirit, not the 
letter of the law ; the meaning, not the anatomy. 
For a moment I feared that Time o' Year did not 
understand my explanation, born of the first real 
touch of Spring and my desire to propitiate him. 
He did, however, but his ideas came to him more 
by thought than through words. "Arbutus does grow 
yet in the Holler woods, only folks don't think it 
does or there would n't be any. Come and see!" 
Refusing the proffered ride he strode up a wood 
path, taking a short cut while we followed slowly, 
Nell halting now and then to snatch at a tuft 
of young grass. 

The change of flower growth from Spring to 
Fall is made no less wonderful by its regularity, 
and the bareness of Spring is as different from the 
nakedness of Winter as slimness is from thinness. 
The greater number of the early blooms are pale, 
and hide in the grass or under dead leaves ; they 



8 



THE COMING OF SPRING 



have less landscape value therefore than the flowers 
of Summer and Autumn that crowd the fields and 
march up to the roadsides to demand attention. 

The first three to appear, sometimes in rapid 
succession and sometimes together, precede even 
their own leaves, the Skunk Cabbage 
having its rank flowers enclosed in a 
pointed wrapping like the 
bouquets of the Madeleine 
flower market, while the flesh 
tints of the Trailing Arbutus 
and the lavender or white 
Hepaticas are enhanced by 
the dark -toned resistant leaves 
of the past season. 

Wise Magician, so to set 
your scenery, while the peep- 
-- ing marsh frogs twang away 
on a single fiddle -string, as 
befits the first arrivals in an 
orchestra! Vivid color and wild music would be 
a too abrupt transition from the season of etched 
outlines, and silence that is only broken by the 
calling of crow, owl and jay, the snapping of icicles 
and the winds whistling. The Magician, though 
he keeps flower and leaf -bud ready so that he may 




THE COMING OF SPRING 9 

unfold rapidly, is the very prince of modulators, and 
does nothing jarringly. 

Time o' Year rejoined us in the lane with its 
grass -divided wheel tracks. On the right the bank 
sloped to the trout stream; on the left it was part 
of a rocky, wooded hillside. The bushes were 
almost leafless and the usually narrow stream was 
again trespassing on the lowlands. 

"It might be November," I said, leaving Nell 
and going down to the water's edge. 

"No, it might not: look!" said Time o' Year, 
jerking his head backward over his shoulder. 

There, almost at my feet, unharmed by the 
drift of the stream, was a Skunk Cabbage, its 
thick, green leaves so far developed as to show 
that it had been long in bloom. Beside it grew 
a stalk of False Hellebore, with its crumpled leaves 
fast unfolding, while underneath the spotted twin- 
leaves of a few plants of Adder's-Tongue bore the 
stalks that held each its single yellow flower. 

"While we were watching for Spring on the 
hill-tops, she has crept in by the waterways and 
entrenched her forces like a good commander, and 
yet as often as she does it, we are always surprised," 
I said; but my companion had again disappeared. 
Yes, and before one can half realize the coming of 



IO THE COMING OF SPRING 

Spring, the flower procession is upon us and march- 
ing by, music and all. Of course the memory of 
it remains, and often gives us back what we did 
not visualize at the time. It is then that the 
camera comes to our aid, that silent companion 
whose eye translates the doings of nature truth- 
fully, without gossip, yet always in an indulgent 
spirit being in itself a lesser magician, bringing 
the frolicking squirrel, the brooding bird and the 
delicate traceries of flower and fern within the very 
glow of the study fireside, yet leaving them unmo- 
lested in their haunts. 

One day I had found a plant of Blue Fringed 
Gentian in a place where before it was unknown. 
I thought, "If I pick the flowers they will close, 
and, being an annual, the place will know the 
wanderer no more. I will take its portrait for 
my photo -herbarium." Then when I had left the 
place and it was too late, I fell to wondering 
what other stray plants might have been its com- 
panions in the sodden meadow where the bog 
moss was ankle deep, for I had seen only the 
Gentian. 

The answer to my thoughts flashed back next 
day from the developed plate, where I found 
Forget-me-nots, Grass of Parnassus, three kinds 