





IRLF 




5sSs$sS3$ 









REESE LIBRARY 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA. 

Received. 
Accessions No..4* Shelf 



INJURIOUS INSECTS 



OF THE 



FARM m GARDEN 



BY 

MARY TREAT 



OF THE 
Y 'LLU S TRA,TEt,. 




NEW YORK: 

ORANGE JUDD COMPANY, 

751 BROADWAY. 

1882. 



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1882, by tbo 

ORANGE JUDD COMPANY, 
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington. 



PUBLISHERS' PREFACE. 



The assertion that cultivation of all plants, whether on 
the farm, in the orchard or garden, is largely a struggle 
with insects, has been strikingly illustrated within the 
past few years. The standard works upon Entomology 
include the harmless as well as the injurious insects, and 
are written with reference to the identification of the spe- 
cies rather than to show how they may be destroyed. In 
view of the need of a work giving an account of the most 
destructive insects and the present knowledge of the 
methods of preventing their ravages, the Publishers in- 
vited Mrs. Treat to prepare the present volume. The 
fact that she has largely availed herself of the works 
of Prof. Riley, U. S. Entomologist, gives this book a 
special value. 



PREFACE. 



Only those who live in the country are aware how 
much the success of cultivators, whether of farm or gar- 
den crops, depends upon insects. There is a surprising 
lack of knowledge among otherwise well educated people 
as to the life history of even the most common insects. 
The questions asked, not only by those in my immediate 
neighborhood, but by letters from all parts of the coun- 
try, show how slight is the popular knowledge on this 
most important branch of Natural History. In view of 
this, and to bring a knowledge of the most destructive in- 
sects within reach of all, this volume has been prepared. 
It will not be necessary to say to those who make use 
of this work that the author has availed herself of the 
permission of Prof. C. V. Eiley, to make use of his vari 
ous contributions to economic entomology. 

MARY TKEAT. 
Vineland, N. </., July, 1882. 



CONTENTS. 



lutroductiou , 7 

INSECTS INJURIOUS TO GARDEN VEGETABLES. 



Asparagus 15 

Bean 19 

Cabbage 21 

Rape-butterfly 23 

Pot-herb Butterfly 24 

Southern Cabbage-butterfly. 27 

Cabbagc-Plusia 29 

Zebra Caterpillar 31 

A New Cabbatre-woroi 33 

The Wavy-striped Flea-bee- 
tle 35 

The Harlequin Cabbage- bug. 37 

Cucumber 42 

iStriped Cucumber-beetle. ..42 



Cucumber. 

The Pickle-worm 45 

Melon The Melon-worm 48 

Onion 52 

The Black Onion-fly 52 

Imported Onion-fly 53 

Parsley and Related Plants 55 

Pea 56 

Radish 61 

Squash and Pumpkin 61 

The Squash-bug 61 

The 12-spotted Squash-bee- 
tle 63 

Tomato ...65 



INSECTS INJURIOUS TO ROOT CROPS AND INDIAN CORN. 



Indian Corn 67 

The Corn-worm 68 

Seed-corn Maggot 72 

,, TheWhiteGrub 73 

Cut- worm sTTTT. 78 

Wire-worms 81 

~~ Tr ~~False 82 

The Potato 83 

The Stalk-borer 83 

The Stalk-weevil 85 

The Potato-worm 86 

The Striped Blister-beetle. . .89 
The Ash-gray Blister-beetle. 90 
The Black -rat and Black 
Blister-beetles. . . . . .91 



The Potato. 

The Margined Blister-beetle 92 
The Three-lined Leaf-bee- 
tle 92 

The Colorado Potato-beetle 94 

Sweet Potato 102 

Tortoise-beetles 102 

The Two-striped Sweet-po- 
tato Beetle 105 

The Golden Tortoise-beetle.106 
The Pale-thighed Tortoise- 

beetle 108 

The Black-legged Tortoise- 
beetle 109 

Turnip and Ruta-Baga 110 



INSECTS INJURIOUS TO CEREAL GRAINS AND THE GRASS CROPS, IN- 
CLUDING CLOVER. 



Grains The Chinch-bug 112 

False Chinch-bugs 117 

The Hessian Fly 120 

The Wheat-Midge 123 

The Joint-worm 124 

Army Worms 129 

5 



Grains Northern Army Worm. 130 
Wheat-head Army Worm.. 134 

Clover 135 

Clover-seed Midge 135 

Clover Root-borer 136 

The Clover- worm 137 



CONTENTS. 



INSECTS INJURIOUS TO FRUIT TREES. 



Apple-tree Borer, Round-head- 
ed 139 

Apple-tree Borer, Flat-headed. .144 

Apple- twig Borer 145 

Harris' Bark-louse. 147 

Oyster-shell Bark-louse 148 

Apple-tree Tent-caterpillar 151 

Tent-caterpillar of the Forest. .155 

Fall Web-worm 160 

The Apple - worm Codling- 

motU. 161 

The Apple-maggot 164 

The Apple-curculio 165 



The Canker-worm. 



"TlieRed-humped Caterpillar. . .170 

The Twig-girdler 171 

The New York Weevil 172 

Climbing Cut-worms 174 

The Bag, Basket, or Drop-worm 177 
The Slug of Pear and Cherry- 
tree 182 

The Peach-borer 188 

The Plum-curculio 185 

The Periodical, or 17-year Cica- 
da.., ..190 



INSECTS INJURIOUS TO SMALL FRUITS. 



The Currant and Gooseberry. . .199 

Gooseberry Span-worm 199 

The Imported Currant- 
worm 202 

The Native Currant-worm. 205 
The Currant Stalk-borer. . .206 

The Strawberry 206 

The Strawberry-worm 207 

The Strawberry Leaf-beetle.208 
The Strawberry Leaf-roller.209 
The Strawberry Crown- 
borer 209 

The Blackberry 210 

Blackberry -borers 212 

The Raspberry 213 

The Snowy Tree-cricket. . .214 

The Grape-vine 215 

The Hog-caterpillar of the 

Vine 215 

The Achemon Sphinx 219 



The Grape-vine. 

The Satellite Sphinx 220 

The Abbot Sphinx 224 

The Blue Caterpillars of the 

Vine 226 

The Eight-spotted Forest- 
er 226 

The BeautifulWood Nymph 228 
The Pearl Wood Nymph. . .229 

The Grape Leaf -folder 231 

The Common Yellow Bear.233 

The Grape-vine Plume 235 

The Grape-berry Moth 238 

The Grape-vine Flea-beetle. 241 

The Spotted Pelidnota 244 

The Rose-bug, or Rose- 
chafer 245 

S The Grape Phylloxera 248 

I The Grape Leaf -hopper. . . .259 
The Cranberry 260 



THE INSECTS OF THE FLOWER GARDEN AND GREENHOUSE. 

The Rose-slug . .263 I Ichnumon Flies on Aphides . . .265 

Plant-lice Aphides 265 | The Mealy-bug 267 



THE ROCKY MOUNTATN LOCUST. 



UNIVERSITY 




INJURIOUS INSECTS OF THE 
FARM AND GARDEN. 



INTRODUCTION. 

It is not the object of this little volume to teach the 
science of Entomology, or to give the life-history of in- 
sects. It is simply intended to group together the most 
injurious insects with illustrations, that the cultivator 
may see, at a glance, his enemies, and learn the best 
known methods of repelling or destroying them. Still 
there are some points regarding their general structure 
and changes that may be briefly stated. 

The true insects are distinguished from some related 
animals, the crustaceans, myriapods, and others, by hav- 
ing in their perfect state six legs (the others having 
either more or none), and generally, though not always, 
wings. 

The insect has three distinct parts : the head, in which 
are the organs of sense; the thorax, to which are attached 
the legs and wings; and the abdomen, which contains the 
reproductive organs. They breathe through breathing 
holes (spiracles) placed along the sides of the body, 
which communicate with the air tubes within. 
7 



8 INJURIOUS INSECTS 

Insects exist in four different stages. First, the egg; 
second, the larva; third, the pupa or chrysalis; and 
fourth, the imago, or perfect insect. 

The parent insect never makes mistakes in providing 
for posterity, but deposits her eggs on or in just the kind 
of food her young requires. With most insects the par- 
ents live upon a very different kind of food from that on 
which their numerous offspring feed, and this makes it 
seem all the more wonderful that they should know so 
well where to place their eggs. The eggs hatch some- 
times within a few days, others take weeks, and some 
pass the winter mouths, and hatch with the warmth of the 
spring sun. It is noticable that those eggs that are not to 
be hatched until the following spring, are not attached 
to the leaves or other perishable part of a tree or shrub, 
but are securely glued to the bark of a twig or branch; 
they are, moreover, often covered with a kind of varnish 
which protects them from the rains. Unlike other eggs, 
those of insects are not injured by intense cold. 

The young of all insects, of whatever class, are called 
larva (plural larvce, a Latin word meaning a mask it 
being in this stage so unlike the perfect insect that its 
real form may be said to be masked). Distinct names 
are popularly given to the larvae of different insects. 
The larvae of Butterflies and Moths are known as cater- 
pillars; those of the Beetles are called grubs, and when 
they live in the wood of trees, etc., borers; the larvae of 
the two- winged flies are known as maggots. In a general 
way, larvae of most kinds are popularly called "worms," 
which, though incorrect, has for some insects, as has 
the term "bug" for others, been adopted by entomolo- 
gists as the common name for the larvae of certain spe- 
cies for example, " Army- worm," " Canker-worm," etc. 

The larva is the growing state of the insect, in which 
it feeds voraciously, moulting, or throwing off its skin 
from time to time until its full size is attained. The 



OF THE FARM AND GARDEN. 9 

larval stage may last but for a week or two, but in some 
insects is known to extend over several years. In some 
insects, as the Mosquitoes and Dragon Flies, the life of 
the larva is passed entirely in the water. 

When the larva has made its full growth it passes into 
the state of the pupa (the name for an infant rolled up 
in bandages after the manner of the ancient Romans), 
this is also called chrysalis, from the Greek word for 
gold, as some have gold-like markings. Most insects are 
in this state perfectly dormant, while a few, as will be 
noticed further on, remain active. Some in their last 
moult appear as if swathed in a hard mummy-like case, 
others make a cocoon of silken threads, like the Silk- 
worm, in which to assume this state; some make a hol- 
low chamber in the earth for the same purpose; and a 
number draw together leaves to form a covering to hide 
them while in the pupa state. 

The insect may remain in the pupa state for a few days 
or weeks, or it may pass the winter in this dormant con- 
dition. The methods by which the escape from this 
imprisonment is made at the proper time, are various 
and interesting to the observer. In due time it comes 
forth, and when, as in the case of some moths, it has 
spread and dried its wings, it seems wonderful that it 
could have been packed in so small a space. 

The perfect insect which is usually provided with 
wings, is also called the Imago, the Latin for an appear- 
ance or an image. 

In the study of insects, it is convenient to bring them 
together in what are termed Orders, according to their 
general resemblances. There are seven of these Orders, 
each of which is subdivided into families, genera, etc. 
While entomologists differ as to the minor divisions, 
these Orders are generally followed in modern works. The 
first, and regarded as the highest Order is 



10 



INJURIOUS INSECTS 



ORDER I. HYMENOPTERA. THE BEES, 

WASPS., ANTS, ICHNEUMON FLIES, ETC. 




1. STRAWBERRY PLY. 



The name Hymenoptera, is from the Greek words for 
6 ( membrane " and i ' wing. " The Greek word Pteron, ' ' a 
wing," plural Ptera, " wings," is used in forming the 
names of all the Orders. The insects of this Order, (with 

the exception of the Saw- 
flies and Horn-tails, which 
are vegetable feeders), are 
highly useful to man. They 
may be regarded as guards 
over the rest of the insect 
world, as they serve to keep 
injurious insects greatly in 
check. This Order ranks the highest in intelligence, and 
many of the insects placed here possess wonderful archi- 
tectural skill. In some of the families the young are 
provided with nurses, who feed and tend them with the 
greatest care and apparent affection. Many are provided 
with stings which are used as weapons of defence. 

OEDER II. COLEOPTER A. BEETLES, OR 
SHIELD-WINGED INSECTS. 

The Greek word Koleos, a "sheath," combined with 
that for "wing," makes up the scientific name of this 
important Order, which 
outranks all others in 
the number and diver- 
sity of its species. The 
insects have two pairs 
of wings, the upper of 
which, usually horny or 

leathery in texture, cov- Fi - 2. -LARVA. Fig. 3. 
er and form a " sheath " for a pair of large membranous 




-BEETLE. 



OF THE FARM AND GARDEN. 



11 



wings, which are folded and concealed beneath them. 
These wing-cases, called Elytra, usually meet together 
with a straight line, or suture, down the back. The 
larvae are popularly known as grubs and borers; some 
live entirely below ground, some are aquatic, while 
others live upon foliage. This Order includes some of 
the most injurious insects, and at the same time many 
carnivorous species, which aid in keeping the vegetable- 
feeders in check. 

ORDER III. LEPIDOPTER A. BUTTERFLIES 
AND MOTHS. 



The wings of these insects when touched leave a dust 
upon the fingers; this, when examined by a magnifier, is 



Fig. 5. CHRYSALIS. 





Fig. 4. LARVA. 



Fig. 6. MOTH. 



found to consist of minute scales, hence from the Greek 
word, Lepis, a scale, we get the name Lepidoptera, or 
scaly-winged insects. The larvae, generally known as 
Caterpillars, present a great variety of forms, and are 
all strikingly different from the perfect or parent insects. 
As these are generally vegetable-feeders, the Order is. 



INJURIOUS INSECTS 



regarded as the most injurious of the seven. Notwith- 
standing this, in their perfect state, they are among the 
most beautiful creatures in the insect world. The Order 
is divided into Butterflies and Moths. The former are 
day-fliers, and their feelers or antennce are thickened at 
the end, and terminate in a kind of knob. The moths 
have their feelers pointed at the tip, and sometimes with 
small side-branches. They mostly fly at night, but a 
subdivision of them fly at twilight. 

ORDER IV. HEMIPTERA. THE TRUE BUGS. 

This Order, (the name of which means " half-winged," 
a portion of the front wings being thick and leathery), 
includes some very injurious 
insects as the Chinch-bug, 
Squash-bug, Plant-lice, and 
the disgusting Bed-bug, while 
some are carnivorous. The 





Fig. 7. WHEEirBUG (Reduvius). Fig. 8. HESSIAN ms?. 

larvae have much the appearance of the perfect insect, 
simply differing from them in the lack of wings. The 
Reduvius, or Wheel-bug, fig. 7, is an example of the car- 
nivorous and useful insects of this Order. The character 
of the larvae is seen in the engraving of the Chinch-bug. 

ORDER V. DIPTER A. Two- WINGED INSECTS. 

This is the only Order of insects that have but two 
wings (a fact expressed in the name). It comprises a 



OF THE FARM AND GARDEN. 



13 



great number of species. Not even the Coleoptera, can 
vie with it in numbers. And it embraces some of the 
most annoying insects as the Mosquito, Horse-fly,, Gnat, 
and House-fly, also many that are decidedly injurious to 
vegetation as the Ilessian-ily, Wheat-midge, Onion- 
maggot, etc., etc. But many of the larvae act the part of 
scavengers, and some few are beneficial to the agricul- 
turist as the Syrphus and Tacldna flies. The young of 
this Order are known as Maggots. 

ORDER VI. ORTHOPTERA. STRAIGHT- WINGED 

INSECTS. 



The name of this Order is from the Greek, Orthos, 
straight," the insects have long bodies, straight wings, 




Fig. 9. THE LUBBER GRASSHOPPER OP FLORIDA. 

large heads, and strong jaws. It includes Grasshoppers, 
Locusts, Cockroaches, Crickets, and Walking-sticks. The 
larvae look very much like the parents, except in their 
usually smaller wings. 



INJURIOUS INSECTS. 



ORDER VIL NEUROPTER A. NERVE-WINGED 

INSECTS. 

This Order takes in the Dragon-flies, Lace-wings, 
White-ants, etc. The veins in the wings of these insects 

are so numerous, that 
they look like net- 
work, and give the 
name, from Neuron, 
nerve, to the Order. 
These insects do no 
harm, with the excep- 

Flg. 10.-AQUATIC LAKVA OF DRAGOS-FLY. 




and Book-lice. Some are quite beneficial to man, both 
in the larval and winged states. The larvae of the 
Dragon-flies are aquatic, and exceedingly voracious; they 




Fig. 11. DRAGON-FLY. 

prey upon the larvae of Mosquitoes, and in the perfect 
insects destroy vast numbers of winged Mosquitoes. 



Insects Injurious 



UNIVERSITY 




n Vegetables, 



ASPARAGUS. 
THE ASPARAGUS BEETLE. 

(Crioceris asparagi, Linn.) 

About 1860, the Asparagus Beetle was accidentally in- 
troduced into Long Island, N. Y., from the other side of 
the Atlantic; and in a very few years it had increased 
and multiplied, among the extensive asparagus planta- 
tions in that locality, to such an extent as to occasion a 
dead loss of some fifty thousand dollars in a single 
county. In the year 1868, it had 
already crossed over from Long 
Island on to the adjoining main land; 
and thence was spread westward. 

That our readers may recognize 
at once this pernicious insect as soon 
as they see it, we annex figures of it 
in its various stages. The perfect 
beetle (shown at a, fig. 12, much 
enlarged, the lines indicating the 
real size), is of a deep blue-black 
color, with the thorax brick-red, 
and some markings of very variable 
shape and size on the side of its 
wing-cases. The eggs (b) are gen- 
erally attached to the leaves of the 
growing asparagus, and are of a 
blackish color. The larva (magnified at c) is of a dull 
ash color, with a black head and six black legs placed at 
15 




Fig. 12. 

ASPARAGUS BEETLE. 

( Crioceris asparagi. ) 
a, Beetle ; ft, Eggs ; c, Larva. 



16 INJURIOUS INSECTS 

the forward end of the body, the tail end being used as a 
pro-leg in walking, as with the larvae of most of the 
allied beetles. The insect passes the winter under loose 
bark and in other such sheltered situations, in the perfect 
or beetle state; and in May, or soon after the season for 
cutting the asparagus for table use has commenced, it 
conies forth from its winter quarters and lays the first 
brood of eggs. These hatch out in about eight days, and 
by the middle of June the first brood of larvae are large 
enough to be noticed, eating the bark off the more tender 
part of the young stems first, and in default of this con- 
suming the tougher and harder bark of the main stalks. 
About the end of June they descend to the ground, and 
either going under the surface of the earth, or hiding 
under any rubbish that may have accumulated there, 
form slight cocoons and pass into the pupa state. From 
these pupae there bursts forth the same season a second 
brood of beetles, which lays its eggs as before, and pro- 
duces about the middle of August a second brood of 
larvae or grubs, whence in the same manner as before 
there conies forth in September the brood of beetles 
which is destined to pass the winter in the beetle state 
and reproduce the species in the following spring. 

According to Dr. Fitch, who published an excellent 
account of the depredations of this insect on Long 
Island up to the year 1862, one asparagus grower there 
had three acres out of seven "almost ruined;" and four 
others had asparagus beds so badly injured that they 
plowed them up. Throughout this entire region the gen- 
eral idea up to 1862 seems to have been, that if this 
beetle was not soon destroyed, the asparagus would be; 
for every year the insect appeared to spread further and 
further, extending already for a distance of at least forty 
miles along the northern side of Long Island, and every 
year it got to be more numerous and more destructive. 
Lime, salt, potash, and a variety of other such applica- 