
MANUAL 
INJURIOUS INSECTS 



METHODS OF PREVENTION 



n.A.ORA';!:iv! 



* > 




f <• vv ■ r;r f ''.^.> «?' 






'.*j;^''^'' ?. '-'-^ - 









^X^ i9^ /pa/. 



MANUAL OF IN.TUPJOUS INSECTS 



METHODS OF PREVENTION. 



" It cannot be expected that success will at once attend our efforts ; but it 
may be hoped that the data once ascertained, and facts correctly recorded, good 
results will soon follow, from the dissemination of sound practical knowledge." 
— John Cuetis, in Introduction to 'Farm Insects.' 

" Those candidates who had been engaged in the practical work of the farm 
were free from the hesitation and uncertainty which some of the more theoretical 
students displayed." — Observation in licport of Examiner in Agriculture of the 
Eoi/al Agricultural Society of England, May, 1S90. 



5B 

fllj) A JI AN UAL 

OF 

INJURIOUS INSECTS 



WITH JIETHODS OF 



PREVENTION AND REMEDY 



FOR THEIR ATTACKS TO 



FOOD CROPS, FOREST TREES, AND FRUIT. 



TO WHICH IS APPEXriED A 



>Ij0rt Kntrotrurtton to (Butamolo^u. 



,y- COilPILED BV 

ELEANOR A. ORMEROD, F. R. Met. Soc, &c. 

CONSULTING ENTOMOLOGIST OF THE EOYAL AGEICnLTURAL SOCIETY OF ENGLAND, AND HON. 

MEMBER OF THE FARMERS' CLDB ; HON. AND COEE. MEM. OF ROYAL AG. AND HORT. SOC, 

S. AUSTRALIA; HON. MEM. OF ENT. SOC. OF ONTARIO, AND COEE. MEMBER OF 

FIELD NAT. CLUB OF OTTAWA, CANADA; MEMBER OF EASTERN PROVINCE 

NATURALISTS' SOC, CAPE COLONY 

ALSO 

MEMBER OF THE ASSOCIATION OF OFFICIAL ECONOMIC ENTOMOLOGISTS, 

WASHINGTON, U.S.A., &C. , ^^.— -""■'^""^i'^V 



^/""^^i 






SECOND EDITI &U\ < fiir, x'^' 

LONDON: 

SIMPKIN, MAKSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & CO., Limited. 

-X 

1890. 

\AU rinhts reserved.'], 
7 



TO 

ALL WHO ARE INTEEESTED 

IN THE WORK OF 

SAVING FOOD OR TIMBER OR FRUIT CROPS FROM 
INSECT RAVAGE; 

TO 

THE MANY FEIENDS, 

BOTH IN MY OWN COUNTRY AND IN OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD, 

TO WHOSE KIND HELP AND ENCOURAGEMENT I HAVE 

BEEN INDEBTED FOR MANY YEARS ; 

AND ALSO TO THK 

MEMORY OF THOSE AMONG THEM WHO ARE NO LONGER WITH US : 

CI/is Moxh 

IS GRATEFULLY AND RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY 

THE WEITER. 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Introductory Preface ....... ix 

PART I. 
Food Crops and Insects that injure them ... 1 

PART II. 

Forest Trees and Insects that injure them . . . 209 

PART III. 

Fruit Crops and Insects that injure them . . . 279 



List of Insects of which Observations are given, alpha- 
betically ARRANGED ...... 369 

Introduction to Entomology ...... 373 

Glossary of Entomological Terms ..... 397 

List of Names of Contributors to First Edition of 

Manual ......... 399 

Index 401 



The names of Contributors to Second Edition of Manual are appended 
to their observations, to mark the difference in date of contribution. 



1^'T1{0DUCT0RY PREFACE. 



The object of the present volume, of which theFh-st Edition 
was piibhshecl in 1881, is to give, in short and plain form, 
some account of the insects that are commonly injurious to 
our food crops, forest trees, and fruit, together with methods 
of treatment that have l)een found serviceable in preventing 
attacks, or in averting serious damage. 

Since the above date much has been learnt in this country 
regarding available measures, both for preventing increase of 
insect pests, and also for lessening the amount of loss caused 
by their ravages when present. Also (and mainly from the 
oljservations of our own agriculturists.^ the appearances have 
been recorded of various kinds of crop pests which had pre- 
viously not been observed as present in this country, or as 
not being present to an injurious extent ; and many points 
have been brought to light, in the history of those previously 
known, on which information was needed in order to enable 
us to counteract their ravages. 

In the present volume I have endeavoured to add the main 
points of the above observations to those originally given, 
find with them the results of much technical consultation 
and co-operation, both as to identification and habits of 
insects, with which I have been favoured by Entomologists 
of our own and other countries. 

Amongst attacks of crop pests which have been recorded 
as first observed here during the past few years, is notably 
that of the Hessian Fly {Cccidomtjia destructor), first recorded 
here in 1886; the Stem Eelworm {Tylenchus devastatrix) 
has still more recently been proved to be the cause of the 
diseased growths known as Tulip-root in Oats and as Stem- 



X INTRODUCTORY PREFACE. 

sickness in Clover ; and the attacks of the Frit Fly {Oscinis 
frit) — a pest little known here before — to Oats in 1888, and 
the yearly recurring damage from Wheat-bulb Fly {Hijlemyia 
coarctata) to young Wheat plants, have also been brought 
forward. 

Notes of a few kinds of crop attacks mentioned in the First 
Edition which have proved to be of little practical importance 
are now omitted, and, instead, observations have been added 
of the above-named infestations, and about eighteen other 
kinds of attack injurious to a serious extent to farm or fruit 
crops, or in a few instances to timber plantations. 

It will be seen that the special subjects of Wireworm, 
Turnip Flea Beetle, Mustard Beetle, and Hop Aphis are 
entered on at length, from the observations with which 1 was 
favoured for publication in my special reports on these 
subjects ; and throughout the book I have endeavoured, as far 
as possible, to complete the life-histories of the insects from 
British observations placed in my hands, and also to replace 
notes of preventive treatment which have become out of date, 
or not found to answer w-ith certainty, by observations of 
measures which have more recently been brought under 
notice and found repeatedly to be of service. 

In this matter the chemical manures now available, which 
are highly beneficial as plant-stimulants (but by no means so 
to vegetable-feeding grubs and maggots), and the many kinds 
of agricultural implements by wdiich the soil can be more 
completely broken up on the surface, or the surface more 
thoroughly buried down than was formerly the case, are of 
great assistance to us. 

The different kinds of attack are, for the most part, arranged 
alphabetically under the headings of Food Crops, Forest 
Trees, and Fruit, beginning respectively with Asparagus, 
Ash, and Apple ; and the insects attacking each crop or tree 
are also, so far as could be managed, similarly arranged alpha- 
betically under such crop, by the name by which they are com- 
monly known, as Turnip " Fly" or Flea Beetle, Wireworm, &c. 

A work of this kind, involving measures of treatment of the 
most varied nature, must necessarily be a compilation from 
many sources, and the special contributions of information I 



INTEODUCTORY PREFACE. XI 

have carefully acliiiowleclged throughout, but with some differ- 
ence in method. In the observations continued from the 
First Edition the initials of the contributors are, as before, 
appended, the names and addresses being given in the list at 
pp. 399, 400. Again I have to express my thanks to Mr. 
Malcolm Dunn, .of Dalkeith, who aided me in forming the 
plan of the original volume, and with introductions especially 
to Scottish Head Foresters, and Superintendent Gardeners, by 
which I obtained much valuable information ; and I am also 
much indebted to Mr. George Brown, of Watten Mains, 
Caithness, N.B., for consultation and information as to agricul- 
tural points, given me for the First Edition. 

In the case of the observations added in the present Edition, 
I have (as in my Annual Reports) appended the name and 
address of the observer to the information given. 

To all I beg to express my hearty thanks for their courtesy, 
and for the kind as well as skilled aid afforded me in the 
work, now for more than thirteen years, which aid has enabled 
me to lay before my readers the views of many whose names 
alone are enough to tell the value of their recommendations 
regarding the best methods of dealing with some of our worst 
crop pests. 

In the entomological part I acknowledge, with many thanks, 
assistance, both personal and by his works, from my much- 
valued friend. Prof. J. 0. Westwood, Life-President of the 
Entomological Society of London ; and also, in the difficult 
task of identification of the Diptera, from ]\Ir. Pi. H. Meade, 
of Bradford. 

I am also greatly indebted for kind assistance in my work 
to the official Entomologists of other countries, and, amongst 
these, for the cordial help always given me by Mr. J. Fletcher, 
Dominion Entomologist of Canada, and likewise by Mr. Frazer 
S. Crawford, Inspector under the Vine, &c.. Protection Act in 
South Australia. I should also acknowledge my obligations to 
Prof. C. V. Riley, Entomologist of the Department of Agricul- 
ture of the United States of America; to Dr. J. A. Lintner, 
State Entomologist of New York State ; and likewise to Dr. J. 
Ritzema Bos, Prof, at the State Agricultural College, Wagen- 
ingen, Holland, for the valuable co-operation kindly accorded 



xii INTRODUCTORY PREFACE. 

me, now tor some years, in identification and observation of 
our crop Eehvorms, a l^ranch of research which cannot be 
carried out trustworthily save under the guidance of an expert 
in this difficult study. 

I must also add to the names of those to whom I am 
especially indebted that of my sister. Miss G. E. Ormerod, as 
my constant colleague, and my unfailing and skilled helper, in 
all my work ; and I should fail in what is a duty as well as a 
pleasure if I did not mention, with many thanks, the encourage- 
ment and help ever heartily and courteously accorded to me 
by our agricultural, and often by our general, press. 

With regard to information taken from published sources, I 
trust it will be found that this has always been fully acknow- 
ledged. In the case of the descriptions of some of the 
commoner insects, where I have not named (as in my First 
Edition) any special authority, I have omitted this, partly 
because these are so often taken from collation of accounts to 
be found in all the monographs and entomological works that 
deal with these subjects, that it is impossible to name one of 
these more than another ; and also because, in the long series 
of years in which I have worked on Agricultural Entomology, 
I have had such frequent opportunities of examining crop 
insects in their different stages, and under different circum- 
stances of feeding, that I have become personally acquainted, 
from life, with much of what, at first, I thought it right to 
give the abstract of information in quotation. 

With regard to assistance given me, by use, purchased or 
otherwise, of figures, it appears to me that all work beyond 
that of the author of the book should be specifically acknow- 
ledged ; and therefore, although I am aware that the following 
arrangement is not the custom here, I have followed the 
example set in publications of similar nature to my own by 
leading official Entomologists of Canada and the U.S.A. ; and 
I trust that I may be found to have lioncsthj acknowledged the 
aid cQurtcoudij accorded. The number of figures given in this 
Edition have been much added to, and in some cases re-drawn; 
and I acknowledge the following, with many thanks, as from 
the sources named below. 

A large number, which I am permitted to use by the 



INTRODUCTORY PREFACE. Xlll 

courtesy of Messrs. Blackie and Son, Stanhope Street, 
Glasgow, whicli are mainly from the pencil of the well-known 
John Curtis, will be found at pp. 3, 5, 11, 14, IG, 18, 23, 24, 
25, 29, 31, 35, 39, 45, 48, 55, 62, 65, 73, 76, 90, 94, 97, 110, 
126, 130, 133, 134, 148, 151, 156 (2), 163, 164, 171, 174, 177, 
180, 192, 195, 199, 201, 365, 381, 383, 385, 386, 393. 

Figures used, by permission of the proprietors of the 
' Gardeners' Chronicle,' in the First Edition, are now again 
repeated at pp. 142, 162, 242, 247, 256, 260, 292, 295, 300, 

310, 324, 361. 

Figures of moths (and, at p. 265, of a caterpillar) from 
Newman's ' British Moths,' are given, by permission of 
Messrs. W. H. Allen and Co., at pp. 9, 58, 232, 265 (2), 290, 

311, 320, 322, 335, 336, 338, 390 (2). 

I also acknowledge, with thanks, figures at pp. 144, 196, 
212, 214, 237, and 308, of which I am permitted the use by 
Mr. T. P. Newman ; also figures of caterpillars at pp. 290, 322, 
386, and of wingless moth at 338, after Dr. E. L. Taschen- 
berg. Also figures of Aphides, at pp. 119 and 280, after 
drawings by Mr. G. B. Buckton, F.E.S. ; and figures of Eel- 
worms, at pp. 51 and 53, respectively after drawings by Dr. J. 
Eitzema Bos and Dr. Charlton Bastian. 

Figures at pp. 286 and 313 are respectively from one of 
Prof. W. Saunders, and one in the Trans, of the Ent. Soc. of 
Canada. 

Figure at p. 383, by Prof. C. V. Riley, and also at pp. 81 
and 392, from ' Pieports of Department of Agriculture,' U.S.A. ; 
likewise figure at p. 84, after Prof. Webster. 

Also figure at p. 338, after Prof. J. 0. Westwood ; and at 
p. 385, after figure in Stephens' 'Illus. of British Entomology.' 

Besides the above, are figs, at pp. 1, 33, 77, 78, 80, 82, 83, 
92, 99, 106, 127, 129, 140, 144, 157, 169, 172, 209, 216, 220, 
227, 229, 233, 235, 238, 243, 250, 258, 260, 267, 271 (2), 281, 
286, 297, 303, 306, 318, 330, 376, 382, 393, 395 (2), drawn 
partly by myself, but for the most part by Mr. Horace Knight, 
artist to Messrs. West, Newman & Co., 54, Hatton Garden. 

The portrait which has been prefixed to the work, by desire 
of friends, is from a photo by Messrs. Byrne & Co., Piichmond, 
Surrey, the reproduction being printed for me by permission of 



XIV INTRODUCTORY TREFACE. 

the proprietor of the 'Farmers' Magazine,' 145, Queen Victoria 
Street, E.G., and under his direction. 

In submitting this work in its enlarged form (as before, 
with the First Edition), I cannot but feel uneasiness as to how 
far my own part of the compilation may meet the approval of 
those better able than myself to judge on many of the points 
entered on. But so far as in me lies, I have tried, by careful 
revision, and collation of authorities, and all other means in 
my power, to render the technical portions of the volume, 
bearing on insect descriptions and life-histories, free from 
inaccuracies, and to bring them up to the present date. 

Of the portion, representing the greater part of the work, 
which deals with remedial and preventive measures, I may 
say, in the spirit and almost in the words, of my late valued 
friend, Mr. Chalmers Morton, in the Preface to his * Cyclo- 
paedia of Agriculture,' that this " is written by such a large 
number of gentlemen practically conversant with the subjects 
which they severally describe," that I fully trust it may often 
be found of service in lessening the losses which at present 
(and often solely for want of having a little plain information 
at hand) add greatly to the burdens which w^eigh down 
agricultural prosperity. 

To all who have aided me I offer my sincere thanks ; and so 
long as it may be desired, and health and power are granted 
me, I trust to labour to the best of my ability in the cause of 
Injmious Insect prevention. 



ELEANOE A. OEMEKOD. 



ToRRINGTON HoUSE, St. AlBANS, 

Awfiist, 1890. 



PAKT 1. 



FOOD CROPS 



INSECTS THAT INJURE THEM. 



PART I. 



FOOD CROPS 

A\D 

INSECTS THAT INJURE THEM. 



ASPARAGUS. 

Asparagus Beetle. Crioccris asparagi, Linn. 




Asparagus Beetle, larva and eggs ; all magnified. Natural length of egg and 
beetle shown by lines. 

The Asparagus Beetle often causes injury, and in some 
seasons does much damage, by the grub eating off the leaves 
of the Asparagus, and gnawing the more tender shoots so as 
to destroy them. 

The eggs are dark-coloured, somewhat spindle-shaped, and 
may be readily observed fastened by one end along the shoots, 
or on the unopened flower-buds. 

The grubs are of a dirty olive, or slate-colour, and exude a 
large drop of blackish fluid from the mouth on being touched. 
From the tail being curved and holding fast by a fleshy foot, 
it is very difficult to pick them off. They are full-fed 
in a fortnight, when they go down into the ground, spin 
parchment-like cocoons, in which they change, and come up 
as perfect beetles in about another fortnight or three weeks. 

B 



2 ASPARAGUS. 

The beetles are about a quarter of an inch long, bhie-l)Iack 
or greenish ; the body behind the head red, with two bhick 
spots. The wing-cases arc ochreous-yellow, with a Hue down 
the centre of the back, a branch from each side of it, and also 
a spot or patch at the base and tip of each wing-case of blue- 
black. These markings form a kind of cross, whence the 
name sometimes given of " Cross-bearer." 

The successive broods of Beetles lay their eggs directly 
after development, and the insect, in all stages, may be found 
from about the middle of June till the end of September. 

The 12-spotted Asparagus Beetle, which differs from the 
above in being red, with twelve spots on the wing-cases, is 
seldom found in England. 

Prevention and Eemedies. — Dipping the infested shoots 
in a mixture of half a pound of soft-soap, a quarter of a pound 
of flower of sulphur, and about the same quantity of soot, 
well mixed together in a pail of warm water, has been found 
a good remedy. The infested shoots were well dipped, and 
next day the grubs were found to have all been cleared off. 
The plants were afterwards syringed, to clean off the dirt left 
by the dipping, and soon regained their healthy appearance. 
— (W. D. C.) 

Syringing with water warm enough to make the grubs 
loosen hold, but yet not of a heat to hurt the leafage, clears 
them off well. The greater part of the grubs fall as the water 
touches them, and the rest on a smart tap being given to the 
shoot. Dry soot plentifully thrown on to them, whilst they 
are on the ground under the Asparagus and are still wet, 
appears quite to prevent any return of the grubs to the shoot. 
If any (either of the beetles or grubs) return, a repetition of 
the treatment would probably clear them comjjletely. 

A large number of beds may soon be dressed by a man and 
boy going round together — one syringing, the other striking 
the shoots and throwing the soot upon the grubs ; and the 
growth of the Asparagus, after this slight manuring, is good. 
The water should not be of a heat above what can be well 
borne by the hand. 

Hand-picking has been recommended, but from the strong 
hold that the grub has on the shoot this is difficult to manage 
without hurting the plant ; but a little salt (or any other 
application disagreeable to the grub) taken in the fingers, 
instead of working bare-handed, helps to make it loosen its 
hold. 

Cutting off the shoots that are badly infested with eggs 
and burning them is of service. 

Shaking the beetles into a wide bason or tray, held below 



BEAN. 



BEAN APHIS. 



to receive them, has been recommended ; but it is desirable 
that some mixture of mud or soot and water or smearing of 
tar, which would almost certainly act well in retaining them, 
should be provided for them to fall into, or they would soon 
escape. 

Strewing the plants well with unslaked lime early in the 
morning, whilst the dew is still on, is also recommended. 



BEAN. 

Bean Aphis. Aphis rumkis, Linn. ; A. fabiv, Kirby & Speuce. 




1, Bean-shoot, with Aphides ; 2, male Bean]"Aphis, magnified ; 3, nat. size ; 
4, wingless female, magnified. 

The Bean Aphis (known also as "Black Fly," "Collier," 
and " Black Dolphin ") sometimes appears in such vast 
numbers as to smother the Beans, making them look as if 
they were coated with soot. The attacks are begun by a few 
wingless females establishing themselves near the top of the 
Bean-shoots, where they produce living young. These in 
their turn are soon able to produce another living generation ; 
and so on, and on, till the increase is enormous, and from the 
numbers of the " Black Fly," and the sticky juices flowing 
from the punctures which they have made with their suckers, 
the plant becomes a mere dirty infested mass, with a few 
diseased leaves sticking out from amongst the plant-lice. 

These Aphides are very similar in shape throughout all 
their stages, excepting that in the first and second (which 

b2 



4 BEAN. 

answer to those of larva and pupa), although they have six 
legs and are active, they have not wings. 

The young are slaty grey, hut soon acquire a blackish 
velvety coat. The pupa is larger and slaty grey, excepting 
the abdomen, which is black with various white spots, and 
the wing-cases are also black. 

Of the two kinds of females producing living young, the 
wingless kind is shiny (or sometimes dull) black ; eyes and 
cornicles black ; shanksand the middle joints of the horns are 
somewhat ochreous. The head, body, and abdomen are so 
much grown together as to seem almost like one piece (see 
fig. 4, magnified). 

The winged female is shiny and black, or with a brownish 
tinge ; the shanks and middle joints of the horns are amber- 
yellow, and the wings are yellow at the base, with a green 
line and mark on the fore edge, and brown veins. 

The egg-laying female — that is, a third description, which 
appears in autumn, and lays the eggs from which a new 
series of generations, producing living young, will start again 
in the following year — is very like the wingless viviparous 
form figured above. The male (fig. 2, magnified) is black and 
winged. — (' Farm Insects,' by John Curtis, and ' Mon. of 
Brit. Aphides,' by G. B. Buckton, F.R.S.). 

Prevention and Remedies. — No better plan appears to be 
known than cutting off the infested tops of the Beans, but it 
should be done as soon as the " Colliers " are noticed. This 
point is very important, on account of the extraordinary rate 
at which Aphides increase. The tops should be trampled on 
thoroughly as they are cut off; or sheared into baskets and 
burnt ; or destroyed in some way before the Aphides can 
leave them, for if these are left amongst the Beans the insects 
are able to make their way back again to the growing plants, 
and thus little good will have been done. 

In garden cultivation, where there is only a small amount 
of crop to be attended to, it sometimes answers to throw soot 
on the infested plants. This lodges well amongst the 
Aphides and in the axils of the leaves. Any dry dressing 
that would thus lodge, and make the Bean-tops more or less 
unpalatable to the Aphides, would be of use. Where only a 
small extent of crop needs attention, a good drenching with 
strong soapsuds, or syringing with a solution of soft-soap, 
would also be useful ; the soapy matter sticks to the Aphis, 
and is thus a much surer remedy than many of the attempted 
applications which run off at once from the skin of the 
insects, and consequently are useless. 

Probably the addition of a very small quantity of paraffin, 



BEAN APHIS ; BEAN BEETLE. 5 

or other mineral oil, to the soft-soap wash would make the 
application much more serviceable. For proportions that 
may be safely used and method of preparation, see references 
to " paraftin " and " emulsion " in Index. 

A healthy, luxuriant growth is also of importance. The 
" Colliers " may attack the healthy as well as the unhealthy 
plants, but the strong growth which is run on by previous good 
cultivation of the ground, and also the application of a little 
liquid manure if desirable, will keep the plant in heart with a 
plentiful flow of sap, and thus it will suffer much less from 
attack than the weakly, stunted growths that have no power 
to replace the juices which the Aphides are constantly sucking 
out of them. 

Eemoval of the wild plants on which this kind of Aphis is 
to be found would probably materially lessen its numbers. 
These " Colliers " or " Black Flies " are to be found in great 
numbers on the Curled Dock {Rumex crispus, whence their 
name of " rumicis''), and also on Thistles; and it is stated 
(see ' Brit. Aphides,' vol. ii. p. 83) that the wingless egg- 
producing female winters in Furze-bushes, the branches of 
which may be found dotted with Aphis eggs. 



Bean Beetle. Bnichus granarius, Curtis ; B. rufimanus, Bob. 




1 and 2, Bnichus rufimanus, nat. size and mag. ; 3, infested Bean split open, 
showing cell ; 4 and 5,'larviie, nat. size and mag. ; 6 and 7, pupa?, nat. size and 
mag. ; 8, Bean injured by beetle, vegetating ; 9 and 10, Bruchus iiisi, nat. size 
and mag. ; 11, injured Pea. 



6 BEAN. 

The mischief caused by this beetle is from the maggots 
feeding in the seeds of various kinds of Broad or Tick Beans, 
and thus lessening their value by weight for sale, and also 
their value for seed, as, where much is eaten away, the grow- 
ing power of the young plant from the damaged seed is also 
lessened. 

The maggots are fleshy, wrinkled across, and with a small 
horny, rusty-coloured head. As far as I am aware, they are 
legless, but in some kinds of Bruchi there are the rudiments 
of feet on the front segments. 

The method of attack is for the Bean-seed Beetle to lay its 
egg on the young seed-vessel in the Bean-blossom before this 
is large enough to be called a pod, and from these eggs the 
maggots hatch, which presently pierce into the growing 
Beans. Then each maggot gnaws a gallery for itself, and 
there, amongst the dust and dirt (consequent on results of its 
feeding) which remain in the closed-up tunnel, it turns to the 
chrysalis, and thence to the beetle state. 

The beetle is little more than the eighth of an inch long, 
and if looked at under a magnifying glass will be found to 
have the head drooping, with the mouth forming a kind of 
wedge-shaped beak, the fore part of the body somewhat bell- 
shaped, and each wing-case pitted with ten rows of small 
dots. The colour is black, with brown hairs and various 
white spots ; the tip of the tail prolonged, and covered with 
grey down. The front pair of legs are reddish. The beetles 
may be found on flowers of the Furze as early as February, 
but though they may be found in seed Beans in March, April, 
and May, they do not always leave the seed as soon as they 
are developed. 

Beans that are still infested by the beetle may be known 
by having a little round depression in the skin, which is also, 
at this spot, slightly yellowish or transparent. This appear- 
ance is caused by the substance of the Bean having been eaten 
away inside by the maggot, which gnaws its gallery in the 
seed up to the skin, so that this sinks a little into the hollow 
space. When the beetle emerges, it pushes this circular bit 
of skin off, and the round holes thus caused show that the 
seed lias been infested. Autumn-sown seed is most likely to 
be infested, as a large proportion of the beetles do not come 
out till the end of winter, or, in some cases, well on in spring. 

Peevention and Eemedies. — A great deal may be done 
towards preventing future attack, and loss consequent on 
weakened plant growth from damaged seed, by ascertaining 
what the condition of the seed is before purchase, or before 
sowing. When the beetles have left the seed, the round hole 



BEAN BEETLE. 7 

through which they escaped will show where they have been, 
and such seed is to be avoided. The injured seed will sprout 
in most cases, but although the growing germ is left, a great 
part of what this germ needs to make it grow healthily is 
gone. If we consider that, in germination, chemical changes 
take place by which the insoluble starch in these seeds is 
turned into soluble plant-food, and that on this alone the 
young sprouting plant is nourished until the leaves and 
rootlets are produced, it will be evident that our chances of a 
strong and healthy plant are much diminished by using 
maggot-eaten seed. The young plant depends on the quantity 
of food in the seed for the vigour of its first start, and if this 
first start is not vigorous the later growth will probably be 
stunted and sickly also ; therefore seed with a large proportion 
of " holed " beans is not desirable for sowing. 

Where, instead of a round hole about as large as a shot- 
hole, there is a round depression, as mentioned above, rather 
duller in colour, and rather more transparent than the part 
around, this shows that the Bean is still infested ; and if the 
small round piece of skin is lifted off, the beetle will probably 
be found within. Such seed should not be sown. If Beans 
or Peas thus infested are sown (without some dressing being 
applied or measures taken to kill the insects within), the 
beetles will not be injured by being buried, but will come up 
through the ground in due time to infest the new crop. 

The following note of successful use of blue vitriol, together 
with McDougall's sewage carbolic and amount applied, was 
placed in my hands by Mr. Geo. Street, of Maulden, near 
Ampthill. On 10th of May, 1888, Mr. Street wrote me that 
the dressed Beans had made excellent progress, and the result 
as far as he could see was perfectly satisfactory. " The 
dressing applied to the Beans was used in a similar way to 
that used for seed-wheat. Formerly we used ' blue vitriol ' 
only, but the addition of McDougall's sewage carbolic leaves 
a smell, which to some extent prevents birds eating the seed- 
corn. I am inclined to think the carbolic alone would be 
sufficient, if a larger quantity was used. We used 6 bushels 
of Beans, 6 quarts of water, 1 lb. of ' blue vitriol,' and 1 pint 
of sewage carbolic. I am inclined to think that Beans should 
be dressed some few days before they are sown, (as the skin is 
thick), and turned over with a shovel every day. Those which 
escaped the liquid dressing might be killed by the strong dust 
which would be formed when the Beans were again dry." 

Good results have been found from the use of Calvert's 
carbolic acid, at a strength which killed all the insects in the 
Beans without hurting the seed. 

In my own experiments on infested Beans, I found that if 



O BEAN. 

placed for a short time to soak, the water passed through the 
thin film of coating of the Bean at the end of the gallery, and 
soddened the powdery dust and rubbish within, and thus 
choked the breathing-pores of the beetle lying within, and 
killed it ; but it is open to doubt w4iether, if weather was 
unfavourable for sowing when the Beans had been wetted, 
they might not be harmed. 

The following observations by Mr. J. Fletcher, the Dominion 
Entomologist of Canada, refer to methods which have been 
found serviceable for preventing weevil attack to Peas or 
Beans : — " When the supply of seed on hand will permit it, 
it is better to keep the Beans over until the following year in 
some close vessel. The beetles will emerge the first spring, 
and die without injuring the Beans further. A similar plan 
is that practised with the Pea Weevil, of keeping the seed 
Peas shut up in a close vessel in a warm room during the 
winter, when the weevils will emerge and die long before the 
seed is wanted for sowing. The remarkable freedom of Peas 
in Canada from the attacks of the Pea AVeevil, during the last 
few years, is attributed by some to the care taken by seed 
merchants to poison all weevils contained in seed Peas, by 
subjecting them for some time, in large closed receptacles, to 
the poisonous fumes of bisulphide of carbon,"* 

In some years Bruclms attack does a deal of mischief. In 
1888 Mr. E. A. Fitch, of Maldon, Essex, reported to me that 
in his "own case a most moderate computation of loss of 
weight alone of 2s. per quarter would give ^£65 12s., i. c, 
164 acresx4 quarters the acre x 2s. per quarter." 

Bean Beetles {BrucJd) of various species are found — some- 
times in enormous quantities — in imported seed, and where 
there is much Bean-growing round mills where Beans are 
ground, it would be highly desirable some measures should be 
taken to save us from the consequences of the vast numbers 
sometimes to be found in such places. 

Dipping the Beans or Peas in boiling water for one minute 
is stated to kill the grub inside without hurting the seed, but 
as dipping for four minutes generally destroyed the germinat- 
ing power the experiment is much too hazardous for general 
use as regards seed, though it might be acted on with 
advantage with regard to Beans or Peas about to be ground. 
For farm use, however, the main point is to avoid purchase 
of infested seed ; or if none but infested seed is available, in 
such case to dress it before sowing ; and also as the harm 
done to the seed takes effect in weakening the young plant in 

* See " Eeport of Entomologist and Botanist" p. 5(5; in 'Appendix to the 
Eeport of the Minister of Agriculture on Experimental Farms ' (Her Majesty's 
Printers, Ottawa, Canada 1889). 



"small ok " gaeden swift moth. 9 

its earliest growth, to counteract tins as far as possible by 
plentiful manuring, and such cultivation of the land as will 
put good supplies of food in reach of the young rootlets 
directly they are able to absorb it. 



"Small" or "Garden " Swift Moth. Hepialus lupulinus, Linn. 




Heinalus lupulinus :* moth, caterpillar, and chrysalis. 

The caterpillars of the Garden Swift Moth are recorded as 
living on the roots of a large variety of plants, amongst 
garden crops, on Parsnip, Lettuce, Potato, Celery, and Straw- 
berry plants, also on grass-roots ; and, with regard to their 
powers, it is mentioned, " their destructive habits are scarcely 
to be equalled by the ' Surface-grubs.' " They are to be found 
in autumn and winter, as well as spring, and are stated to 
turn to chrysalids in May, from which the moths come out in 
about a month. 

So far as my own observations go, I have only once received 
communication of a really serious attack attributable to this 
caterpillar ; but as there appears to be reason to think that a 
good deal of mischief, of which the precise authorship has 
not been traced, may be owing to these caterpillars working 
on various kinds of plants just below the surface in the 
spring time, I append the full description ; as given by John 
Curtis in his paper on this subject in the * Gardeners' 
Chronicle ' : — 

" The caterpillars are cylindrical, yellowish white, the 
head is brown and horny, with two minute antennte ; the 1st 
thoracic segment is horny and pale brown ; the following 
segments have four dark dots on the back of each, producing 
bristles, with a greyish intestinal line between them often 
blackish at the tail ; there is a similar line of dots and hairs 
down each side, and beneath them the black spiracles, which 
are bristly. They have six pectoral, eight abdominal, and 

* The worst attack of the above caterpillar that I have report of was to Bean 
crop; therefore I have placed it under this heading. — E. A. 0. 



10 BEAN. 

two anal feet. They changed to a very sensitive, cylindrical 
pupa, ocbreous and shining." * 

The figures of the caterpillar and chrysalis are partially 
taken from those given l)y Curtis in the paper quoted, and it 
will be observed that the chrysalis shows the shape of the 
forming moth within it, and that the position of the wings 
and legs are clearly discernible. 

The figure of the moth shows its shape, and the usual 
pattern of the white markings, but the colour is excessively 
variable. It may be generally described as having the fore 
wings clay-colour or brown, with various white stripes and 
dots, and the hinder wings of a brown or smoky brown. 
Sometimes the markings on the fore wings scarcely show, and 
the moth then is of a dirty pale broAvnish colour. The size 
also varies from an inch to an inch and a half in spread of 
the fore wings. The female moth is sometimes considerably 
larger than the male. As the names differ as much as the 
varieties, I have taken Professor Westwood's name of the 
" Small Swift," which distinguishes it well from the much 
larger kind (the " Ghost Moth " or " Hop Swift "), the cater- 
pillar of which specially attacks Hop-roots. The name of 
"Swift" is given on account of the rapidity of the flight. 
The moths may be seen in the evening by hedgerows or 
grassy banks, over grass, where they drop their eggs in large 
numbers. 

In the spring of 1885 I received specimens corresponding 
with the caterpillars of this moth, from Mr. Martin Burl, of 
Elsenham, near Bishop's Stortford, with the observation that 
they were samples of earth grubs which were destroying his 
winter Beans, gnawing the stalks in two a little below the 
ground. They were a strong healthy plant, sown early in 
October, ploughed in and pressed with ribbed roller in strong 
clay-land after wheat, and he feared that about two acres of 
the twenty were hopelessly ruined. 

With regard to getting rid of this special attack, Mr. Burl 
noticed, on March 10th, that in digging them that morning 
(being frosty) he found some of them retired quite into the 
solid ground, in a cavity just fitting them ; and consequently 
he was going to cultivate as deeply as possible between the 
rows of 13eans, in hopes of turning out a good many of the 
pests. 

This plan might be expected to act well wherever the grubs 
could be reached, as they were obviously sensitive of weather 
influences ; and turning them out of their self-made shelters 
would act as thoroughly on them as on the common surface 

* ' Gardeners' Chronicle ' for 18i5, p. 873. 