


' ■;>, 



^'. 



SS « J';^i:;ri:^!!^r-- ^-^^-"^ -^y «■ Ca.ickshank from J. Batcman, 1U> OrcMace 



ualemaia, 1837-43 



aeof 



' ^ 



■ y 






■/ 






/ 







s. 



3^ 



fj(»! 





rr. 



■it 



Encouraged and assisted by his father in his botanical proclivities, 
Bateman sent out to Demerara at the end of 1833 a botanical collector named 
Colley, chiefly to search for orchids. About sixty species reached this 




i 



■*■>'.': 



' t 



luntrr alive, of which a third we 



One of these was given the name 



f . 



■ it. 



. ' 






r 



mannia 



Lindley, thus coinmi 



.:^^ 



^ r 



and collector. Bateman contributed an account of the expedition, based on 
Colley's report, to Loudon's Gardeners' Magazine for I835. In lQj!k he be- 



7 - , "fT; 



.f^ 



came 



im many 



In less than ten years the finest orchids 



I 



■'.t 



r^' 



.■--•t-. 



-/- -' 



•^f- ^ 



of Guatemala 'fere in cultivation in England, having first floored at 
Knypersley. 



' ^■'' 



. I . . 



-.•.-^i 



■>...' 



:#^' ' 



L*^^-.— _ 



•I.f7 



^^ 



'-mf'f> 



>- -X - 



f^^ 






I 






His Orchidaceae of Mexico and Guatemala , perhaps the greatest botanical 

I 

book in point of size ever published, was issued in parts from I837 to 181|3. 
It consists of forty elephant folio plates, with descriptions and cultural 



numerous 



One of these represents the 



£< 



J ^ 



■K \ 



*n'<. 



1 - 



opening of a box supposed to contain orchids, from which issue a pair of 
gigantic cockroaches, grovm fat on the original contents, and iThich are 
chased by the gardener's family and assistants. The edition was limited to 

I r, . 

125 copies at twenty guineas each. 



V tr^'f Ct■^■ 



\ 



#.- *v^"' 



>* 




^ 



\ ^ 



r 




'--^-^^J^ 


4 ^B 


■-- "^"ig 


\ ^^^^l^k 


^^^^^j ^^^H^^H 


^ 


m;, w 


n 


" r 


.'l ■- 


^ J 


I-/ 


. 


.•''•', 

^ 


F L f 


- ' 

•J 

4 


< - 


1 

L 


r 

-* 


X 


. '^^^ 


■ 




h 


"S" 






■ 


J 



I. 



t> 



h 



s 



■/■ 



,\ 



- -i\- 



■ry, 









« * 






\ 



*x 



-'i 



/ .. '^ 




Bateman (J.) The Orchidaceae of Mexico and Guatemals 



PP 



VIII, 11,12, 






/ 



i|o. 






■ 

I|,0 fine hand-colored plates, large folio 



837 



h3 



r ' 




V . 



% 

^:..# 



-h) 




A good copy of t he most imposing of Orchid books As usual, 

the text and some of the plates are rather spotted. This occurs 



copies 




er. 



in all 



and appears to be due to a defect in the 
The work has become extremely scarce, which is hardly surprising 
as only 125 copies were issued* 



I'- 




From Wheldon & Wesley's Catalogue No. 86 



1957 



v^ 



■^j- 







tfr^"'-- 





A. 



^' 





■*^ 







^ 



\ 



Ci 



zO. 



ih> 




-~j^- 





S7 











D. 




A (S E ® HJ 





Jk S 





IT ¥ 







A D 



Z\ 



&" 






t^' 



T K] a 





© GS K 







g^tH H 







Eaa 





1^ Ta 




IT li 



A 



]? 




c. 




Si 







Tf 



A 




IE E 




g 







IL A M IF g 



W EI E © 




I 







E ^ 



Ji& 



ST^^T E ¥ m 




® W Sf 




E) E 1^ 




iv. IE 1 






pi 




m 




[Si 



WOIUIE 





ItI 









1^^ 




V. 




® IF I® ]1 






l1^ 






/i 





S" 111 JO. 





a 



^ 





C--! 

i:i^ 



^^ 





D. 




;v3 





:s2 










h^ 




^j 





_5Z 



a ^i ^ 



n^ 




H^m IF 






n^^E©!^ iD)iiin)ii©.^^iiin) 



1^^ 



i"ST 






c 




Slv^jTIi^^^^ 



I^^®g^ mwi^siBiL 



J 






i^ 






^"1 




©=1^11 Is) 






^^■^' 





J^ 






B/^T[^ 





Ih 




*v 



« 



PREFACE 



i HE completion of his Work affords the author an opportunity of apologizing for the delays that have 
attended its publication, and which he fears must have taxed the patience of many of his subscribers. 
These delays were not, however, under his own control, but were owing, in part, to the difficulties which 



an author, resident in the country, experiences w^hen publishing a work in town ; and, in part, to the dilatory 



blooming of particular plants, without which the series of illustrations would have been incomplete 



The present is also the most suitable occasion for offering his grateful acknowledgments to the 



botanical friends who have 



kindly assisted him in the prog 



his undertaking 



T 



those distin 



r 

guished foreigners. Professor Von Martins, of Munich ;— Professor Poeppig, of Leipsig;— Dr. Endlicher, 

n r 

of Vienna ;— and Dr. Klotzsch, of Berlin, his thanks are especially due, for the facilities afforded him in the 



examination of the herbaria under their 



His obligations to many of the leading British cultivators 



pressed in the 



press which accompanies the representations of the plants they respec 



supplied. 



To Professor Lindley a separate and more ample acknowledgment must be paid, as nothing could 

■ 

exceed the kindness with which he has given his invaluable advice and ready help in the numerous instances 

■ J 

in which both were greatly needed. 



Knypersley Hall, August 1, 1843. 



/ 



X 



t} 



N 




> 



r- 



-: 



LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS 



n k 



N,B, — Only 125 Copies of this Work are published. 



HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY THE QUEEN DOWAGER. 

HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF THE BELGIANS. 

HIS SERENE HIGHNESS THE GRAND DUKE OF TUSCANY. 



His Grace the Duke of Bedford. 
His Grace the Duke of Devonshire. 
His Grace the Duke of Marlborough. 
His Grace the Duke of Northumberland. 
His Grace the Duke of Sutherland. 



Right Hon. the Earl of Derby. 
Right Hon. the Earl Fitzwilliam. 
Right Hon. the Earl Talbot. 
Right Hon. the Earl of Powis. 
Right Hon. the Earl of Burlington. 



^ 



The Lady Grey, of Groby. 
The Lady Rolle. 



Right Hon. Viscount Milton. 
Right Hon. Viscount Lowther. 



The Baron von Humboldt, Berlin. 

The Count Torlonia, Rome. 
The Baron Delessert, Paris. 



Sir P. de Malpas Grey Egerton, Bart., M.P. 
Sir Charles Lemon, Bart., M.P. 
Sir J. R. Reid, Bart., M. P. 



Adderley, Mrs., Barlaston Hall, Staffordshire. 
AUcard, John, Esq., Stratford Green. 



Butt, Rev, Thomas, Trentham, Staffordshire. 
Birley, H. H., Esq., Swinton Park, Manchester. 
Bow, W., Esq., Millbert Villa, Broughton. 
Brocklehurst, T., Esq., The Fence, Macclesfield. 
Baxter, R., Esq., Dee Hill, Chester. 
Barclay, R., Esq., Lombard Street. 
Barker, G., Esq., F. R. S., Springfield Bir- 
mingham. 
Brewen, R., Esq., Leicester. 

Baker, T. J., Lloyd, Esq., Hardwick Court, 

Gloucester. 
Botfield, Beriah, Esq., Norton Hall, Daventry. 



Crossley, L. T,, Esq., Olive Mount, Liverpool. 
Clowes, Rev. J. Broughton, Manchester. 
Cheetham's Library, Manchester. 
Copeland, Alderman, M. P., Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Compton, G., Esq,, Milan. 

Cox, Frederick G., Esq., Bennett's Hill, Doctors' 
Commons. 



F 

Davenport, Charles, Esq., Tunstall, Staffordshire 
Daubeny, Professor, Oxford. 
Digby, E,, Esq. 



Edwards, Rev. E. J., Trentham, Staffordshire. 
Egerton, W., Esq., Tatton Park, Cheshire. 



Fielding, W. B., Esq., Stodday Lodge, Lancaster. 



Glegg, Mrs., Rostherne Hall, Cheshire. 
Grundy, Miss, Seedfield, Bury. 
Gould, R., Esq., Manchester. 



Grant, D., Esq., Manchester. 

Grant, W., Esq., Springside, Bury. 

Glegg, J. B., Esq., Withington Hall, Cheshire. 



W 



Holt, Miss, Redivals, Bury. ^ 
Harter, J. C, Esq., Broughton Hall. 
Horticultural Society, The, 21, Regent Street. 

r 

Harrison, R., Esq., Aigburgh, Liverpool. 

Horsfall, C, Esq., Everton, Liverpool. 

Holford, R, S., Esq., "Weston Birt, Gloucester- 

shire. 
Hodges, Twisden, Esq. 



Kinnersley, Mrs., Clough Hall, Staffordshire. 
Kean, Mrs., Rowley Hall, Staffordshire. 



Lloyd, Edward, Esq., Cheetham Hill, Man- 
chester. 

Leaf, W., Esq., Old Change. 

Lawrence, Mrs., Whitehall Place. 

Llewellyn, J. D., Esq., F. R. S,, Penllargare, 
Swansea. 

Loddiges, Messrs., Hackney. 

Legh, G. C, Esq., M. P., High Legh, Cheshire. 



Moss, John, Esq., Otterspool, Liverpool, 
Minton, Herbert, Esq., Stoke-upon-Trent. 

Morris, Valentine, Esq., St. Mary-at-Hill. 



Portico Library, The, Manchester. 
Perkins, F., Esq., Southwark. 



Reddall, Mrs. A. B., Congleton. 

r 

Rawson, Christopher, Esq., Hope House, Halifax 
Russell, J. Watts, Esq., Ham Hall, Staffordshire. 
Rucker, S., Esq., Wandsworth. 



Solly, R. H., Esq., F. R. S., Great Ormond Street. 



M 



Eatington Park, 



Warwickshire. 



Sparrow, Miss, Bishton Hall, Staffordshire. 
Splitgerber, D., Esq. 



Tomlinson, J., Esq., Cliff Ville, Newcastle-under- 
Lyne. 



r 

Van Marum, Dr. M., Taylerian Library. 
Van der Hoop, M. Amsterdam. 



Williamson, H. H., Esq., Greenway Bank, Staf- 
fordshire. 
Wilbraham, Mrs., Rode Hall, Cheshire. 

Walker, J. H., Esq. 

Warner, T. Esq, 

Walker, G. Esq. 

Wailes, G., Esq., Newcastle. 

Wilson, Christopher, Esq., Rigmaden Park, 

Lonsdale. 
Wood, W. E. Collins, Esq., Keithwick, Perth 
Wilmore, J., Esq., Oldford, Manchester. 
Walker, J. G., Esq. 



Kirby 



BOOKSELLERS. 



Black and Armstrong, Messrs., 1 copy. 
Simpkin and Marshall, Messrs., 2 copies. 
Longman and Co., Messrs., 2 copies. 
Bohn, Henry, G., 10 copies. 
Godwin, Mr. (Bath), 1 copy. 



^ 



^ 






. . -%■ 



.1 



INDEX 



TO 



THE PLATES 



BARKERIA, 

Lindleyana 
spectabilis 



w ' 



BRASAVOLA, 

r 

glauca 



BRASSIA, 



verrucosa 



CATASETUM, 

maculatum 



CATTLEYA, 

Skinneri 



CHYSI 

Ice vis 




CORYANT 



speciosa^j va? 





s 



i - 




CYCNOC 



ventricosum 




s 



3 



Efifertonianum 




CYRTOCHILUM 

Bictoniense 



EPIDENDRUM, 

alatum 
aloifolium 

auraDtiacum 

r 

aromaticum 

erubescens 
macrochilum 
polyanthum 
Stamfordianum 



TAB. 

28 
33 



16 



22 



2 



13 



31 



36 



. 5 

40 



6 



18 
25 
12 

10 
32 
17 

34 
11 



GALEANDRA, 

Baueri 



LiELIA, 

autumnalis 

majalis 

siiperbiens 

MAXILLARIA, 

Skinneri 



MORMODES, 

pardina 

ODONTOGLOSSUM, 

grande 
hastatum 



ONCIDIUM, 

Cavendishianum 



mcurvum 



Insleayii 

F 

leucochilum 

ornithorhynchum 

Wentworthianum 






PERISTERIA, 

b ■ 

Barkeri 



SHOMBURGKIA 

tibicinis 



SOBRALIA, 

decora 

h 

macrantha 



STANHOPEA, 

Martiana 

r 

saccata . 



tigrma 



TAB. 

19 



9 
23 

38 



35 



14 



24 
20 



I) 



3 

29 

21 
1 
4 

39 



* 



8 



30 



' ^ 



26 
37 



27 
15 

7 



J" 



I 



Vtt- 



*.— 



INTRODUCTORY REMARKS. 




FEW general remarks on the extensive family of Orchidacese, will, perhaps, best introduce what we 
are about to say respecting that section of the tribe, to which this Work is more immediately devoted ; 
and, in the hasty observations which follow, we shall abstain, as much as possible, from all details of a 
purely scientific nature, as an opportunity of treating more fully on that branch of our subject will occur 
towards the close of our Work. Although the great extent of the species of this order was not even suspected 
till within the last few years, and though the rage for their introduction is of still more recent date, yet there were some among 
the earlier botanists, on whom their charms would not appear to have been lost ; especially, the great Rumphius in the Old 
World, and Hernandez in the New. In the Herbarium Amboinense of the former, his chapter on the " Angr^cums" 
so he designates the whole tribe) opens with the following passage, which we quote for the edification of our readers : 
" Now," he exclaims, " now come we to describe a noble family of plants, which is remarkable for having always its 
dwelling aloft upon the branches of other trees, and which scorns the lowly ground ;— like the seats and castles of the 
great, which are usually built in elevated situations And, as nobility is distinguished by its appropriate and 






dignified attire, so this tribe of plants has a towering mode 



of growth, quite peculiar to itself. 



"* 



This eloquent 



eulogium will sufiice to prove, that the eastern Orchidacese were not without admirers, even in those barbarous times . 
and their brethren of the West seem to have been equally fortunate, as one of their tribe received attentions of the 
most marked description from the " Pliny of New Spain," (as Hernandez has been styled), who, not content with 
using it to decorate almost every page of his work, ventured to dedicate it, as the loveHest plant of the Mexican 
Flora, to the Lyncean Academicians of Rome, by whom it was immediately adopted, as the peculiar emblem of 
their learned body.t 



r 

Plumier was another botanist, who paid his court to this tribe in an especial manner ; and his figures of some of 
the West Indian species are models of accuracy and beauty, even at the present day. With these and other examples 
before us, it will appear surprising that Linn^us should only have been acquainted with one hundred species, of which 
all those which grew upon trees (making, perhaps, a fourth of the whole) he thrust into his genus Epidendrum. What 
would be the astonishment of that " father of Botany," could he now but behold his lonely " Epidendrum" multiplied 
into two hundred genera ! and his one hundred Orchidacese increased to two thousand ! ! J Nay, what if he were 
assured, that our knowledge of the tribe was only in its infancy, and that, in all probability, not one half of the 



species 



had been hitherto discovered ! ! ! 



■ 

* " Nu7iG noUlem describemus herhamm silvestriumfamiliamy qum eo sese distinguit, quod semper in alto habitat, in aliis nempe arboribus, ac spernit hiimile solum 
uti etplerumque nobiles arcm et castella in altis extructa sunt locis, ita ut alium ac sublimem crescendi habeant modum acformam, uti et nobilitas modernis sese distin- 
guit, etsuperbis vestimentisy — Rumphius Herb, Am, xi. 1. 

The Latin of our Amboyna " Savant," it will be seen by this quotation, is by no means Ciceronian^ nor is it easy to translate literally : indeed it 
is almost as bad as our own. 



-yncea 



r- 9f r t J 

to be the emblem of the Z?/?icm?i Academy. Hernandez would seem to have been a wit: he flourished in 1650. His favourite plant, was, probably, an Ang-uloa 
and it has, we believe, been recently imported. A greatly reduced representation of it will be observed in our Frontispiece. 



X This is no exagg-eration. 



MalaxidecB 



of five hundred mig-ht now be added ; and, besides these, there are the Ophrydea, &c. which will comprehend at least five hundred more. 



2 



Asia. Africa * and America 



L 

found to divide the species of the order amongst them, into three 
nearly equal proportions (for the few which Europe produces need scarcely be taken into the account) ; and the closer 
we approach the Tropics, the more numerous and beautiful they become. Arrived, at length, within the precincts of 
the Torrid Zone, we find them no longer " prone on the ground," as heretofore, but conspicuous on the branches of 

of the naturalist, from afar, by the 



must 



the most rugged trees of the dampest and wildest forests ; attracting the eye of the naturalist, 
dazzling brilliancy of their colours, or arresting his attention by their delicious fragrance. And 
occasion to observe, that although plants of this description are not unfrequently termed " parasitic," the epithet is 
altogether misapplied ; for, while the " Parasites" prey upon the vital juices of their victims, and perish with them, the 
" Epiphytes" derive nothing but their stay, or local habitation, from the plants on which they have established 
themselves, and continue to flourish and flower, indifferent as to whether their supporters live or die. The great 
majority of the Orchidacese of the Tropics belong to the latter or epiphytic class; there are however a few that do 
not, as was long ago observed by the same ingenious Rumphius, to whom we have already had occasion to advert ; 
after noticing, in terms of due commendation, the dignified habits of most of the tribe, he proceeds with a sigh, to 
remark :—^Hhat among these vegetable nobles, just as among the nobles of mankind, some degenerate individuals are 



■ 



■ 



who are on the 



seem to constitute a class of their own."t But, it is not m 



in their ^' habits'' that the terrestrial species are placed below the Epiphyt 
singularity and beauty. 



them 



Orchidacese of each of the three great divisions of the globe have features of their own, so marked and 



peculiar, that in most cases, a practised eye would 



/< 



proper habitation. Thus, for example, the pendent stems and graceful flowers of many of the Dendrobiums, jSlrid 



their allies. 



character of beauty and lightness to the Orchidaceous Flora of tropical India, which con 
clumsy pseudo-bulbs of the Bulbophyllums, or the long tails of the Angrsecums of Africa 



most 



■ I 

America, the characteristic features are the upright vegetation (as distinguished from pendent) of the Epidendrums, 
the long straggling flower-spikes of many of the Oncidiums, and a much greater variety of grotesque and marvellous 
forms, than is to be met with in anv T3art of the Old World. 



The uses to which the plants of this family are applied, are few, but, in several instances, highly romantic. In 
Demerara, that most deadly of all poisons, the " Wourali,'' is thickened by the juiqe of the Catasetums; and in 
Amboyna, the irwe *' Elixir of Love'' is prepared from the minute farina- like seeds of Grammatophyllum speciosum.;]: 



In Mexico, where the '' language of flowers" is understood by all, the Orchidaceae seem to compose nearly the entire 



!■ 



T 



alphabet. Not an infant is baptized, not a marriage is celebrated, not a funeral obsequy performed, at which the 
aid of these flowers is not called in by the sentimental natives, to assist the expression of their feelings ; — 'they are 

r I 

offered by the devotee at the shrine of his favourite saint, by the lover at the feet of his mistress, and by the sorrow- 
ing survivor at the grave of his friend : whether, in short, on fast days or feast days, on occasions of rejoicing or 
in moments of distress, these flowers are sought for with an avidity, which would seem to say that there was " no 
sympathy like theirs ;' —\hm%, " Flor de los Santos," " Flor de Corpus," " Flor de los Muertos," " Flor de Maio," " No 



me olvides," (or " Forget me not,") are but a few names, out of the many, that might be cited, to prove the high 



consideration in which our favourites are held in the New World. Nor are these the only honours that are paid to 
them ; for Hernandez assures us, that in Mexico the Indian chiefs set the very highest value on their blossoms, for the 
sake of their great beauty, strange figure, and delightful perfume ; while, in the East Indies, if Rumphius is to be 
credited, the flowers themselves positively refuse to be worn, except by princesses or ladies of high degree. 1| In 
Honduras, again, the large hollow cylindrical stalks of a fine species of JEpidendrum^ are made into trumpets, by the 

J- - - L 

little boys and girls of the country ; and the pseudo-bulbs of several of the more succulent species, are used instead 
of resin for the strings of their guitars. The following are, however, almost the only known instances in which the 
tribe do any direct service to mankind. The bulbs of Maxillaria hicolor contain a large quantity of an insipid watery 
fluid, which is greedily sucked by the poor natives of Peru in the dry season ; a fluid of a similar nature is obtained 

r ' . 

from what is, probably, a Lcelia^ in Mexico, and is administered as a cooling draught in fevers j from the roots of 
some of the Orchises, the nutritive substance called " Salep" is obtained ; in New Zealand, certain species are of 
considerable importance as esculents ; and in Guiana, the soles of the shoemaker are as much indebted to the viscid 
matter obtained from the Catasetums and Cyrtopodiums^ as are the poisoned arrows of the Indians. 



' 



r 

* It has been ascertained^ by recent travellersj that the interior of Africa (especially the banks of the Nig-er^) teems with Orchidaceous Epiphytes. 

f In Tide avMm nohilitate^ ceque ac inter homi?ieSp etiam tales reperiuntur^ qum in rusticos degenerant^ et in terra crescunt^ qumque peculiare videntur constituere 
genus, — RumphiuS; xi.^ 1. 

X 

I We think it our duty to state, that this plant has just been received in England, in a living state, from Mr. Gumming ; we tremble for the consequences, if what 
Rumphius says of its properties be true, asserting, as he does, " mulierem prosequi amore talem, a quo hunc farinam cum cibo, vel potu accepit," (!!!) Rumphius^ xi. 1. 

r 

II We could name, if we durst, certain fair English ladies of " high degree," in whose head-dresses these pretty vegetable exclusives have already condescended to 
appear. 



§ Epidendrum tiMcinis, (Nob.) 



'i 



/ 



/ 



3 



In this list the Vanilla is not included, as that plant has recently been separated (no doubt, most judiciously) 
by Dr. Lindley, from the natural order " Orchidaceee," and constituted the type of a new order of its own. 



If then, this brief catalogue comprehend all the instances in which this vast order either relieve the wants, or aid 
the pursuits of mankind, its very scantiness would seem to argue that it was neither to provide us with food or 
ramient, nor to protect us from disease or cold, that tropical forests were made to teem with an almost endless 
variety of the tribe ; either, therefore, in the cheerless spirit of atheism, we must suppose them to have been created 
in vain, or we must conclude that their office was something other and higher than to minister to the mere animal 
necessities of our nature. No ; it was to yield us a pleasure of an intellectual kind, and so to win our affections from 
more hurtful things, that these most worthless of plants were clothed in unrivalled charms ;— it was to provide a 
rich banquet in the temple of Flora, which, while it yielded the utmost enjoyment to her more constant votaries, 
might, at the same time, draw round her innocent table those who were more rarely numbered among her guests ; 
an entertainment, in short, which might attract the man of pleasure by its splendour, the virtuoso by its rarity, and 
the man of science by its novelty and extraordinary character. It is, we are convinced, on this principle alone that 



we can attempt to understand the OrcJiido- Mania 



especially the upper) classes, to such 



a marvellous extent. Not contented with the exertions of our foreign connexions, we send men expressly to all the 
points of the compass, to swell the number of the species in cultivation; and in this zeal for their introduction, the 
amateur, the nurseryman, and the public establishment, all vie with each other. The nobility, the clergy, those 
engaged in the learned professions or in the pursuits of commerce, seem alike unable to resist the influence of the 
prevaihng passion ; nay, if we may trust a paragraph in a morning paper, it has even extended to Windsor Castle itself.* 
Works solely devoted to the " Orchidacese" have made, or are about to make, their appearance ;t houses for their 
accommodation are rearing in every direction, and, as a matter of course, included in all designs for a complete 
residence 4 pots for their exclusive use are already sold in the shops of London ;|| their blossoms are even now 
imitated in the establishments of some of the most fashionable manufacturers of artificial flowers ;§ and prizes, the most 
munificent, are offered by all Horticultural Societies, for the finest specimens of their popular family. 



On the Continent, as in England, collectors are every day entering the field. Russia, Austria, and even Tuscany, 
are infected ; and in Holland and Belgium, Bulbs and Camellias seem likely to be neglected in the growing rage for the 
new favourites. In its extent and intensity this Orchido-mania bids fair to rival the Haarlem mania for TuHps (so 
memorable in the annals of horticultural enthusiasm) ; it is based, however, on a much better foundation than that 
most strange infatuation ; for while mere abstract beauty is all that could be alleged in favour of the one, full fifty good 
reasons may be brought forward to excuse and even justify the other. Some of these we shall presently enumerate; 
but we must first briefly notice the cause which has delayed the developement of the present "furor," until 
nearly the middle of the nineteenth century, and which, we are satisfied, will be found to have been no other than the 
supposed impracticability of cultivating them with any success. In addition to its obvious tendency to prevent the 
formation of collections, this cause had the effect of retarding the acquaintance of Botanists with this tribe in a far 
greater degree than could have occurred in the case of any other vegetable family whatsoever ; for not merely does the 
succulent and fragile nature of the subjects make it, in some cases, impossible to dry them at all, but it always renders 
imperfect and difficult of determination such specimens as, by dint of skill and care, have at last been placed in our 
Herbaria. 



Again : as it is usual for these plants to flower, for the most part, in the rainy season, in the dampest woods and in 
the most noxious atmosphere, they were, in a measure, secured from the depredations of the botanical collector, who 
would not merely have had to risk his life to possess himself of their flowers, but so secret, and frequently inaccessible, 
are the situations in which they grow, that probably, after all his labour and perils, nine-tenths of their number would 
have eluded his grasp ; the result of his mission would therefore have been to impress us, in the first place, with an 
idea that the species were not numerous, and in the next, to convey but a very imperfect notion of their beauty ; for as 
the largest and most extraordinary forms are invariably the most fleeting, so they are the most rarely met with in per- 
fection, and, even when detected, are the most difficult to preserve. All these circumstances combining with the great 
similarity which, when out of flower, the members of this family bear to each other (in the eyes at least of all hut the 
initiated), it will no longer excite our surprise that a very erroneous estimate should have been formed of their number 

h 



and merit, until we discovered the proper mode of their cultivation. But no sooner was this grand object attained, 



* We allude to a recent paragraph in the Morning Post, in which " the Chinese Air-plant" is stated to have flowered in the royal conservatory 
t E. g. Dr. Lindley's " Serttmi OrchideumP and our own " Opiiscuhimy 

b 

X Vide. Mr. Kutger's designs for residences in Loudon's Gardener's Magazine. 
II At Lowesby's Terra-cotta warehouse, 18^ King William Street, Strand. 
§ At Foster's, 16, Wigmore Street. 



4 



most splendid and extraordinary beoran to make 



been brought 
From Guiana 
been already received, and 



appearance : produced 



by plants which had 



from countries whose Orchidaceous Flora was supposed to possess little of either novelty or interest. 



accordin 
number 




Aublet, contained only 



marvellous 



species, nearly 



Coryanthes maculata, and Cycnoches Ijodd 



which, when they flowered for the first time, were found not merely to be new to science, but to constitute genera 
with which botanists were altogether unacquainted. 

Having now explained the cause which has so long delayed the growth of a passion for the Orchidaceee amono- 



us, we will next proceed 



humble 



opinion, a popularity so great, and therefore so likely to wane, 



should in their case appear destined to endure ; and to do this satisfactorily, it is clear we must notice some of 
the numerous modes in which they commend themselves to our attention and regard. Of these the most attractive is, 
perhaps, their beauty; and of their superiority in this respect, the most sceptical are even now beginning to be 



convinced — even now, we say, when our 

of the most magnificent species have flowered with us either im 

in all their glory, and arranged in our stoves with all the adva 

plants as the GrammatopTiyllums and Saccolabiums of the Spice Islands! or the Dendrob 



by far the 



maj 



of mutual 



mriant foliage, — such 
of India ! ! or the 



Stanhope 



Oncidiums^ of America ! ! ! all of 



<i 



In colour though variedj in beauty may vie ; 



f9 



spontaneously grows. 

And then their 



1 admit that the eye never before rested 
blage of flowers, each of which is consic 



mass of such surpass 
he choicest ornament 



loveliness, com 



r 

fragrance ! We question whether even '' Araby the blest'' can boast of any perfumes that can at 



all compete in sweetness with those exhaled by 



/' 



brides odoratum, and Epidendrum aromaticum (Tab. X. of 



Angrcecum odoratissimum (Lindley MSS), Tet 



which remind the recipient of the smell of a drug 
violets, pomatum, aniseed, and angelica, of noyau, 
no fragrance, except in the day-time, but there are others which. 



milk 



Work). Other species emit odours 



cinnamon, allspice, citron, musk, and honey.t Some of 



Epidi 



nocturnum and B 



are aromatic 




which 



or day. 



Another characteristic of the tribe is the long: duration of their blossoms 



what we before remarked. 



This assertion will appear to contradict 




some of the most 



it is but too true in the case of such genera as Stanhopea, Catasetim, Cycnoches, and Cory 
pre-eminent for the large size and strange configuration of their flowers; 



and, unfortunately, 
ithes, which stand 



com 



though less 
of EpidendrecB, 
Vandese, where 
Coryanthes, wh 



such as Lmlia 



m many, however, of the more 



Cattleya, and we may 



flower-spikes remain in perfection for weeks, and even sometimes for 



other 



3n, the whole tribe 
together. Even in 



continues nevertheless in beauty for 



they may be removed with safety (and sometimes 



ordinary temperature, where their 



much 



the order, we know of none so fugitive as 
They bear carriage remarkably well, and 
vantage to themselves), into apartments of 
a stove. Indeed, it is easy to foresee the arrival, 



r 



the 



that too at no distant period, of the time when their flowers will appear as much " at home'' in the B 
L as in the Mexican temple, and when they will be prized as highly by the English as by the Indian belle. 

F ' 

We would next direct attention to a circumstance connected with their cultivation, which seems to place 



most advantageous light : we mean the much sfreater amount of 



a small house, if devoted 



be derived from one of four times the extent, if 



of 



any other description. Their superiority in this respect shews itself 



a 



of 



in the first place, 



the space required for each individual is usually very small, and while the shelves, stages, or even flues, are preferred 



f the true Air 



and 



two distinct tiers of vegetation are thus obtained. In the 
suffered to flag, something is constantly going; on, either 



pi 



may 



the 







the 



opening of the flowers is to be expected, or the progress 

h 

* Should there be any, especially among the softer sex, who may be disposed to cavil at the hard names which Botanists have given to these plants, the fair 

objectors may adopt (if they prefer them) those by which they are known in their respective localities; such as the following, for example, which are the siviple 

appellations of some of the finest of the Mexican species, viz. " Tzauhxilotl," " Amazauhtli," " Coatzonte coxochitl," " Chichiltic tepetlauhxochitl/' Hernandez Re 
Mid. Lib. 8, Cap. 7. . 



Maxillaria 



brides 



The species are arranged in this note in the same order as their odours in the text. 



5 



of development in the leaves and pseudo-bulbs may be marked, or the progress of a young shoot has to be observed, 
or the life-and-death struggles of a recent importation have to be v^atched over, and that too with a degree of care and 
anxiety that could never be felt for ordinary plants. Then there are the seasons of growth and of rest, each of which 
has an interest peculiar to itself; since during the first the greatest change occurs in the circumstances and appear- 
ance of the plants, while during the second the greatest number of them flower;— and thus, throughout the dreary 
months of Winter, which, in the majority of Conservatories, is the season of nakedness and inaction, the Orchidaceous 
House is gayer than in the most glowing days of Summer. * 
the strictest sense of the word, and realize the 



The plants too with which it is stored are evergreens in 



ic 



virct semper — nee fronde caduca 



" Carpitur ; " 

of the Latin poet in a far higher degree than is to be seen elsewhere ; for while many of their number retain the same 
leaves in perfect health and beauty for six or eight seasons together, there are none which lose them in a shorter period 
than twelve months, f It is likewise worthy of remark, that the species which are the most unwilling to part with 
their natural advantages, are also the most loth to change the abode which has been artificially afforded them; and 
they may therefore, when once firmly established in a suitable tenement, be left in undisturbed possession of it for ten 
or more years in succession;— thus relieving the cultivator from the unsightly changes and continual shiftings which 
stove-plants in general are wont to require, t 



But the appearance of the genuine Air-plants, when suspended from the rafters of the Orchidaceous House, forms, 



thrusting their long 



perhaps, its most characteristic feature. And wonderful it is to see these " children of the sun " 
tortuous roots into the surrounding atmosphere, and maintaining the most vigorous health with no other support than 
what that pure element affords them ; — thus reversing as it were the settled laws of Nature ; for while other plants are 
compelled to seek their coarse subsistence from the ground, our Orchidaceas, like unearthly beings, are enabled to 
live solely upon air. 



Even the rarity of the tribe, and the difficulties and expense attendant upon their cultivation, although they may 
have the effect of diminishing the number of their votaries, will at the same time tend to strengthen the devotion 
of such as have the courage to encounter, and the means to overcome those formidable impediments. It is indeed, 
probable, that Orchidaceous culture will always continue in a (comparatively) few hands; and that it will, therefore, be 
pursued with the same ardour in the upper walks of life, that already, in a humbler sphere, attends the cultivation of 
the many beautiful varieties of the tulip, auricula, and carnation. Some, perhaps, there may be, who, looking only at 
the greater facilities afforded by the latter, may be disposed to question the importance of the former in a social point 
of view ; but while we admit the superior value of whatever is placed within the reach of the great mass of mankind, 
we must at the same time maintain that nothing ought to be condemned or disregarded, merely because it can never be 
extensively diffused. Few will value what all may possess; so long, therefore, as each class has enjoyments suited to 
its circumstances and position, we are satisfied that the happiness of the community at large will be far more effectually 
promoted, than if all were interested in the same objects, or occupied with the same pursuits. The reciprocal pleasure 
which the lovers of " florist's flowers " and of " rare plants " may derive from the sight of their respective collections, 
is a sufficient example of the truth of our assertion. 



*• In the collection of the Author, although specimens in flower may at all times be seen, March and April, in the Spring, and October and November, in the 
Autumn, are perhaps the gayest months ; the intervening period is " growing season " with a large majority of the species, many of which come into blow just before its 
commencement, and a still greater number immediately after its termination. There are, however, several that flower at uncertain periods ; others that flower all the year 
round ; and likewise a few that, we are concerned to say, never flower at all. 

t We are now, of course, speaking of epiphytal and not of terrestrial Orchidaceaj; many, indeed most, of the latter lose their leaves and entirely disappear, for half 
the year ; but there are divers weighty reasons why these should not be admitted into the Orchidaceous House, properly so called. There are, also, a few of the Catasetwns, 
which are sometimes destitute of leaves for a short time ; but it is doubtful whether they ought not to be classed with the terrestrial species, rather than with the epiphytes, 
since they are quite as frequently found under trees as upon them. 

I -• 

X These remarks apply more particularly to species of some of the caulescent and slow-growing Eastern genera, such as Vanda, Saccolahiian, jErides, and 
their alhes. 

4 

II All the OrchidacejB which are really entitled to the name of ** Air-plants " are of Easier?! extraction, and constitute a well- defined section of the " Vandew " group, 
which is readily distinguished by its peculiar habit from the corresponding group of the West, where heavy masses of pseudo-bulbs usurp the place of the long and graceful 
stems of the EasL It is not a little singular that the habit of many of the South American Epidendrece approaches that of the oriental Vandece far more closely than any 
genera of their own tribe have been observed to do in the former country. 

brides odoratum affords, probably, the best example of a true Air-plant with which we are at present acquainted, for it will grow freely, for any length of time, if 
merely suspended by a wire from the roof of a moist stove. A plant of this species, in the possession of the Messrs. Loddiges, has attained an extraordinary size, and when 
loaded, in spring, with thirty or forty bunches of its beauteous flowers, forms an object of unsurpassed loveliness, and affords us a glimpse of what our collections will 
one day become. 

Some persons, seeing plants of this description seated in pots among pieces of decayed wood or peat, imagine that they derive their nutriment from these sources, 
although such treatment is purely artificial, and merely designed to supply them with moisture more perfectly than could otherwise be done. 



\ 



6 



But will the rarity of Orchidace^^ o 
fascination which they are felt to possess ? 
their flowers ? — or by the presence of all 



Or is it to be accounted for by the beauty^ the fragrance^ or the durability of 
these qualities combined ? , No ; other plants might be mentioned^ as rare, and 
as difficult of culture^ and scarcely inferior to them in personal charms^ and yet they could never boast of the train of 



attracted 



spell consist ? We 



of their 
in all 



that constitutes the charm of other plants ! Neither 



I 



Orchidac 



6 



but it is the means to that end,— the secret of that power which we are now so anxious to arrive at. Something it must 



Orchidaceae, but which at once distin 



and 



where is a character so marked and peculiar to be found ?— where, but in the marvellous structure, the grotesque 
conformation, and imitative character of their flowers? Yes; here we have that which is more than sufficient to 



safely 



esides. It 



and from which we believe their interest to be derived, are neither idly nor fancifdly 
apprehend, we shall have but little difficulty in effecting. 



Accustomed as we are to look upon the animal and ve.sretable kingdoms as altogether d 



of 







the other ; and yet 
; for, as if it were 

too simple a matter to imitate the works of Nature only, they mimic, absolutely mimic, the productions of art ! But 
not contented to rest even here, they display a restless faculty of invention, fully equal to their powers of imitation, and 
after having, like Shakspeare, ^^ exhausted worlds," like him too, they seem to have "imagined new;" and thus we 
find their flowers exhibiting a variety of strange and unearthly objects, such as bear no resemblance to created things, 
nor yet to any of the works of man. Such a host of examples of their freaks in all these departments are on record, 
that we scarcely know where to commence our selection ; perhaps, however, it may be well to take first a few of the 



birds 



reptiles.* W 



'5 



then, with the insects ; not only because they are the class most frequently imitated, but 



of 



proper season, 
of the originals. 



t 



t &c. &c 



variety ; and we have, also, the gorgeous vegetable-butterfly of Trinidad, whose blossoms, poised at the extremity of 
their long elastic scapes, wanton gaily in the wind, and "seem impatient of that fixture by which they are differenced 
in kind from the flower-shaped Psyche that flutters with free wing above them." 



We 



birds. 



from which the 



have borrowed their swans, eagles, doves, 



§ to say nothing of a large 



r 

* Our examples will be principally derived from South America^ for owing to the much greater uniformity in the blossoms of the OrchidacefB of the Old World, the cases 
in which strange figures and animal likenesses occur are not nearly so numerous as in the New. Among the more remarkable of the " Orientals " we may mention Vanda 
peduncularis, Renanther a arachnites, and Phalcenopsis amaUle ; the latter bears a most striking resemblance to a downy white moth (hence the name), and flowered last 
year (1837), for the first time in Europe, in the rich collection of the Messrs. Rollisson, of Tooting. It is figured in the Herharium Aynholnense of Rumphius ; and this 
worthy man (hardly knowing what to make of the insect and animal mockeries of which this Phal^nopsis and others of its tribe are guilty,) quotes the opinion of 
a contemporary botanist who seems to be convinced that all such4ike Orchidace^ spring '^ vel ex putridis quorundam animalium cadaveribus, in quibus vis qu<Bdam 
seminalis latet, vel ex ipsis animalium seminihus, qum in montlhiis vel pratis coeunt, atgue pro ejus argwnento dicit in Satyriorum (meaning all Orchidace^) floribus detegi 
speciem istius animalis ex cuius semine in terra putrefacto hoc Satyrium excrevit, vel istius insecti, quod pier umque ex cadavere cujusdam animalis prodit" — Rumph. 

Herb, Amb, vi. 98, 

t E. q, "flies" in Ophrys muscifera, "bees" in 0. apifera, "drones" in 0. fucifera, "spiders" in 0. aranifera, A remarkable circumstance, connected with 
OpTirys muscifera has twice occurred in the garden of the Rev. T. Butt, of Trentham, whose devotion to the Orchidacese of Europe and North America is fully equal to 
that of some of his contemporaries for those of the torrid zone. The flowers of 0. muscifera bear, it is well known, a striking resemblance to a certain (and that an 
uncommon) species of fly; and some years since, one of this description was observed by Mr. Butt to settle for days together on a blossom of the unconscious plant, no 
doubt under the impression that it was enjoying the society of one of its own kind. For several summers afterwards, although the Orchis continued to flower, the fly was 
no where to be seen ; last year, however, it was again observed at its post, where it remained, as before, for several days in succession. 



% The colmims of many of the Catasetums and other genera make excellent " Grasshoppers. 



j» 



a 



Mosquitoes " are borne by TricJioceros antennifer, or "Flor de 



Mosquito " of the^Peruvians ; " Dragon-flies " by Renanthera arachnites ; " Moths " by Fhalmnopsis amabile, &c. &c. Insect-like " Antennsg " are also conspicuous in the 
flowers of Restrepia antennlfera, and an unpubhshed Mexican Epidendrwn {E. antenniferum, Lind. MSS.) discovered by Mr. Henchman. The Genera Myanthiis of 
LiNDLEY, and Myoxanthus of Poeppig and Endlicher, (though now abolished) were also founded, as their names imply, on the resemblance of their flowers to different 
kinds of flies. 

II Coleridge's ''Aids to Reflection:' The " Butterfly-plant " of Trinidad, is the now well-known Oncidium papilio ; it had not flowered in this country at the time the 
"Aids to Reflection" were written, otherwise we might have supposed it to have been in the eye of the "Ancient Mariner" when he penned the passage we 
have quoted. 

§ "Swans" are found in both the species of Cycnoches (vide Tab. V.); "doves," in Peristeria elata ; "Pelicans," in an unintroduced Mexican Cypripedium 
(C Irapceanum La Llave,) which, from the great resemblance of its flowers to the bird of that name, is styled by the natives " Flor de Pelicano." As to the " Eagles/' 
they have not yet come under the cognizance of any professed botanist; but a fine Orchidacea which has been imported from Jamaica by that zealous collector, 
Mr. HoRSFALL, of Liverpool, is always spoken of as the " spread eagle " by the inhabitants of that island. Unfortunately, the plant has hitherto refused to flower ; and, 
therefore, we have had no opportunity of judging how far it deserves its title. 



f 



7 



J 

assortment of wings, feathers, beaks, and bills.* From the beasts they have not copied quite so freely as from the 



Iff 



In the catalogue of reptiles we find an endless variety of snakes, lizards, toads, and frogs.J Of shells, hkewise, there 

Then follows a mixed multitude of masks, cowls, hoods, caps, and helmets ; swords, spurs, crests. 



§ 



pikes, arrows, and lances ; whiskers, eyelashes, beards, bristles, tails, horns, and teeth ; combs, slippers, buckets, trowels 
pouches, saddles, &c. &c. |1 Nor is this mimicking propensity confined to the flowers alone, being equally conspicuous in 
their leaves and pseudo-bulbs, which have been likened to onions, cucumbers, bamboos, and palms ; tongues and mouse- 
tails ; hooks, whips, and straps ; swords and needles, &c. &c. Of some the leaves are inscribed with Arabic characters, 
of others the roots are cased in coral.^ 



Such are Orchidacege as distributed 



through 



the world at large; it now only remains to notice them when 



confined within the limits of Mexico and Guatemala. And in so doing our attention will at once be attracted by the 
prominence of the particular tribe of Epidendrece, which, although greatly surpassed in other countries by the Vandece 
and Malax'idecB, may here challenge a comparison with either, not merely in number of species, but in the interest 
and beauty of their flowers. To the truth of the latter proposition the illustrations of this work bear ample testimony, 
the very choicest subjects being derived from the ranks of that dominant tribe. What, for example, can exceed the 
magniflcence of such plants as Lwlia superbiens, Epidendrum macrochilum, Barkeria spectahilis, or Cattleya Skinneri /* * 

The splendid genera Lwlia and Barkeria 



E 



are almost exclusively Mexican, and where shall we hope to find forms of more perfect elegance, penciUing of more 
exquisite delicacy, or colours of more sparkling lustre than their various flowers display ! 



But these regions so unusually rich in Epidendrem are far from poor in other tribes. Here Oncidmm flourishes in 



the greatest variety and beauty, while Stanliopea, 



Ma 



most showy attire, and 



Mormodes, CycnocJies, and Catasetum their most marvellous forms, ff The terrestrial species, also, are both numerous 
and beautiful, but the greater difiiculty that attends their introduction and cultivation has unfortunately narrowed our 
acquaintance with them. The Pelican-flower {Cypripedium Irapwanum) and Gove^iia capitata, W\i\i many other plants 
of extraordinary interest, are still included amongst our desiderata, notwithstanding that every exertion has been made 
to obtain them. A splendid exception, however, occurs in Sohralia macrantha, already the pride of British collections, 
though far from having attained the vigour which distinguishes it in its native haunts, where it is no unusual thing to 
meet with thickets ten feet high, composed entirely of its reed-like stems. 



I 

The only other pecuharity of Mexican Orchidacege to which it is necessary to advert, is the circumstance of their 
being more abundant in the higher latitudes and purer air, than in the hot and pestiferous jungles of the coast. They 
have even been found in situations where snow not unfrequently falls, of which Oncidium nuUgenum and Lwlia superbiens 
are conspicuous examples. This power of withstanding a certain degree of cold must be regarded as a most important 
circumstance, especially by those— a numerous class, no doubt— who have hitherto only admired Orchidacege at a 
distance, and been deterred from attempting their cultivation by the heat and expense that ordinarily attend it. 



* The column in most Orchidaceous plants has its wings and beak infinitely diversified in structure. Feathers are not so plentiful, but they may be seen in great 
beauty m the various species of Ornithocephalus, all of which are quite birds in miniature. Psittacoglossum atratum, an unintroduced Mexican plant, has a black ton-ue 
like a parrot, and La Llave named it accordingly. ^ 

t The skins of the tiger and the leopard are rivalled by the petals of such plants as Sianhopea tigrina, Bidhophyllum leopardinum, &c. ; the "flos lyncea" of 
Hernandez (which can be no other than the Stanhopea Martiana of this work) is so called from its lynx-like eyes and teeth ; Dendrohhan taurhmm has nmch of the bull 
about Its face; and various Cataseta-C. semiapertum especially-grin like the ugliest monkey. Jceras anthropofera, the man-orchis, is a well-known plant 
extinct animals do not always escape ; a geologist would instantly recognise the head of a Dimtherium in the flowers of Masdevallia infracta. 

^ I PleurothalUs ophiocephala has a strong resemblance to a serpent's head, and PhoUdota imbricata an equally strong resemblance to a rattle-snake's tail. Lizards 
occur in PleurothalUs saurocephalus and Epidendrum lacertinum, and frogs in Epidendrum raniferam. 

t 

§ Zygopetatum cochleare, Epidendrum cocUeatum, and PhoUdota Conchoidea afford as pretty specimens as any; PleurothalUs chitonoides is also a little gem of its 



Even 



kind. 



II The genera Coryanthes, Coryclum, Bouatea, Pelexia, &c., all derive their names from caps and helmets, which they yield abundantly. For hideous masks we 
must look to Mormodes atropurpurea ; for cowls to Monacanthus (now Catasetum) discolor and viridis ; swords and pikes and other weapons of war are supplied in 
quantities innumerable by the various and complicated forms of the lip. Epidendrum selligerum, and many more, are provided with good saddles, and a host of Sac- 
colabia and aUied genera carry large bags and pouches. 



^ Onions in Oncidium ceholleta; cucumbers in BendroUum cucumeroides ; bamboos in Arundina hamhusifolia ; palms in Angrcecum palmiforme ; tongues and mouse- 
tails in BendroUum Unguceforme and B. myosurus ; hooks in Arpophyllum spicatum ; whips in Maxillaria (now Scuticaria) flagellifera ; straps in PleurothalUs strupifolia • 
needles in Epidendrum aciculare ; swords, passim. The name of Grammatophyllum scriptum proclaims its pecuharities (somewhat tautologically) ; Corallorhiza also. 

I 

* * In the establishment of Messrs. Loddiges this plant has produced clusters of flowers as large as a man's head. In the same collection, Cattleija citrina—o^ 
old so refractory— has been found to succeed perfectly by merely inverting the plant (when suspended), and permitting it to grow downwards. 

F 

1 1 Sianhopea tigrina, S, Martiana, Odontoglossum grande, and Maxillaria Skinneri, all belonging to Vandece, are unrivalled for the beauty and 
Dwers. Catasetum Russellianum, figured in the "Botanical Magazine," is, perhaps, the best of the Cataseta, at least if seen in perfection, when its h 



their flowers 

masses of whitish green flowers have a striking effect. 



magnitude of 
large pendulous 



\ 




fife 



'^<r7f? ^'i^FXB^^^^i 



Meya jBl.SXlov jx^ya kukov. 



^ 



-^ 



'^ w 



■s 



\ 



GN THE CULTUEE OF TROPICAL ORCHIDACEiE. 



•-1 



- f 



Of 



^ 



made any progress among the 



moderns until the commencement of the present century. A few species had, it is true, been estabhshed at Kew, and in 



Messrs 



defiance than in consequence of the barbarous treatment they received. If, however, the gardener was in the dark as 
to the management of the tribe, the botanist w^as as much at fault as to their numbers and importance, for even Professor 
LiNDLEY — the first to entertain enlarged views upon the subject — in an early edition of his '' Natural System," estimates 
the probable extent of the tribe at only two thousand, a number that is exceeded, at the present time, by those actually 
cultivated in the hot-houses of England alone ! 



But, before we enter upon the details of the prevaihng modes of culture, it may not be uninteresting to make brief 



mention of the parties who, by their zeal and skill, have successively contributed to bring Orchis-growing to its present 
palmy state ; and first on the list must stand the well-known firm of C. Loddiges and Sons. A collection appears to have 
existed in this establishment for more than half a century, which, in the last ten years, has increased so rapidly that it 
now includes more than one thousand eight hundred species. Mr. Cattley, of Barnet, w^hose memory is embalmed in 

■ 

the splendid genus that bears his name, appears to have been the first successful private grower, and had the merit of 
introducing many excellent plants.^ The Horticultural Society had also, from the first estabhshment of their garden 
at Chiswick, spared no pains to discover the secret of epiphyte culture, and their experiments enabled Professor Lindley 
to compile his memorable paper '' Upon the Cultivation of Epiphytes of the Orchis Tribe," which was read May 18, 
1830, and from which the science of Orchis-culture may be said to date.f Contemporary with Mr. Cattley, and 
no doubt prompted by his success, other collectors soon appeared, of whom the most remarkable were the late 

■ -J f 

A - 

Mrs. Arnold Harrison and her brother, Mr. Richard Harrison, the Rev. J. T. Huntley, and the late T.ord FiTzwTT.LiAM.t 



Mr. R. Harrison's collection was, for many years, " the leader/' and was visited accordingly not by epiphyte-lovers only, 
but by botanists and men of science from all parts of the world. Aigburgth, in fact, became a sort of Mecca, to which the 
faithful Orchis-grower made his annual pilgrimage, and never without finding himself abundantly rewarded by the sight 
of its then unrivalled treasures. What are called ^' fine specimens" were here seen for the first time, and many were 
the years of patient care and skill that had been requisite to produce them. Next in order, and second to none of 
his predecessors in enthusiasm, came the writer of this article, who, impatient of the tardy rate at which new species 
crossed the seas, determined to expedite matters by dispatching a botanical collector to seek them in their native haunts. 
This service was undertaken by Mr 
fell short of expectation, it yet was sufficient to encourage other parties to embark in similar adventures. From this 
period the importation of Orchidace^ has steadily increased, and, although we now reckon the species by thousands, an 
inexaustible fund of novelty seems to be in store for us : and collections have multipHed almost as rapidly as the plants. 
Those of Mr. Barker and Mr. Williams, in the neighbourhood of Birmingham, became celebrated about the year 1834; 
and the former 





Mr. Ross to Mexico 



The 



collection of the Rev. John Clowes next came into notice, as did shortly afterwards that of the Duke of Devonshire, at 

N to India, in 1836. But the annus mirahilis 

' I 

Gibson from the Nipalese Hills, and which 



Mr 



■ . - . 

of Orchis-importatum was 1837. 



Mr 



Mr 



Mr 



Mr 



exquiste species from the interior of Guiana ; 



M 



Mexican 



In the whole, not less, probably, than three hundred species were seen in 



England for the first time in this memorable year. 



I 

Besides the collections already noticed, many others deserve to be enumerated, which, although more recent than some 



Mr 



\ 



* Mr. Cattley's collection was disposed of to Mr. Knight, of the Exotic Nursery, about the year 1832. 

■ J 

f This paper is published in the "Horticultural Transactions," 2nd Series, Part I. : except that it advocates a temperature unnecessarily high, it contains no views 
that subsequent experience has not amply confirmed. 

X Of these, all except the collection at Wentworth, have disappeared. At the death of Mrs. Arnold Harrison, that lady's collection passed, like Mr. Cattley's, 
into the hands of Mr. Knight : Mr. Huntley's was removed to Chatsworth in 1835, and Mr. R. Harrison's dispersed by the hammer last year. 



--■ 



10 



/ 



Mr. Allcard, Mr. Cox, and Mrs. Lawrence, all in the neighbourhood of London, — Mr 



Macclesfield 



HoRSFALL and Mr. M 



Mr. Wanklyn and Mr. Bow, at Manchester 



There are also good collections at 



(L 



Stamford) 



(Lord Mountnorris) 



(S 



Lemon) ; 



(Mr. Llewelyn) ; Bicton (I 



indisp 



Although many of the collections above enumerated are nearly on a par, as respects the number of species they con- 
tain, there is a wide difference in the modes of culture employed, and in the degree of success attained ; and, therefore, a 
tour among those of greatest note would be of more service to the young Orchis-grower than any code of instructions 
that mififht be laid down for his guidance. 



may 



studied with the 




g 



are those of the Duke of 



Messrs. Loddiges. at Hacknev : the Rev. John Clowes, of Brousfhton Hall 



of West Hill, Wandsworth 



The two first are on 



immense scale, and 



ire, at 

nd Mr. 
several 




ements 



omodate 



Chatsworth 



numb 



much 



from such sultrv localities as Sierra Leone, the Mauritius 



Isles. 



Messrs 



suffocation. 



smaller house and lower temperatu 



In the 




some magnificent specimens 



but the 



produce 



■ 

The collections of Mr. Clowes and Mr. Rucker are admirably grown, and the houses in which they are disposed, 
seem so well adapted to serve as models^ that, with the permission of the owners^ a ground plan of each is given 
in a subsequent page. Mr. RucKER'sf plants are the most vigorous ; but the house of Mr. Clowes is the most 
enjoyable, and displays Orchidaceas to greater advantage than any other that we have hitherto seen. The plans will 



explain themselves. 



V. 



And 



is an indispensable preliminary 
management. 



ng 



Supposing the plants estabhshed in a suitable house — which 
found to contain all that is most essential for their successful 



1st. The plants can scarcely have too much light or too little sun. 

r 

Light prevents mildew, strengthens the fibre, and checks the disposition to throw up a succession of weakly shoots. 



which 



first 



he production of flowers. The sun, on the contrary, scorches and turns the leaves 
is to shine powerfully upon plants that have just left their winter quarters. In order 
many species should be suspended in the air from rafters or chains, some being placed 



blocks of wood (cork-wood is the best) or fragments of cocoa-nut husks 



moss and broken peat, or in pots with pierced 



perfectly for plants ( 



hkims) 



and 



Examples of all these contrivances will be seen in the vignette at the conclusion of this article. To prevent injury from 
the rays of the sun, shading is, of course, necessary, but this should be so arranged as to be easily removed, as it ought 
not to be continued for more than ten or twelve hours on the very longest summer's day. Exotic climbing plants^ intro- 
duced SDarindv, are advantasreous, and have a good effect. 



2nd. Take care of the roots. 



depends. The winter is with them the most critical season, for if suffered to 



grow too drij they shrivel up and perish ; if too wet^ they rot. 



depends upon the mode 



plants are potted, and which should be such as to admit of their readily parting with all suDerfluous moisture ; and to 
secure this nothing is better than a plentiful admixture of broken potsherds. Hi^h-potting; is now so generallv practised 



* An example of perfectly natural treatment will, probably, ere long be afforded in the great conservatory at Chatsworth, where the palms and other glories of 
the tropical forest will soon be ready — at the rate they are now progressing — for the reception of epiphytes of all denominations. 

t Mr. Rucker has kindly sent the following memorandum of the mode of treatment, &c., at West Hill :— " Our average temperature, in winter, is about Qb'' at the 
warm end of the house, which usually falls to about 60^ at the other end, in summer 75° to 80°. I find that all the plants from temperate climates thrive better at the cool 
end of this long house than in another where is less moisture, and a lower temperature." 



* ■ '--I-'. " f - - — i- 



-•••7 



' - 



- 1-. 



11 



\ 



r 

in good collections, that it is needless to insist upon its importance. Rapidly growing plants, such as the different species 
of Phaius, Gongora, Peristeria, Stanhopea, &c., require to be broken up and entirely repotted every second or third year ; 
on the other hand there are some air-plants, &c., that may remain undisturbed for five or ten years together. 



3rd. Beware of 



^ 



Y 



Orchidaceje are more particularly exposed to the attacks of the following insects— woodhce, crickets, and cock- 
roaches, the thrip, a minute woolly w^hite scale, and a diminutive species of snail ; the two last being infinitely the most 
pernicious. WoodHce are easily kept in check by placing the plants on saucers, or within troughs filled with water, 
especiahy if the valuable aid of a few toads be called in. The " onyscamyntic epiphyte-stand"* invented by Mr. Lyons, 
IS an mgemous and, no doubt, effectual way of accomplishing the same end. It is made by merely fixing a forked branch, 
or block of wood, to the raised centre of a massive saucer or feeder which, being kept constantly full of water, forms a 
sort of foss — impassable to vermin — round the plant it is intended to guard. Crickets and cockroaches are very fond of 
flower-scapes, and to be dreaded accordingly. Red wafers scattered over and among the pots, are to them very tempting 
baits, and, if swallowed, the red lead they contain acts as a poison, but these pests are best destroyed by the mixture 
recommended for the white scale. The thrip does not do much mischief, except where plants are either neglected, or 
grown in too hot and dry a temperature. It usually first appears among the Calaseia, and is to be removed by careful 

Small snails abound in some collections, while, in others, they are unknown ; it is difficult to conjecture whence 
they come, and all but impossible to eradicate them entirely. They batten upon the tenderest roots, such as plants put 
forth when they are just beginning to grow, and if not kept in check would speedily produce irretrievable mischief 
Lettuce leaves, shces of potato, turnip, &c., are very enticing, and while they divert the attention of the enemy from the 

I 

roots^ they also afford an opportunity of capturing him. The collections which are watered exclusively with ram-water 
are the least infested. But the worst plague of all is the small white scale, which, in its first insidious approaches, appears 
only as a white speck upon the leaves, then covers them with a soft whitish down, and finally kills them. For this the 
following remedy will be found efficacious ; viz., dissolve half a pound of camphor in a pint of spirits-of-wine ; the result 
will be an impalpable powder, to which add one pound of Scotch snuff; one ditto, pepper; one ditto, sulphur, and keep 
in a bottle (carefully stopped). This mixture should be dusted over the infected parts, and repeated whenever or 
wherever the enemy shows itself If persisted in for some time, the mixture rarely fails to effect a perfect cure ; and it 



has the further good property of acting as a most deadly poison to cockroaches, &c., which have quite disappeared in the 



washing. 



collection at Knypersley since this mixture came into frequent use. Besides the above annoyances, the red spider and 
the brown scale are frequently injurious, but never except in' cases of gross neglect. 



4th. Give the plants a season of rest. 



Without a season of rest, most plants will not flower at all, and others do so very imperfectly. It is easily accom- 
plished in a variety of ways, either by moving the plants from the warmer to the cooler end of the house ; or by 
diminishing the quantity of water ; or by placing them in a cooler house. Even exposure in a hot, dry atmosphere, 
although it scorches their leaves, not unfrequently throws them into vigorous flower. Plants from the East Indies, and 
from other climates where the extremes of drought and wet are not felt so severely as in Brazil or Hindostan, require a 
season of rest proportionably short, and of a less decided character. 



/ 



5th. Attend to the condition of the air. 

In winter 60° to 65° is a wholesome temperature for most of the species ; in the summer it may rise to 70° or 75°, or 



even higher if derived from the heat of the sun. Where there are two houses, the warmer one should not be 
70^ even in winter ; but, fortunately, there are comparatively few kinds that insist upon so hot a berth. 



The 



air 



should always 



^ft 



The latter should, however, be prevented from dripping 



upon the plants, as it condenses ; and this is easily effected by fixing a small copper pipe, or piece of channelled wood, under 
each rafter and sash-bar, to catch and carry off the water. 



6th. Do not over- water. 



1l 



This a beginner is very apt to do, and a grievous fault it is. When plants do not shrivel or flag, it is a sign that they 
are content with the humidity that the atmosphere of the house supphes. When watering is necessary, it should not be 
done indiscriminately, but according to the wants of particular plants. It is, also, of great importance to use rain-water 
only, which may be collected for the purpose in a tank, as shewn in the nlan of Mr. Rucker's house, and whirh should 



* What a pity Mr. Lyons did not invent an easier name for his ingenious device 