




iL A Jk bL. jL^h 













f>"V'^ «""». ^'- 



GENE STRATTON- PORTE 




MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 




OUR RAREST MOTH 



C2l 



I o^ 






MOTHS 



OF THE LIMBERLOST 



./ 



JJ^itli IJ'atcr Color and Photographic 
Jllustrations from Life 



BY 



GENE STRATTON-PORTER 




Garden City, N. Y., and Toronto 
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY 

IQ2I 



JUN2 7t987 




Copyright, 1912, by 
DOUBLEDAY, PaGE & CoMPANY 

All rights reserved, including that of 

translation into foreign languages, 

including the Scandinavian 

IV, 




CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. Moths of the Li.mberlost ...... 3 

II. Moths, Eggs, Caterpillars, Winter Quarters . . 33 

III. The Robin Moth 81 

IV. The Yellow Emperor 137 

V. The Lady Bird ......... 155 

VI. Moths of the Moon . . . . . . . 173 

VII. King of the Hollyhocks 191 

VIII. Hera of the Corn "^07 

IX. The Sweetheart and the Bride ..... 2'-27 

X. The Giant Gamin ........ '243 

XI. The Garden Fly 265 

XII. Bloody-nose of Sunshine Hill 287 

XIII. The Modest Moth 303 

XIV. The Pride of the Lilacs 317 

XV. The King of the Poets ... .... 339 

V. 



. hi- 


is 


, 4.- 


H^i;^ 




. ' fr^ 


^^-^-^^Vv ■ 


*^^^K Mk^w ^^ 3v? 




v* 


, ,Tk V 


s^^^SE '^S^^!; 


H ' 


. 


■5^^ 


^KJiw!^-... 


1 


\ 




■i ' ^ 


■1 


^^^^•^^jy-lSsaSi. >^' ■. . 






PfcA^' 


m 




mm^ ■ 


f:-- 




^v 1 


|f^| 






R^pp'^w, ii. 


^T; 1 


■•■5w%4 ?>■:• . i^ , 4' 






t J 


%'-^^ f^w 


1- .-4r^^%i^-'- vi ' 




T 


/^■A '*! 


^-^ ^^xv'^iii y 






"■'■^■'^ 





BOOKS BY 
GENE STRATTOX-PORTER 



Nature 
The Song of the Cardinal 
Homing With the Birds 
Birds of the Bible 
Music of the Wild 
Friends in Feathers 
Moths of the Limberlost 
Mokninc; Face 



Novels 
Freckles 

At the Foot of the Rainbow 
A Girl of the Limberlost 
The Harvester 
Laddie 

Michael O'Halloran 
A Daughter of the Land 




.:t> 




.SWBBMSlWaBWB*"?— 





To 



Ne/t/'e DeGniff Drjubleday 



^^Scientific writings may be divided into three 
groups: technical ivories intended Jor scientific 
men, popular compilations for general use, 
and works which contribute to literature and 
science at the same time. Of the first two 
there is no lack, but our third division is so 
poorly represented as to have led to the say- 
ing that those who can write on scientific 
subjects have no original ideas, while those 
who have ideas cannot icrite. It is even true 
that popular loorks by eminent investigators 
are usually to be described as critical compi- 
lations, taking no high rank as science or 
literature.''' 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Our Rarest Moth Frontispiece 

All Diamonded with Panes of Quaint Device .... 3 

Developing Regalis 3 

At the Edge of the Limberlost 4 

Under No Restraint 10 

A Moth Worth Knowing 1(J 

Study the Ensuing Illustrations 'ii 

Citheronia Regalis Scattering Pearls ...... 33 

Modest and Lovely Modesta S3 

Moth Mullein 38 

Cocoon Inside Hollow Log ........ 44 

Eggs . 5"^ 

Caterpillar at Maturity 58 

Pupa Case of Feeder and Non-feeder 64 

Winter Qltarters 70 

Life-size Pupa Case of Earth 73 

The Robin Moth 81 

My First Cecropia 81 

Slender Cocoons 84 

Baggy Twin Cocoons 88 

Where Philip Found a Girl of the Limberlost .... ihi 

Cecropia Life History Begins with Eggs !)(> 

Cecropia Caterpillar Ready to Spin 100 

Interwoven Twin Cocoons 104 

Twin Cecropia Emerging 108 

Male Out and Female Coming 114 

XL 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Both Out 118 

Expanding and Drying Wings 122 

Ready to Travel 126 

Interior of Winter Quarters 130 

Moths of the Carnival 137 

Facing the Audience 137 

"On the Banks of the Wabash" 1-16 

The Lady' Bird 155 

LiNEATA Moth ... 155 

Works of Art . 158 

Favourite Haunt of the Lady Bird 104 

The Trailed Aristocrat 173 

Luna Moth 173 

A. Luna Courtship 174 

Good Luna Hunting 178 

Luna Caterpillar . , 183 

King of the Hollyhocks , . . . 191 

Celeus Moth „ . , . . 191 

A LiMBERLOST CaBIN 192 

No Other Celeus So Big and Beautiful 198 

Gold Io Seeking a Mate 207 

lo Moth 207 

My Childhood Enemy of the Corn 210 

Io Pupa Case 215 

"One for the Blackbird," etc 216 

The Sweetheart and Bride of Limberlost Cabin . . 227 

Hiding Among the Roses 227 

The Home of the Sweetheart and Bride 230 

Sweethearts and Brides Come to LiciHT 236 

Velvet Robed and Jewel Bedecked 243 

New Polyphemus Cocoon 243 

The Home of my First Giant . 246 

Occupied and Deserted Tenements 250 

Leaving Home 256 

Waiting for Wings 207 

Garden Fly 207 

A Pair of Garden Flies 272 

Where Elnora Found Garden Flies 276 

Bloody-nose of Sunshine Hill 285 

Thysbe Resembles a Big Bumblebee 285 

The Crest of Sunshine Hill 292 

The Modest Moth 301 

Soft Grays and Browns 301 

In the Valley of the Wood Robin 304 

The Pride of the Lilacs 315 

Three Promethea Cocoons 315 

The River Bridge 320 

XII. 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Promethus Bound . . . . , 3'-2G 

King Cithekoxia ;>-'57 

Preliminary Exercise . . 337 

King of the Wild Tiger Lilies 340 

A Royal Couple 344 

The Queen Gives Us Her Jewels . 3.50 

High Piled Treasure 3.j4 

Full-fed and Ready to Transform 3.58 

Changing to Pupa 3(51 

Encased for Winter 30,3 

Leaving Winter Quartep.s 3(jo 

An Hour Later 3UV> 




xnL 



" All diamonded imth panes of quaint device. 
Innumerable of stains, and splendid dyes. 
As are the Tiger MotJis deep damask wings.' 



XIV. 




ALL DIAMONDED WITH PANES OF QUAINT DEVICE' 



Chapter One 
MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 



TO ME 
is a word 
conjure; 
to revel. The 
northeastern In- 
hundred miles 
Michigan line 
the Ohio. In its 
a large area, 
there were miles 
forest, lakes pro 
for navigation. 




the Limberlost 
with which to 
a spot wherein 
swamp lies in 
diana, nearly one 
south of the 
and ten west of 
day it covered 
When I arrived, 
() f u n b r o k e n 
vided with boats 
streams of run- 
ning w^ater, the roads around the edges corduroy, made by 
felling and sinking large trees in the muck. Then the 
Winter Swamp had all the lacy exquisite beauty of such 
locations when snow and frost draped, while from INIay 
until October it was practically tropical jungle. From 
it I have sent to scientists flowers and vines not then 
classified and illustrated in our botanies. 

3 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

It was a piece of forethought to work unceasingly at 
that time, for soon commerce attacked the swamp and 
began its usual process of devastation. Canadian lum- 
bermen came seeking tall straight timber for ship masts 
and tough heavy trees for beams. Grand Rapids fol- 
lowed and stripped the forest of hard wood for fine 
furniture, and through my experience with the lumber- 
men ''Freckles' " story was written. Afterward hoop 
and stave men and local mills took the best of the soft 
wood. Then a ditch, in reality a canal, was dredged 
across the north end through my best territory, and that 
carried the water to the Wabash River until oil men 
could enter the swamp. From that time, the wealth 
they drew to the surface constantly materialized in 
macadamized roads, cosy homes, and big farms of 
unsurpassed richness, suitable for growing onions, celery, 
sugar beets, corn and potatoes, as repeatedly has been 
explained in everything I have written of the place. 
Now, the Limberlost exists only in ragged spots and 
patches, but so rich was it in the beginning that there is 
yet a wealth of work for a lifetime remaining to me in 
these, and river thickets. I ask no better hunting 
grounds for birds, moths, and flowers. The fine roads 
are a convenience, and settled farms a protection to 
be taken into consideration, when bewailing its dis- 
mantling. It is quite true that "One man's meat is 
another's poison." When poor Limber, lost and starv- 

4 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

ing in the fastnesses of the swamp, gave to it a name, 
afterward to be on the Hps of miUions; to him it was 
deadly poison. To me it has been of unspeakable in- 
terest, unceasing work of joyous nature, and meat in 
full measure, with occasional sweetbreads by way of a 
treat. 

Primarily, I w^ent to the swamp to study and repro- 
duce the birds. I never thought they could have a 
rival in my heart. But these fragile night wanderers, 
these moon-flowers of June's darkness, literally "thrust 
themselves upon me." When my cameras were placed 
before the home of a pair of birds, the bushes parted to 
admit light, and clinging to them I found a creature, 
often having the bird's sweep of wing, of colour pale 
green with decorations of lavender and yellow or running 
the gamut from palest tans to darkest browns, with 
markings of pink or dozens of other irresistible combi- 
nations of colour, the feathered folk found a com- 
petitor that often outdistanced them in my affections, 
for I am captivated easily by colour, and beauty of 
form. 

At first, because these moths made studies of exquisite 
beauty, I merely stopped a few^ seconds to reproduce 
them, before proceeding with my work. Soon I found 
myself filling the waiting time, when birds were slow in 
coming before the cameras, when clouds obscured the 
light too much for fast exposures, or on gray days, by 

7 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

searching for moths. Then in collecting abandoned 
nests, cocoons were found on limbs, inside stumps, among 
leaves when gathering nuts, or queer shining pupae- 
cases came to light as I lifted wild flowers in the fall. 
All these were carried to my little conservatory, placed 
in as natural conditions as possible, and studies were 
made from the moths that emerged the following 
spring. I am not sure but that "Moths of Limberlost 
Cabin" would be the most appropriate title for this 
book. 

Sometimes before I had finished with them, they 
paired, mated, and dotted everything with fertile eggs, 
from which tiny caterpillars soon would emerge. It 
became a matter of intense interest to provide their 
natural foods and raise them. That started me to watch- 
ing for caterpillars and eggs out of doors, and friends of 
my work began carrying them to me. Rej^eatedly, I 
have gone through the entire life process, from mating 
newly emerged moths, the egg period, caterpillar life, 
with its complicated moults and changes, the spinning of 
the cocoons, the miraculous winter sleep, to the spring 
appearance; and with my cameras recorded each stage 
of development. Then on platinum paper, printed so 
lightly from these negatives as to give only an exact 
reproduction of forms, and with water colour medium 
I copied each mark, line and colour gradation in most 
cases from the living moth at its prime. Never was the 

8 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

study of birds so interesting. Before I realized it, the 
larger part of the illustration of this book had been 
completed, in connection with bird work, and for no 
purpose save the pleasure it gave to me and the delight 
of my friends. 

Later when I realized that the idea of a moth book 
had taken definite shape in my brain I studied the illus- 
tration I had, most critically, striving to decide if it 
would be possible to jjroduce better and more accurate 
pictures by drawing my specimens. This led to close 
comparison between such photographs as I had made, 
and the drawn illustration of the same species in moth 
books now on the market. Very little investigation 
along this line proved that the worth of a drawing 
amounted exactly to the art of the artist. It was as 
close as he could copy, no more, no less. The work of a 
good camera, rightly operated, was reproduction; the 
living creature placed before you as it was evolved by 
the Almighty — not as it was coj^ied by man. The sur- 
roundings presented as they were, not as they were 
imagined. This meant work, five or six years of exact- 
ing, unceasing work, but it i^roduced the real moth and 
its true environment as close to life as it was possible to 
put it on paper. 

The illustration of every molh book I ever have seen, 
that attempted coloured reproduction, proved by the 
shrivelled bodies and unnatural position of the wings, 

9 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

that it had been painted from subjects mounted from 
weeks to years in private collections or museums. A 
lifeless moth fades rapidly under the most favourable 
conditions. A moth at eight days of age, in the last 
stages of decline, is from four to six distinct shades 
lighter in colour than at six hours from the cocoon, when 
it is dry and ready for flight. As soon as circulation 
stops, and the life juices evaporate from the wings and 
body, the colour grows many shades paler. If exposed 
to light, moths soon fade almost beyond recognition. 
In judging the exactitude of my work as a colourist, 
please remember this fact: in nearly every case the moths 
of these illustrations were photographed before they had 
taken flight, and their colours copied as soon as the 
down was dry and fluffy. Having done my work from 
moths fresh as life, all other attempts at colour repro- 
duction with which I am familiar, appear pale and 
faded to me. Also, I must admit, that to show 
nearly intangible lines, shadings and fluff ings, I pur- 
posely have made all colour as strong as I dared to be 
accurate. 

I make no claim to being an entomologist. I quite 
agree with the "Autocrat of the Breakfast Table," that 
*'the subject is too vast for any single human intelligence 
to grasp." If my life depended upon it I could not give 
the scientific name of every least organ and nerve of a 
moth, and as for wrestling with the thousands of tiny 

10 




f 



M; 






UNDER NO RESTRAINT' 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

species of day and niglit or even attempting all the 
ramifications of — say the alluringly beautiful Catocalse 
family — life is too short, unless devoted to this purpose 
alone. But if I frankly confess my limitations, and 
offer the book to my nature-loving friends merely as an 
introduction to the most exquisite creation of the swamp; 
and the outside history, as it were, of the evolution of 
these creatures from moth to moth again, surely no one 
can feel defrauded. Since the publication of "A Girl 
of the Limberlost, " I have received hundreds of letters 
asking me to write of my experiences with the lepidop- 
tera of the swamp. This l^ook professes to be nothing 
more. 

Because so many enemies prey upon the large night 
moths in all stages, they are nowhere sufficiently numer- 
ous to be pests, or common enough to be given local 
names, as have the birds. I have been compelled to use 
their scientific names to assist in identification, and at 
times I have had to resort to technical terms, because 
there were no other. All these moths were reproduced 
so far as possible to me, in natural and characteristic 
environment. x\t times in order to show exquisite 
markings, by judicious use of a fine brush of long camel's- 
hair, I have coaxed and manipulated the wings to a 
wider sweep than is natural to the moth; but the subject 
was living and under no restraint when this was done. 
Frequently I have written of them under the names by 

13 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

which I knew them in childhood, or that we of Limberlost 
Cabin have bestowed upon them. 

Most of these studies were possible by making them of 
the moths as soon after their emergence from the cocoon 
or pupa case as their wings were fully developed, dry and 
hardened, but before circulation was sufficiently estab- 
lished for them to take flight. At this time they could be 
reproduced at full beauty, not a scale of down displaced, 
their markings the brightest they ever would be, and 
as they climbed naturally with wings lifted, half open or 
widespread. Often the camel's-hair brush had to be 
called into use to fluff down that had dried in tufts, an 
office that the air performs in flight. The difference 
between these perfect living creatures, and the shrivelled, 
pin-pierced subjects of the illustration of any moth book 
I possess, is the difference between abundant life and 
repulsive death. 

To one point I wish to call especial attention. In the 
case of Luna, Modesta or any moth that has much 
white or gray, the colour is changed a faint shade by the 
creamy paper. The whites are not the pure white they 
should be, the grays take on a brownish cast. With a 
moth having any shade of yellow or of the numerous 
tans, browns, reds or black, the work of the engraver 
comes out with a mellow velvet softness added from 
having been printed on this paper. In summing up the 
entire illustration I found four moths slightly changed 

14 



MOTHS OF THE LI:MBERL0ST 

in white and gray sliades by the paper, while twenty 
were immensely helped by it and to the half-tones it 
gave a background of tempting richness. So the major- 
ity of "points" was overwhelmingly in favour of clay 
coated paper, and knowing how long and patiently I 
had worked over the material, the powers that control 
the destiny of this book graciously left it to me to decide 
questions concerning its manufacture. I have loved the 
work above anything I ever have done, a fact you will not 
be slow to recognize as you read and examine the illus- 
tration. 

There is a wide gulf between a Naturalist and a Nature 
Lover. A Naturalist devotes his life to delving into 
stiff scientific problems concerning everything in nature 
from her greatest to her most minute forms. A Nature 
Lover works at any occupation and finds recreation in 
being out of doors and appreciating the common things 
of life as they appeal to his senses. 

The Naturalist always begins at the beginning and 
traces family, sub-family, genus and species. He deals 
in Latin and Greek terms of resounding and dishearten- 
ing combinations. At his hands anatomy and markings 
become lost in a scientific jargon of patagia, jugum, 
discocellulars, phagocytes, and so on to the end of the 
volume. For one who would be a Naturalist, a rare 
specimen indeed, there are many volumes on tlie market. 
The list of pioneer lepidopterists begins authoritatively 

15 



MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST 

with Linnseiis and since his time you can make your 
selection from the works of Druce, Grote, Strecker, 
Boisduval, Robinson, Smith, Butler, Fernald, Beuten- 
muUer, Hicks, Rothscliild, Hampson, Stretch, Lyman, 
or any of a dozen others. Possessing such an imposing 
array of names tliere should be no necessity to add to 
them. These men have impaled moths and dissected, 
magnified and located brain, heart and nerves. See 
Packard's "Guide to the Study of Insects," page thirty- 
five, figure forty-four. After finishing the interior they 
have given to the most minute exterior organ from two 
to three inches of Latin name. From them we learn 
that it requires a coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia, tarsus, 
ungues, puhdllus, and anterior, medial and posterior 
spurs to pro\dde a leg for a moth. I dislike to weaken 
my argument tliat more work along these lines is not 
required, by recording that after all this, no one seems 
to have located the ears definitely. Some believe 
hearing lies in the antennae. Hicks has made an 
especial study of a fluid filled cavity closed by a mem- 
brane that he thinks he has demonstrated to be the seat 
of hearing. Leydig, Gerstaecker, and others believe 
this same organ to be olfactory. Perhaps after all, there 
is room for only one more doctor of science who will 
permanently settle this and a few other vexing questions 
for us. 

But what of the millions of Nature Lovers who each 

16 