











c5 '^. ^^^• '^'^ 



^■~^' 






.''^^ ^' VJ '^^ ''c- 






v^^ '^>. 



^^.^^ 









'^r- '" 



A' 






^^,'^m:^%. 






\> ^ ^^ 0, -"> 0> .- '^ /,, -^^^ 



^ .^N^ 






V ^ 



V V- 






,-0^ c«-'^.;<^ '^^^;^ 



\'^^ 



■^^ 



..iS^ 



'^z. .V 






<::*• » cj c> -1 a 



'^yi¥/ J' 



.^^' 



^^N^ 









7^s^ 



v^^' % 



% « <?■ 



' ■ A. 



-ig^fe. 




"DAVID'S" RETURN TO CAMP. 



NATURAL HISTORY 



OP 



Western Wild Animals 



AND GUIDE FOR 

HUNTERS, TRAPPERS, AND SPORTSMEN; 

EMBRACING 

Observations on the Art of Hunting and Trapping, a description 
of the physical structure, homes, and habits of Fur-hearing 
Animals and others of Worth America, with general 
and specific rules for their capture; also, nar- 
ratives of personal adventure. 

By 

DAVID W. CARTWRIGHT. 



i) 




1 



^ 



^ 



WRITTEN BY 

MAEY F. BAILEY, A. M. 



TOLEDO, OHIO: 

BLADE PRINTING & PAPER COMPANY. 

1875. 




^\ 






Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1875, 

BY D. W. CAKTWRIGIIT AND M. F. IJATI.EY, 

In the office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington. 



/ / ^ ^ 



Many Worthy and Companionable M. 

WITH WHOM I HAVE 

HUNTED AND TRAVELED 

THE FOLLOWING PAGES ARETNSCKIBED BY 

, "DAVID." ""^ 



EN 



PREFACE 



For the past ten years Mr. Cartwright has been occa- 
sionally asked to put into book form something of his 
observations of the habits of many annuals, of his knowl- 
edge of woodcraft, and some account of his life as a 
woodsman. He has been for several years engaged a 
considerable portion of his time, during the sporting 
seasons, in acting as guide for parties of pleasure seekers. 
Some of these sportsmen have also asked him to put into 
readable shape some of his travels in the out~door world. 

He is not a professed scientist, nor does he claim to be 
in possession of the practiced use of the vocabularies of 
conventional technicalities; but his knowledge of the 
wild animals of this country is the practical knowledge 
of their homes and their habits, and the frequent personal 
scrutiny of their physical structure, which the naturalist 
needs and desires for the successful pursuance of his 
studies, and without something of which his knowledge 
is as a dictionary full of meaningless words. 

He is also not a professional book maker, and he knows 
that it is only by practice that there comes any great 
degree of perfection in any art or trade. What he gives 
you, he puts upon the basis of an experience of forty 
years, and gives it with that assurance that he believes 



vi PREFACE. 

should come of practical knowledge, as opposed to any 
hypothetical and visionary trash. As to the matter of the 
subjects herein set forth, his endeavor h to meet the 
requests of his friends, believing that he understands 
them. As to the manner of their presentation, referring 
more specially to thj narrative portions of the book, his 
design is to embody the truth in its deserved credibility. 
He has personally but little interest in works of fiction , 
and less sympathy for the story-teller as such. He would, 
therefore, be foolish to desire to present the many incre- 
dulities of travel and adventure, as is often done, even if 
it were not also true that in such an effort he would be 
like a man in deep water, who could find no way of escape. 
Therefore, 

, Though this work be ragged, 

" Tattered and jagged, 
Rudely rain-beaten. 
Rusty, moth-eaten ; 
If ye take well therewith. 
It hath in it some pith.'' 

In the course of his life as a hunter, he has come in 
contact with many inexperienced, and many unsuccessful 
v/oodsmen. He hopes to benefit that class of readers, 
by placing within their reach rules that he has in every 
case thoroughly tested. 

Since the author of this book claims for himself an 
incompetency to the task of putting it into shape, and 
the more exact wording of its pages, and has placed that 
part of the work into the hands of another, it is due to 
him to say that he labors under difficulties in presenting 
this book to the public. There is of necessity in many 



PREFACE. vii 

places a lack of that clearness of ideas, and of that sym- 
pathy that can come only from one actually experienced 
in such a knowledge and such a life as it is now the effort 
to make known. 

Two of the articles, '* The Speckled Trout," and 
"A Trip to Lake Superior," w^ere furnislied by 
friends of Mr. Cartwright. With these exceptions, 
the work has been done by means of notes taken 
by me at the dictation of the author. In filling out the 
description of the animals, " The American Cyclopedia," 
" Chambers' Encyclopedia," an English " Museum of 
Animated Nature," and '' The American Beaver," by 
Lewis H. Morgan, have been used as references. All 
other books thus used are acknowledged in their respec- 
tive places of reference. \¥hen tlie notes were filled out 
tney were subjected to Mr. Cartwright for revision, and 
stand as in the print by his authority. Some of the illustra- 
tions he has secured from the publishers of Wood's Mam- 
malia ; all others have been prepared expressly for this 
work. 

It is Hkewise due to the writer of these pages that it be 
said that there are difficulties lying in her way which 
must be faced, but cannot be overcome. It is as if you 
were obliged to tell for othefs what they know and feel, 
and say it as well as if you knew and felt it for yourself, 
and yet you do not. 

One man could write books, if he knew how to write 
them ; another could make books if he had something of 
which to make them. M. F. B. 

Milton, Wis., Oct., 1875. 



CONTENTS 



IPJ^^T I 



THE HUNTER'S ART AND HIS GAME. 



Chapter. 




• Page 


I. 


Hunting as a Business 


3 


II. 


Useful Hints on Woodcraft 


8 


III. 


The Deer . . . 


12 


IV. 


The Antelope .... 


. 39 


V. 


The Rocky Mountain Goat 


41 


VI. 


The American Bison 


. 43 


VII. 


The Prairie-Doct . . . . 


45 


VIII. 


The Woodciiuck 


. 47 


IX. 


The Weasel Family 


49 




The Pine Marten . 


. 49 




The Mink . . . . 


52 




The Fisher 


. 54 




The Badger 


56 




The Otter 


. 58 


X. 


The Skunk 


63 


XL 


The Wolverine .... 


. 65 


XII. 


The Bear Family . . . . 


68 




The Black Bear 


. 71 




The Grizzly Bear 


75 




The Raccoon . 


. 78 


XIII. 


Felid^e, or Cat Tribe 


80 




The Canada Lynx . 


. 82 




The Bay Lynx . . ' . 


85 




The Cougar 


. 86 


XIV. 


The Fox 


89 


XV. 


The Wolf . . . . 


. 96 



X CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER PAGE 

XVI. The Opossum 100 

XVII. The Muskrat 104 

XVIII. The Beaver 109 

XIX. Speckled Trout ..... 134 



ip^iEea: ii. 



NARRATIVES OF PERSONAL ADVENTURE. 

I. My First Fox Hunt .... 141 

II. My First Bear Hunt 143 

III. Hunting in Allegany Co., N. Y. . . 146 

IV. An Adventure with a Wolf . . . 155 
V. Hunting in Jefferson Co., Wis. . . 158 

VI. A Tramp to California in 1852 . . .165 

VII. Hunting Trips in N. W. Wis. and in Minn. 235 

A Trip in N. W. Wis. . . .235 

In the Chippewa Regions in Wis. 238 

In the Woods in K W. Wis. . 240 

About Eau Claire . . . 241 

, In Eau Claire and Dallas Counties 246 

Trapping in Minn. ... 248 

In the Cottonwood Country . . 253 

An Encounter with an Eagle . 254 

VIII. A Trip to Lake Superior . . . .256 

IX. Trapping in the Lake Superior Regions 271 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 







Opposite Page 


I. 


Frontispiece .... 




II. 


Virginian Deer .... 


. 17 


III. 


Elk or Moose ..... 


36 


IV. 


Wapita or Elk .... 


. 37 


V. 


Wish-ton-wish or Prairte-Dog . 


45 


VI. 


Pine Marten 


. 49 


VII. 


Mink .... . . 


52 


VIII. 


Fisher ...... 


. 54 


TX 


Badger ...... 


56 


X. 


Black Bear 


. 71 


XI. 


Log-Trap for Bears .... 


75 


XII. 


Canada Lynx .... 


. 83 


XIII. 


Wildcat 


85 


XIV. 


Cougar 


. 86 


XV. 


Red Fox .... 


92 


XVI. 


Virginian Opossum 


. 100 


XVII, 


Musquash or Muskrat 


104 


SVIII. 


American Beaver 


. 109 


XIX. 


Trout Fishing Scene 


134 



PART I. 

THE IDKfER'S AIT AND HIS GAMS, 



I. 

HUNTING AS A BUSINESS. 



Before attempting any description of the various meth- 
ods of capturing different animals, I wish to make some 
statements relative to hunting and trapping as a business. 
A vast number of people count the hunter's and trapper's 
occupation as dishonorable, fit only for roughs and idlers. 
The business, as a business, is not dishonorable. It can- 
not be unless it is dishonorable for one to buy, sell, or use 
for wearing apparel, or for any mechanical purpose, or 
for the food markets the furs and pelts of animals, the 
skins, bones, horns, hoofs, and sinews, and the palatable 
flesh of many of those same animals. As a point of fact, 
however, it is probably true that the odium which is cast 
upon the business, as such, comes from the general un- 
derstanding of the people relative to the character of a 
hunter as a hunter. 

The man who earns his living by his rifle and his steel 
trap, and who supplies the demands of the various mar- 
kets, must of necessity work far back from the thickly 
settled portions of the country. The communications 
between him and his buyers is such that he spends but a 
small portion of his time in the so-called civilized world. 
There are comparatively few people who become per- 
sonally acquainted with this wild man of the woods. 
There are in by far too many communities men who neg- 
lect their families and their business to hunt and fish. 



4 WESTERN WILD ANIMALS. 

who care less for their homes than their hunts, their fish 
than their fun. There are also men in almost every town 
who frequently spend one day or several days in hunting 
and fishing, but who do it professedly for the fun. They 
return to their homes tired, and generally crippled in some 
way. They have hunted so near the homes of some of 
their neighbors that they generally find but little game, 
and, as a rule, have used more ammunition than their game 
would be worth in market. It is not, therefore, strange, 
owing to the easy way in which we dispose of so many 
questions which do not intimately concern us, that 
people, looking upon the two classes of hunters just 
referred to, count the real hunter unprincipled, as is the 
former class, and unsuccessful as is the latter. The 
hunter and trapper need not be a rough or an idler, and, 
indeed, if he is a successful business man he cannot be 
either. The rugged constitution necessitated by the 
exposures and hardships of such a life as his is the only 
sort of roughness which is in any way demanded by the 
business. A skillful hunter will find, in any gamy 
country, enough to do to keep himself busy. 

Hunters are not without honor. There are rules of 
honor which hunters, as a class, consider themselves 
bound to respect, and which I have never known any one 
of them to violate. Respecting the right of territory 
trappers have long since decided that the first man upon 
a certain ground had a right to that ground so long as he 
should choose to hold it. If a trapper finds certain 
ground occupied, as he can determine by traps set, or by 
occupied camps, he leaves it. If, in going the rounds of 
his traps, a trapper finds that another man has set traps 
upon his ground he hangs them up, and passes on. When 
the man who has set those traps finds them thus removed, 



HUNTING AS A BUSINESS. 5 

he at once understands that he is upon occupied ground. 
There are no territorial rights amongst hunters ; but, if a 
hunter has started up game and it runs upon parties who 
maybe hunting close by, and they find it coming to them 
already wounded, they may kill it and take one half of 
the meat, but the other half of it, and the whole of the 
hide belongs to the man who first shot it. He may follow 
up his wounded creature ; but, if he finds it in the hands 
of a second party, he cannot and does not claim^ the 
whole of the flesh. 

Does it pay to hunt } Yes. It can be made to pay 
well. It would not pay to spoil the good blacksmith to 
make a poor hunter; but, given a man of strength, of 
physical powers, courage, endurance, a close observation 
of the habits of the animals hunted, skill in the methods 
used for their capture, ability to live in the woods without 
getting lost, a good trapping and camping outfit, and 
with all these a liking for the business, and the result is 
monetary success. For the frontiersman, thus qualified, it 
is emphatically money in the pocket. There is every 
year a portion of the time when his farm work does not 
keep him busy. By proper management he can then earn 
several times as much as if he were to hire out by the day 
to do any ordinary kind of work. Speaking from expe- 
rience, I believe that I can safely say that during those 
years when I lived upoi: a frontier home, I earned five 
dollars per day for every day that I hunted, which was 
certainly more than any neighbor of mine could pay me 
for working for him, even if he had had work to be done, 
and was every time five dollars more than I could have 
received for doing little or nothing upon my own place. 
It is also an advantage to a frontier settler to have a good 
knowledge of hunting and trapping, as he can thereby 



6 WESTERN WILD ANIMALS. 

increase the bounty of his board, even if he never traffics 
in skins or flesh of wild animals. He also hastens the 
more civilized condition of his home surroundings, by 
thinning the ranks of the wild creatures about him. 

A great many of the hunters are jolly, genial, free- 
hearted men, and when they have come out of the woods, 
they gratify their generosity, and their fun-loving pro- 
pensities by quickly spending all they have just earned, 
and are thereby forced to go back again into the woods. 
I would advise any young man who cannot find other em- 
ployment, to go into the woods, and if he does not know 
how to hunt, to learn, rather than being out of business, 
to lounge about the loafer's resorts, and thus become a 
nuisance to a community and a bore to himself 1 would 
not for any other reason advise one who is not specially 
adapted to the work, to attempt to follow it as a business. 
It is such a man's fault more than any other one's that 
every hunter must bear the reproaches so generally laid 
upon him. 

I could never advise an intemperate man to become a 
hunter. Alcoholic spirits are not necessary to ensure 
safety against the exposures of life in the woods. A vig- 
orous constitution which has never been damaged by the 
fitful fires of alcohol will of itself preserve an even 
temperature of healthy blood and spirits. The hand and 
the judgment of a drinker are unreliable, and thus unfit 
him for such work. The use of tobacco is no less than 
suicidal to every attempt at successful hunting and trap- 
ping. If one could catch game by driving it from him^ 
no better scent could be used than that of tobacco. Know- 
ing, as who does not, that the whole brute creation abom- 
inates the scent of tobacco, it is a mockery of all honest 
pretensions for a man to claim that he reaps the full 



HUNTING AS A BUSINESS. 7 

benefit of his hard hunter's toil while he habituates him- 
self to the use of tobacco by any means whatever. If he 
does not believe this, it must be because he has never 
made a fair trial of hunting with no tobacco about him. 
I have in a few cases been upon hunting grounds with 
men otherwise well adapted to the work, but who, by 
their tobacco-using habits have greatly reduced the suc- 
cess of the trip, and I have been obliged to abandon a 
field because some one of the company would persist in 
using tobacco. 



WESTERN WILD ANIMALS, 



II. 
USEFUL HINTS ON WOODCRAFT. 



A trap shoald always be set with one end pointing 
towards the probable approach of the animal for whose 
capture it is intended. If a trap is set in a hole, one 
spring should be in the hole, the other out of it; other- 
wise the jaw will be very likely to throw the leg out of 
the trap as the trap springs. 

Nevei' put bait on the pan of a trap. The bait should 
always be put either above or beyond the trap; its posi- 
tion is to be determined by the kind of game for which it is 
set. Scarcely any animal can be caught by the nose, as 
it should be if the pan were the place for the bait; 
scarcely any animal would be caught by the nose if it 
could be ; for the attention of the animal would be 
directed towards the trap. The design is that the animal 
should step upon the trap while trying to secure its bait, 
and if the trap is not baited and is concealed, no atten- 
tion is drawn towards it. The animal then knows 
nothing of the trap until it is sprung. 

It is always better to cover a trap when set, if it can 
be done, even for animals of aquatic habits. When a 
trap is set in water for a coon it does not need to be con- 
cealed ; otherwise the rule holds good. I\Jud, or sand, 
or a light covering of earth, grasses, or leaves, or small 
twigs, or other light stuff that may be easily picked up 
are the materials used for concealing traps. 



USEFUL HINTS ON WOODCJIAFT. 9 

For capturing heavy animals a clog or weight should 
be used. I would, however, except the deer ; for they 
will not go off far carrying a trap with them, and they 
are apt to bruise themselves worse if the trap is clogged. 
The clog is usually a pole, over the larger end of which 
the ring of the trap-chain is slipped and then fastened 
by a wedge. 

A spring-pole is a pole so fixed as to spring when dis- 
placed by the motions of an animal in its attempts to 
extricate itself from a trap, and to fling the animal into 
the air, and there holding it to keep it safe from the 
clutches of any beast of prey, until the trapper shall 
secure his game. 

The sliding-pole is used to secure aquatic animals 
from molestation, by drowning them as soon as the trap 
springs upon them. As soon as an aquatic, or an am- 
phibious animal is caught in a trap it plunges for deep 
water. For small game the weight of the trap is sufficient 
to drown them, but for. larger animals a sliding pole is 
used. A pole about twelve feet long is taken and is 
stripped of all its branches, and a nail is driven into it on 
its upper side, in a slanting direction, near the smaller 
end of the pole, the head of the nail pointing towards 
that end. The pole is then placed near the trap set, 
which is very near the bank, the ring of the trap chain is 
slipped upon it. The larger end of the pole is fastened 
by a hook put over it and driven into the ground, but the 
pole is to be secured high enough from the ground for 
the ring to have a chance to traverse freely down the 
length of the pole ; the smaller end of the pole is fastened 
in the bed of the stream. When the animal springs the 
trap and makes its lunge for deep water, the chain ring 
slips down upon the pole and carries with it the trap and 



10 WESTERN WILD ANIMALS. 

the animal, but once past the nail it is held from return- 
ing : the animal must therefore drown. 

The Newhouse steel U^ap is the best one in use. It is 
perfectly adapted to all the purposes for which it is 
designed, except No. 4 for deer. I consider No. 4 worth- 
less for deer catching. A trap to catch a large buck 
should be nearly as strong as that required for a bear. I 
therefore use No. 5. 

The number of traps required for a good outfit dej: ends 
upon the kind of game to be trapped and the country in 
which one traps. If a man is going into the woods where 
there are no roads, and where he must carry his baggage 
upon his back, he will naturally limit his supplies to the 
actual necessities of the case. To fill this demand I 
would advise two dozen traps of Nos. 3 and 4, or large 
ones, and thirty-five small ones. If he can by boat reach 
the heart of his trapping ground, he can take as many as 
he pleases to carry; but it is never advisable to take 
more than the trapper can tend. From seventy-five to one 
hundred is as many as two persons can well tend under 
ordinary circumstances. 

It is preferable to have a trapping ground where one 
can travel mainly by water. It is easier, is pleasanter, 
and is more profitable. Light but serviceable boats may 
be easily made by any one of ordinary ingenuity and 
knowledge of boat building. 

For a camping outfit, I would advise that 7iof/ii7ig be 
taken that can well be dispensed with. Inexperienced 
hunters almost always cumber themselves with needless 
articles. Two heavy, double blankets are necessary for 
two persons. A small pail for tea or coffee, a small camp 
kettle, a frying-pan and a tin cup should be carried, and 
one knife and fork and two tin plates for each person. 



USEFUL HINTS ON WOODCRAFT. 11 

For food-stuffs I take flour, corn meal, beans, a little 
pork, some butter and sugar, and unless going very far 
into the woods I carry potatoes. A pocket knife^ a good 
compass^ matches^ and a hatchet are indispensible to a hunter's 
outfit. No man should ever go out from camp without 
them. 



12 WESTERN WILD ANIMALS. 



III. 
THE DEER. 



The deer family has been variously classified by natur- 
alists, some giving to it several genera, others regarding 
its groups not sufficiently marked to give to them generic 
character. Most writers base their classifications upon 
the hoins. The horns, however, are not found upon all 
species, nor at all seasons of the year, and they also as- 
sume a different aspect at different ages of the animal, 
and similar horns, in some instances, grow upon species 
otherwise distinct. Some have therefore classified them 
with respect to the kind of hair which forms the fur, to 
the form and extent of the muzzle, and to the position 
and presence of glands on the hind legs. Again, they are 
classified as follows : First, those of snowy regions, hav- 
ing a broad muzzle, hairy palmated horns, a shortfall, 
fawns not spotted; Second, those of temperate regions 
with a tapering muzzle, ending in a bald muflie, fawns 
and sometimes adults spotted. 

The deer family is represented in almost every region 
of the globe, AustraHa and central and southern Africa 
being the only exceptions to this universality of distribu- 
tion. Hills of moderate elevations, wide plains, and 
forests are the localities to which these fleet-limbed 
creatures give the preference. The most of them herd 
together in troops ; some few live singly. They use their 
powerful horns for weapons of defense, and sometimes of 
offense ; but in general they trust to flight for safety. 