r-i^ 



y-v.-' 



<■-? -V 



IM 



^'■^ 



■^-^ ■ 







Return to 
LIBRARY OF MARINE BIOLOGICAL LABORftTORY 

WOODS HOLE, MASS. 



Loaned by American Museum of Natural History 



THE 



I 



TERRESTRIAL 



AIR-BEEATHING MOLLUSKS 



OF 



THE UNITED STATES, &c. 




v_< 






THE 



TERRESTRIAL 



AIE-BREATHING MOLLUSKS 



OF 



THE UNITED STATES 



AND THE 



ADJACENT TERRITORIES OF NORTH AMERICA: 



DESCEIBED AND ILLUSTKATED BY 



AMOS BINNEY. 



EDITED BY 

AUGUSTUS A. GOULD. 
VOL. L 



B OSTON: 
CHARLES C. LITTLE AND JAMES BROWN. 

MDCCCLI. 



■^ 



Au 



Cambridge: 
feinted by bolles and houghton. 



TO THE 

:2lcaiiemi) of J^'atural Bdtnas 

OF PHILADELPHIA; 

TO WHOSE FOUNDERS IS DUE THE FIKST EFFECTIVE IMPULSE GIVEN 

TO THE STUDY OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN NORTH AMERICA, 

AND WHOSE LABORS HAVE BEEN MAINLY INSTRUMENTAL IN 

DEVELOPING THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE COUNTRY, 

THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY 

THE AUTHOR. 



EVERY SPECIES OF ANIMAL IS POSSESSED OF BEAUTIES PECITLIAK TO IT- 
SELF. THE MORE MAN CONSIDERS THEM, THE MORE THEY EXCITE HIS 
ADMIRATION, AND THE MORE THEY ENGAGE HIM TO ADORE THE AUTHOR 
OF NATURE, WHO HAS MADE EVERY THING IN WISDOM, WHO HAS SUB- 
JECTED EVERY THING TO HIS POWER, AND WHOSE GOODNESS GOVERNS THE 

WHOLE. St. An^zistin. 



IS NOT THE SMALLEST WORM THE WORK OF THE SUPREME BEING, AS 
WELL AS THE MOST PERFECT ANIMAL? AND IF GOD HAS JUDGED IT NOT 
BELOW HIM TO CREATE IT, WHY SHOULD IT BE THOUGHT A WEAKNESS IN A 
REASONABLE MAN TO MAKE IT THE OBJECT OF HIS RESEARCH? LeSser. 



CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 



PAGE 

Editor's notice, ix 

Biographical memoir, xi 

Alphabetical catalogue op authors whose 

WORKS are referred TO IN THIS VOIiUME, 

American authors, 9 

Foreign authors, 13 

Author's preface, 19 

Introduction, 29 

I. Op the rise of scientific zoologt in the united 

states, with notices of naturalists, particularly 

connected with the subject of this work, . . 31 

II. Op the IGNOlliNCE AND NEGLECT OP AMERICAN LABORS 

IN ZOOLOGY EXHIBITED BY EUROPEAN NATURALISTS, 56 
III. Of SOME OP THE OBSTACLES IMPEDING THE STUDY OF 

ZOOLOGY, AND THE MEANS OF OVERTHROWING THEM, 63 

IV. Of classification, 84 

V. Of THE geographical distribution of genera and 

species, and the existing causes influencing it, 99 
Geographical Features of the Countiy, . . .100 

Climate, 110 

Geological Structure, Il2 

Vegetation, 113 

Humidity and Dryness, 113 

Elevation, 115 

Sudden and Extreme Vicissitudes of Temperature, 1 27 

Inundations of Rivers, 130 

Fires, 131 

Agriculture, 132 

Destruction by Animals, 133 

Proximity to the Sea, 135 

Local Causes, 138 



J 



viii CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

VI. Of zoological foci, or points of oeigin whence 

GENEKA AND SPECIES AEE DERIVED, . . . 141 

VII. Of the introduction op foreign species into the 

UNITED ^ATES, . 150 

Table of Foreign Species recorded by Authors as 
^ observed in the United States, . . . .159 

\ Table of the Distribution of Species inhabiting the 

United States, in other parts of America, . .162 
) VIII. Of the distribution of genera and species in the 

UNITED states, COMPARED WITH THAT IN EUROPE 
AND SOUTH AMERICA, 163 

IX. Geological relations, 176 

X. Habits and faculties, 187 

XI. Special anatomy of the terrestrial gasteropoda 
of the united states, by JOSEPH leidy, m. d., of 

PHILADELPHIA, 198 

Introduction, 198 

Chap. I. General Remarks upon the exterior form 
and Structure of the Terrestrial naked Gastero- 
poda, 199 

Chap. II. General Remarks on the Terrestrial Tes- 
taceous Gasteropoda,) 201 

Chap. III. On the Tegumentary Covering of the 
Terrestrial Gasteropoda, . . *' . . . 203 

Chap IV. Of the Digestive Apparatus, . . 206 

Chap. V. Observations on the Tissues of the Diges- 
tive Apparatus, 216 

Chap. VI. Of the Generative Apparatus, . . 217 

Chap. VII. General Remarks upon the Junction of 
different portions of the Generative Apparatus, 
and the Structure of its Tissues, . . . 232 

Chap. VIII. Of the Respiratory and Circulatory 
Apparatus, 235 

Chap. IX. On the Nervous Centres and the Distri- 
bution of the Nerves, 239 

Chap. X. On the Organs of Especial Sense, . 243 
References to the plates, 249 



NOTICE. 



In the last "Will of Dr. Binney is the following clause : 
" Having, for several years past, been collecting mate- 
rials at my leisure for the publication of a -work concern- 
ing the Terrestrial INIollusca of the United States of 
America, a large portion of which is ready for the press, 
and for wliich numerous engravings have been prepared, 
my will is, that in case of my decease before the same 
shall be published and distributed, my executors shall 
employ some competent person or persons to prepare 
the same for the press, and shall publish the same at the 
expense of my estate." 

At the request of the executors, I have endeavored to 
fulfil the wish above expressed. The plan laid out by 
him has been strictly followed, though in some in- 
stances contrary to my own opinions, and it has been 
departed from only where observations since his decease 
have rendered it imperative. The consequence is, that 
there are a few discrepancies between the first and 
second volumes. The work was found to be less com- 

VOL. I. B 



X NOTICE. 

plete than had been anticipated, very few descriptions 
having been finished except in the genus Helix, and 
none of the generic descriptions except those of the 
Limacida3. Many new species have also been added 
from the collections which he had caused to be made 
in the South-western States and Texas, but which 
his health had not permitted him to examine. The 
passages for Avhich I am responsible are indicated 
by the annexation of the letter " g." A number of the 
plates also remained to be designed or engraved. It 
was the intention to have had the work issued very soon 
after the decease of Dr. Binney ; but the scattered state 
of the materials, at various places in this country and in 
Europe, and the difficulty of procuring suitable artists, 
have caused most perplexing delays. 

I cannot hope to have produced the work such as he 
would have made it. My comparative ignorance of a 
subject to which he had given so much of the attention of 
a mind deeply in love with his subject, and thoroughly 
prepared for a full and philosophical treatment of it, 
would forbid this. Nor can I pride myself on possessing 
that delicate artistical taste with which he was so well 
endowed, and which is so necessary in the details of 
such a publication. But so far as a general knowledge 
of his design, together with a sincere wish to do justice 
to the memory of a friend, could avail, they have been 
given to the work. 

A. A. GOULD. 
BosTOX, 1850. 



M E M I E . 



Amos Binney was born in Boston, October 18, 
1803. At the age of ten years, he was sent to 
the Academy at Hingham, where he received his 
education preparatory to entering college. At 
the age of fourteen, he entered Brown Univer- 
sity, and was graduated in 1821. He then en- 
gaged in the study of medicine, under Dr. George 
C. Shattuck, of this city, and attended medical 
lectures at Dartmouth College. At this time his 
health failed him. He had urgent cough, pain 
in the side, and other alarming pulmonary symp- 
toms, and was obliged to suspend his studies. 
By the advice of his medical attendants, he un- 
dertook a journey on horseback, which he accom- 
plished in the summer of 1823, proceeding in 
this way to Cincinnati and home. At Cin- 
cinnati he had an attack of fever which wellnigh 
proved fatal. No relief was gained from this 



xii MEMOIR. 

journey ; and in the following May he fled, as it 
were in despair, to Europe. He there visited 
England, France, Italy, and Germany, directing 
his attention principally to the Hospitals and to 
the great collections of science and art, and re- 
turned home in December, 1825, greatly relieved 
of his disease; though he ever afterwards felt 
the relics of it, and had one or two violent parox- 
ysms of palpitation of the heart, threatening to 
be fatal. He then resumed his medical studies, 
and took the degree of Doctor in Medicine at 
Harvard University, 1826. 

Though intensely interested in the study of 
medicine on account of its bearing upon natural 
science, the practice of the profession he had cho- 
sen was by no means congenial to his taste -, and 
as he deemed the past history of his health ad- 
verse to a professional life, and, still further, as 
Providence seemed at that time to present to 
him prospects of an advantageous connection in 
business, he forthwith abandoned the medical 
profession for mercantile pursuits. His earlier 
enterprises in trade were not encouraging. The 
consequence was, that he was led to direct his 
attention to real estate and mining operations, in 
which his father was also extensively engaged, 



MEMOIR. jjjjj 



and all of wliicli soon devoh^ed upon him by the 
death of his father. In these operations he was 
eminently successful, and rapidly accumulated a 
fortune. 

In the midst of his extensive business he was 
never unmindful of science. This was his pas- 
sion ; and all his leisure moments were devoted 
to it, in preference to mingling in general society, 
for which he had very little taste ; and he always 
looked forward to the time when he should retire 
from business, become a patron of science and art, 
and make science his occupation. In the winter 
of 1836-7, having accumulated what he re- 
garded as a competence, and having invested it 
profitably as he supposed, he counted that the 
anticipated era had thus early arrived. But the 
well-remembered business disasters of 1837 came; 
and so far from being able to retire from business, 
he was obliged to give himself exclusively to it, 
and with redoubled zeal, for the next five years, 
in order to meet the crisis and save his estates 
from the general ruin. Having successfully ac- 
complished this and much more, he again felt 
that, with a competence before him, he could with- 
draw from business cares, and devote himself 
more especially to science and art; and, next 



xiv MEMOIR. 

after his own family, to make the Boston Society 
of Natural History and the Boston Athenseum 
the objects of his solicitude and bounty. But 
alas ! his long-cherished anticipations were not to 
be realized. His health soon began to decline. 
Intermittent headache of a severe and unmanage- 
able character, had already robbed him of half the 
enjoyment of life ; and other difficulties now su- 
pervened. He retired for relief to the country, 
hoping that quiet would restore him. Finding 
this unavailing, he resolved to try what had once 
before proved so salutary to him, — the effect of a 
sea voyage, and a visit to Europe, which he had 
many years designed, for the purpose of becoming 
acquainted with the scientific men and scientific 
collections of the old world, and of purchasing a 
well-appointed scientific library, — all of which 
was to be subservient to the cause of science in 
general, in America, rather than to his individual 
gratification. With these ends in view, and with 
every facility for accomplishing his scientific 
designs, he sailed from New York for Havre in 
October, 1846. He obtained no relief during the 
voyage ; and after stopping a few days at Rouen 
and a short time in Paris, during which his bodily 
sufferings and his nervous irritability increased, 



MEMOIR. Xy 

he urged onward for Italy. He tarried a short 
time at Florence, but became still more ill. In 
passing the Apennines, the chilly and penetrat- 
ing "mistral" which prevailed, and the bleak- 
ness of the lodging-houses, were too much for 
him, in his sensitive condition; and the conse- 
quence was a violent attack of pleurisy. Con- 
vinced that it would be certain death to remain 
under such exposure, he made a desperate effort 
to reach Rome ; and, though every jolt of the 
carriage caused a groan, he arrived there on the 
third day. The most energetic treatment was 
here employed, and at first with marked relief; 
but a relapse took place, and he suffered in- 
tensely. Again the disease seemed to have been 
subdued, and he was encouraged that he would 
recover ; suddenly and unexpectedly, however, 
he sunk, and died, February 18, 1847. His 
earthly remains, in accordance with his wishes, 
Avere brought home, and committed to their des- 
tined resting place at Mount Auburn. 

In person. Dr. Binney was above the middle 
stature, erect, robust, and well-formed. His com- 
plexion was dark, with very dark hair and eyes. 
His features were full and well-formed. His dress 
was elegant and scrupulously neat ; his manners 



xvi MEMOIR. 

were dignified, and bespoke the gentleman. His 
voice was deep-toned, full, and melodious, and 
his enunciation was remarkably distinct. His 
imposing mien, and the grave and positive tones 
of his voice, conveyed a first impression that he 
was haughty and inaccessible. He was himself 
at a loss to know why he had acquired this repu- 
tation, inasmuch as he felt entirely unconscious 
of indulging any thing corresponding to it in his 
heart. In his opinions he was decided, but not 
obstinate. Though naturally indolent, according 
to his own confession, he was ever busy, as it is 
evident he must have been to have accomplished 
so much at so early an age. He was elegant and 
refined in his tastes, and passionately fond of the 
fine arts. His discrimination as a connoisseur is 
well evinced by his numerous and well-selected 
books, pictures, engravings, sculptures, and other 
specimens of the fine arts. He was most happy 
in his domestic relations ; an excellent father, 
unspeakably anxious to train up his children, 
both by example and precept, in all their duties 
to God and man. An extract from his journal 
will exhibit the burden of his mind on this point. 
He says, "May my children especially imbibe 
principles of honor and religion, and may it 



MEMOIR. xvii 



be their high aim to acquire and deserve the 
name of christian gentlemen. May it be said of 
my house, not that ^ all the sons "were brave and 
all the daughters virtuous,' but that all the sons 
were upright and honorable, and all the daugh- 
ters good 1" 

Dr. Binney loved the works of nature, not 
as objects of scientific interest only, but as 
the beautiful manifestations of Divine Wisdom, 
adapted, at the same time, to afford the well- 
disposed mind gratification of the purest and 
deepest kind. As a lover of nature, he viewed 
with delight the whole landscape ; as a natural- 
ist, he loved to study the relations of individual 
objects. And he loved art, because it is the 
nearest material approach which man makes to- 
wards the handiwork of the Creator. His love 
for Natural History was early manifested. When 
quite a child, his chamber was garnished with 
stones, shells, strings of birds' eggs, and such other 
objects as are likely to attract juvenile observa- 
tion. He commenced a collection of shells while 
in college. The interest of his father in mining 
tended early to direct his attention to the study 
of minerals ; but perhaps nothing contributed so 
much to enkindle his interest in the wonders 



VOL. I. 



xviii MEMOIR. 

of nature as his visit to Cincinnati, soon after 
leaving college. The fossiliferoiis rocks of that 
region could not but attract his attention ; and 
during his stay there, he spent most of his hours, 
so far as his strength admitted, in lying upon the 
rocks, and in chiselling out the fossil remains. 
Most of the Silurian fossils now belonging to the 
Natural History Society, were obtained by him at 
that time. His first visit to Europe contributed 
greatly to foster and enlarge the taste already 
formed for Natural Science ; and he availed him- 
self of the opportunity to procure many shells 
from the Mediterranean, and many valuable min- 
erals. 

In February, 1830, there was a meeting of 
gentlemen, which resulted in the formation of the 
Boston Society of Natural History. Dr. Binney 
was one of the number, and was appointed one 
of a committee of five to recommend measures 
for its organization, and the best means of inter- 
esting the public in its favor. In connection 
with the late Simon E. Greene, Esq., he under- 
took to call on gentlemen likely to be favorable 
to the proposed objects of the Society, and 
obtain their cooperation. At a subsequent 
naeeting, he was appointed on the committee to 



MEMOIR. ^ 

draft a Constitution; and it is understood to 
have been mainly done by him. His name is one 
of those mentioned in the act of incorporation. 
At the first meeting for the choice of ofiicers he 
was elected one of the Curators, and has held 
some office in the Society ever since. He was 
Treasurer, 1832-45 Corresponding Secretary, 
1834-7; Vice President from 1837-43, when 
he was elected President. 

The nucleus of the Society's Museum was con- 
tributed by him. In Juty, 1831, he gave two 
hundred specimens of minerals, one hundred spe- 
cimens of foreign organic remains, and two hun- 
dred specimens of fossils from Ohio. He also 
deposited his collection of shells, consisting of 
about fifteen hundred species, and at that time 
by far the most complete collection in this country. 
In 1840, these shells were given to the Society, 
together Avith about one hundred specimens of 
mounted American birds, on certain conditions) 
which were at once complied with. 

The Journal of the Society had his special 
regard. It was modelled by him ; and the first 
paper printed, was written by him. Besides this, 
which was upon the Fusus Aruanus of Chemnitz, 
he contributed several others ; all of them upon 



XX MEMOIR. 

the Terrestrial Mollusks of the United States, 
which he made a special study. As long ago 
as 1835, he commenced a monograph of this 
group of animals, and published it, from time to 
time, in the Journal. Besides his papers pub- 
lished in the Journal, he read others to the 
Society, of no less interest and importance, on 
various subjects, in which he displayed most just 
and discriminating views of the claims of Natural 
Science, and of the spirit and aim with which it 
should be prosecuted.^ 

> The followiag are some of the papers found on his files : — '• 

Report oa the Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Vol. VII. 
Part 2, 1837. 

Remarks on the Reports on the Birds, Fishes, and Reptiles of Massachu- 
setts. November, 1839. 

Observations on the Appearance of the so-called Sea Serpent at Nahant, 
as seen by himself, August, 1839, with sundry Documents. 

Criticism on Schlegel's Notice of Dr. Holbrook's Herpetology, Vol. I. 
September, 1840. 

Remarks on two Paleontological Works of Michelotti. October, 1842. 

Observations, during two successive summers at Nahant, on the Habits of 
the short Sun-fish, ( Onhagoriscus mola.) December, 1842. 

Remarlcs on the American Species of Pupa. April, 1843. 

Remarks on the Descriptions of New Fresh Water and Land Shells, by 
Isaac Lea. 

On the Hydrarchos and the Mastodon, (published in the Daily Advertiser, 
September, 1845.) 

Remarks at the Annual Meetings of the Boston Society of Natural His- 
tory. 1844 and 1845. 

Remarks on the Fossils from the Strata of the Bluffs at Natchez, on the 
Mississippi River. April, 1846. 



MEMOIR. xxi 



The great work, however, to which he chiefly 
devoted himself, was the one which follows, being 
an amplification of his Monograph on the Ter- 
restrial Mollusks of the United States. It was 
his intention to publish something that, in com- 
pleteness and in the style of its mechanical ex- 
ecution, should be unsurpassed by any similar 
work. He therefore spared no pains and no 
expense to render it as perfect as possible. He 
obtained characteristic and living shells of every 
species and variety ; he procured the best artists 
to figure and engrave both the animal and the 
shell J many of which were repeatedly drawn or 
engraved before he was quite satisfied with the 
result; — he had thorough and accurate dissec- 
tions made of all their anatomical minutise, by 
the skilful hands of Drs. Wyman and Leidy ; and 
he kept most of the species in captivity for 
months, that he niight be able to observe their 
habits, the variations they exhibited, and the 
changes they underwent by age, food, etc. To 
carry out fully his design, he employed an expe- 
rienced collector to spend one winter in Florida 
and the adjacent Keys, and another in the South- 
western States, including Texas ; and thus he was 
prepared to give not only the descriptive charac- 



Xxii MEMOIR. 

ters of the whole group, but its geographical and 
geological relations, and many other generaliza- 
tions of much interest and importance. He car- 
ried the manuscript with him to Europe, intend- 
ing to have some of the unfinished plates exe- 
cuted there. This most valuable work was left 
so nearly complete that it may be regarded 
as essentially his work. 

His last and his greatest effort in behalf of 
science was, to carry into effect a purpose, long 
since formed, of obtaining, through the liberality 
of the Boston public, a building for the Society 
of Natural History, which should amply accom- 
modate its present and prospective collections. 
In his anniversary Address, in 1846, he set forth 
in the most lucid and convincing manner, the 
wants of the Society, the absolute uselessness of 
adding to its collections in consequence of a 
want of the means for their preservation and dis- 
play, and the claims which the objects and labors 
of the Society had upon the public. By a vote 
of the Society, this address was afterwards 
printed and circulated, as an appeal to an en- 
lightened and liberal public; and it will ever 
stand as an enduring memorial of his just 
appreciation of the claims of science, of his 



MEMOIR. ^^ili 

clear and unafTectecl style of writing, and of 
his devotedness to the interests of the Society. 
Not only did he do this, but voluntarily under- 
took to solicit the necessary subscriptions, in 
which he had so far succeeded as to put his 
final success beyond a doubt, when disease 
arrested him. 

He was a member of all the scientific bodies 
in this country; — the American Philosophical 
Society ; the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences ; the Academy of Natural Sciences of 
Philadelphia ; the New Yovk Lyceum ; the Na- 
tural History Societies of Hartford, Salem, Port- 
land, and many others. 

He was also one of the prominent members of 
the American Association of Geologists and Na- 
turalists. He had read several very interesting 
papers at its sessions, most of which were des- 
tined to form a part of his work on the Terres- 
trial Mollusks. When, at the session of the 
Association in Boston, in 1844, it was proposed 
by several of our most intelligent citizens, that 
the valuable papers which had been read should 
be printed, and liberal contributions were A'olun- 
teered by them for the purpose. Dr. Binney 
was made chairman of the publishing committee. 



Xxiv MEMOIR. 

In conformity to his wishes, the work was carried 
out in a style far superior to what was contem- 
plated, and proved also much more voluminous, 
while the sales were very limited. The cost, of 
course, far exceeded the means of publication; 
and the residue, amounting to a large proportion 
of the whole, was contributed by him. 

At the session held in Boston in September, 
1848, he was to have presided over that distin- 
guished body, and expected much gratification 
to himself on that occasion, in the anticipation 
that the citizens of Boston would, by their hos- 
pitality and energy, render it a profitable and 
happy occasion to those who might favor them 
with their presence. 

It was not, however, for his direct, actual scien- 
tific labors and acquirements that Dr. Binney 
stood in his most important relations to science. 
Others have, probably, labored more constantly, 
more zealously, and have made more progress 
than he. But he held a position which very few 
occupy. He stood between science and the pub- 
lic to whom it must look for countenance and 
support. Fully alive to its claims, having a 
clear, philosophical appreciation of the difference 
between true and false science, and having him- 



MEMOIR. XXV 

self made respectable attainments in the funda- 
mental principles of natural science, and even in 
all its separate branches, he was at the same 
time the man of business, the man of fortune, the 
man of prospective leisure, and the man who had 
consecrated that leisure to the interests of science 
and art. 

Not the least among the items for which science 
is indebted to Dr. Binney, must we reckon his 
superb library. It numbers many hundred vol- 
umes, and at his death was undoubtedly the most 
important library of works on zoology in America. 
It was by no means the largest ; but it contained 
more of the modern works, on those topics which 
are essential to the study of natural history in its 
present state, than any other one library in the 
country. Many of the books are splendid, rare, 
and very costly works; and all are in elegant 
binding. These he granted free use of, to all 
who desired it ; and indeed it had become indis- 
pensable, in the investigation of any important 
topic in zoology, to consult his library ; and for 
this purpose it was visited by gentlemen from all 
parts of the Union. 

Having frequent occasion to travel, and thus 
visiting every quarter of the Union, he formed 

VOL. I. D 



xxvi MEMOIR. 

an acquaintance with almost every man who had 
any pretensions to science ; and he did much to 
encourage them, and to bring them in contact 
with each other. At the same time, his eye was 
always open, and on the watch for any thing that 
might be of importance to the Museum or to the 
Journal of the Natural History Society. 

While a member of the Legislature, in 1836-7, 
he used his endeavors to sustain the State Geo- 
logical Survey, then in process by Prof Hitch- 
cock, and was jorincipally instrumental in having 
attached to it the Commission for the Zoological 
Survey also, the results of which have been so 
important. He also secured for the Natural His- 
tory Society an appropriation from the Legisla- 
ture, which, small as it was, was infinitely import- 
ant at that time. 

To the Natural History Society, he was, at the 
same time, the patron, the fellow-laborer, the Pre- 
sident. He stood with it, and yet with the world, 
a link to bring them in contact. Having been 
instrumental in its organization, having watched 
and fostered it through its days of feebleness and 
small things, and having passed through its vari- 
ous offices till he had become its head, — his 
name, his fame, his labors, and his fortune were 



MEMOIR. ^^ii 



identified with the Society ; and in its social rela- 
tions he was in a position to render services which 
no survivor has the power of rendering. He had 
hoped that by his visit to Europe he should be 
enabled to form acquaintances with scientific men, 
and their modes and facilities for investigation ; 
to learn the best arrangement for a cabinet, and 
the best modes of preserving objects ; to negotiate 
exchanges, and make large additions to his li- 
brary; by which his future connection with the 
Society, especially at the juncture when plans 
for the permanent arrangement and preservation 
of the Cabinet were likely to be needed, might 
become of the greatest possible advantage. 

Nor was he less qualified, or less disposed, to 
promote the interests of art among us. Ill as lie 
was in Europe, he never lost sight of the two 
institutions which he had determined to foster ; 
and he was daily seeking to obtain collections 
for the one, and rare books and paintings for the 
other. Several arrangements with this view had 
been entered into, which were interrupted by his 
illness, and more or less defeated by his death. 

It is due both to him and to the history of 
American Art to record, that with a view to the 
encouragement of American Artists, he had pro- 



xxviil MEMOIR. 

posed to four of the most prominent painters of 
his native country to execute for him two pictures 
each, at generous prices. They were to choose 
their own subjects, and not be limited for time ; 
the only stipulations being, that the pictures 
should be of certain dimensions, and the subject 
of one of each was to be from history, either 
American, or written by an American ; and they 
were requested to produce such works as would 
give to the world a pledge of their ability, and on 
which they might hope to rest a reputation with 
posterity. The four artists selected were Hunt- 
ington, E-othermel, Leutze, and Terry. The fol- 
lowing pictures have resulted; namely, "Henry 
VHI. and Catherine Parr," by Huntington ; 
"Noche Triste," from Prescott's Conquest of 
Mexico, by Rothermel; "Spaniards storming a 
Mexican Teocalli," also from Prescott's Mexico, 
by Leutze ; and " I think," from Prescott's Fer- 
dinand and Isabella, by Terry. 

Similar propositions were made to the Ameri- 
can sculptors. Powers and Crawford, and also to 
other artists, for statuary in bronze. 

Such was his life, his attainments, his aims. 
And when, with his generation, the memory of 
Dr. Binney, as a man, an enterprising citizen, a 



MEMOIR. 



XXIX 



father, and a friend, shall have passed away, his 
name must ever appear among the pioneers of 
Science in America, as one of its most substantial 
supporters, and as having contributed materially 
to the enlargement of its boundaries. 



"=— j-^^- " 




CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 



ALPHABETICAL 

CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS 

WHOSE WORKS ARE REFERRED TO IN THIS VOLUME. 

WITH THE TITLE AND DATE OF PUBLICATION. 



N. B. The leading words only of the title of each worlt, and those often abbreviated, are pVen in the 
references in the text. When the author's name alone is given, it is to be understood to refer lo the single 
work in this list. 



AMERICAN AUTHORS. 

Adams, C. B. Professor of Natural History in Middlebury Col- 
lege, Vermont. Catalogue of the Mollusca of Middlebury, 
Vt., and vicinity. American Journal of Science, Vol. xl., 
pp. 266— 277. April, 184L 

Fresh-Water and Land Shells of Vermont, with figures, con- 
tained in Thompson's History of Vermont ; also published 
separately, pp. 20, 8vo. 1842. 

Anthony, John G. Cincinnati, Ohio. Description of Bulimus 
vermetus. On the cover of Haldeman's Monograph of the 
Limniades, No. 3. July, 1831. 

BiNNEY, Amos. Boston, Mass. A Monograph of the Helices 
inhabiting the United States, with figures. Boston Journal 
of Natural History, Vol. i. pp. 466 — 495. May, 1837. 
Vol. iii. pp. 353 — 394, July, 1840, and pp. 405 — 438, 
November, 1840. 
Descriptions of some of the species of naked air-breathing Mol- 
Itisca inhabiting the United States. Same Journal, Vol. iv. 
pp. 163 — 175. Same in pamphlet form, January, 1842. 

VOL. I. 2 



10 CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

Description of a species of Helix newly discovered in the United 
States. In the same Journal. Vol. iv. p. 241. 

Conrad, Timothy A. Philadelphia, Penn. American Marine 
Conchology, or descriptions and colored figures of the Shells 
of the Atlantic coast of North America. 8vo. pp. 72, 16 plates. 
Philadelphia, 1831. 
New Fresh- Water Shells of the United States, with colored 
illustrations, and a Monograph of the genus Anculotus of Say, 
also a Synopsis of the American Naiades. 12mo. pp. 76, 
8 plates. Philadelphia, 1834. 

DeKay, James E., M. D. New York. A Report on the Zoology 
of New York, containing a Catalogue of the Animals of that 
State, being a part of the Annual Report on the Geological 
Survey for 1840, pp. 7 — 36. Document of the Assembly of 
New York, No. 50. Albany, January, 1840, 

Zoology of Neio York ; or the New York Fauna. Part V. Mol- 
lusca. 4to. pp. 270, 40 plates. Albany, 1843. Published by 
order of the Legislature of New York. 
Gould, Augustus A., M. D. Boston, Massachusetts. A Mon- 
ograph of the species of Pupa found in the United States, 
with figures. Boston Journal of Natural History, Vol. iii. 
pp. 395 — 404. July, 1840, and Vol. iv. pp. 351 — 360. 
Jan. 1841. Same in pamphlet form. 

Results of an Examination of the Shells of Massachusetts, and 
their Geographical Distribution. Same Journal. Vol. iii. pp. 
483—494. November, 1840. 

A Report on the Invertebrata of Massachusetts, comprising the 
Mollusca, Crustacea, Annelida, and Radiata, pp. 373, 8vo. 
with figures. Boston and Cambridge, 1841. Published by 
order of the Legislature of Massachusetts. 

Green, Jacob, M. D. Professor of Chemistry in Jefferson Col- 
lege, Pennsylvania. Note annexed to a Memoir, containing 
a description of Helix Pennsylvanica. Contributions of Mac- 
lurian Lyceum, No. 1, p. S. Philadelphia. January, 1827. 
Notes of a Naturalist. Doughty's Cabinet of Natural History, 
Vol. ii. p. 291, and Vol. iii. p. 35. Philadelphia, 1833. 

Haldeman, S. Stehman. Columbia, Pennsylvania. A Mono- 
graph of the Limniades and other Fresh- Water Univalve Shells 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. Jl 

of North America. With colored figures, 8vo. Pliiladelphia, 
1840 — 1843. Eiglit numbers have been published. 
Enumeration of the fnsh-water MoUusca common to North 
America and Europe, with Observations on Spccirs and their dis- 
tribution. In the Boston Journal of Natural History, Vol. 
iv. pp. 468 — 484. 1844. 

KiRTLAND, J. p., M. D. Cleveland, Ohio. Report on the Zoology 
of Ohio, contained in the Second Annual Report on the Geo- 
logical Survey of the State of Ohio, pp. 157 — 200. 8vo. 
Legislative Document. Columbus, Ohio, 1838. 

Lea, Isaac. Philadelphia. Observations on the Naiades, and 
Descriptions of new species of that and other Families : with 
colored figures. Transactions of American Philosophical 
Society, Philadelphia, Vol. iv. pp. 63 — 121. 1834; and 
Vol. V. pp. 23 — 120. 1837. 
Descriptions of new Fresh- Water and Land Shells. Same 
Transactions, Vol. vi. pp. 1—111, vi^ith colored figures, 
1838. Also Papers under the same title in the Proceedings 
of the same Society, viz. : No. 13, October, 1840; No. 17, 
March, 1841 ; No. 19, July, 1841. 

LiNSLEY, Rev. James H. Stratford, Con. Catalogue of the Shells 
of Connecticut, pp. 16. In American Journal of Science, Vol. 
xlvii. No. 2. Same in pamphlet form. New Haven, 1844. 

MiGHELs, J. W., M. D. Portland, Maine. Catalogue of the 
Marine, Fluviatile and Terrestrial Shells of the Slate of Maine 
and adjacent Ocean. Boston Journal of Natural History, 
Vol. iv. pp. 308 — 345. April, 1843. 

Phillips, John S. Philadelphia. Description of a neio Ameri- 
can species of the genus Helix. Journal of the Academy of 
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. viii. p. 182. Also in 
Proceedings of the same, No. 3, June, 1841. 

Plummer, John T., M. D. Scraps in Natural History. Shells 
about Richmond, Wayne County, Indiana. In American 
Journal of Science, Vol. xlviii. pp. 92, 94. 

Say, Thomas. Philadelphia. Conchology. The Article under 
that name in the American editions of Nicholson's Encyclo- 
pedia. The references are to the 2d edition. Philadelphia. 
1818. Vol. iv. With figures. 



12 CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

Say, Thomas. Description of seven species of American Fresh- 
Water and Land Shells not noticed in the Si/stems. Journal 
of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. i. 
pp. 13 — 18. May, 1817. 
. Descriptions of neio species of Land and Fresh-Water Shells. 
Same Journal. Vol. i. pp. 123 — 125. October, 1817. 

Account of tioo new Genera, and several new species of Fresh- 
Water and Land Shells. Same Journal. Vol. i. pp. 276 — 
284. May, 1818. 

Descriptions of Univalve Shells of the United States. Same 
Journal. Vol. ii. pp. 149 — 179. January, 1821. 

Descriptions of Univalve terrestrial and fluviatile Shells of the 
United States. Same Journal. Vol. ii. pp. 370 — 381. De- 
cember, 1822. 

Descriptions of some new species of Fresh-Water and Land 
Shells. Same Journal. Vol. v. pp. 119 — 131. August, 
1825. 

Expedition to the Source of St. Peter^s River, Lake Winnepeck, 
(Sfc, performed in the year 1823, by order of John C. Cal- 
houn, Secretary of War, under the command of Stephen H. 
Long, Major U. S. T. E. Appendix. Zoology. Vol. ii. pp. 
253 — 378. With figures. 8vo. Philadelphia, 1824. 

American Conchology, or Descriptions of the Shells of North 
America, illustrated hy colored figures. Six numbers. 8vo. 
New Harmony, Indiana. 1830 — 1834. A posthumous num- 
ber has been published in Philadelphia, by Mrs. Say. 

Descriptions of some new terrestrial and fluviatile Shells of North 
America. Disseminator of Useful Knowledge. New Har- 
mony, Ind. 1829 — 1831. And Transylvania Journal of 
Medicine, vol. ii. 1832. Collected and published in pam- 
phlet form, under the same title, pp. 26. 8vo. New Har- 
mony, 1840. 

Sager, Abm., M. D. Detroit, Michigan. Catalogue of Animals 
observed in the State of Michigan. Contained in the Second 
Annual Report of the State Geologist ; Document of the Sen- 
ate of Michigan. No. 13. Detroit, Mich., Feb. 1839. 

Transactions of Societies devoted wholly or in part to Natural 
History, viz. : 
Annals of the Lyceum of Natural History of New York, 4 vols. 
8vo. 1823 to 1826. 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 



13 



Contributions of the Madurian Lyceum to the Arts and Sciences, 

8vo. three numbers, Philadelphia, 1827 to 1829. 
Journal of the Acadcmij of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, 

8 vols. 8vo. 1817 to 1826. Proceedings of the same, 1843 

to 1846. 
Journal of the Boston Society of Natural History, 5 vols. 8vo. 

1834 to 1846. Proceedings of the same, 1843 to 1846. 
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society ; First Series, 

6 vols. 4to ; Second Series, 8 vols. 4to. Proceedings of the 

same. 

Wyman, Jeffries, M. D. On the Anatomy of Tebcnnophorus 
Caroliniensis. Journal of Boston Society of Natural History, 
vol. iv. p. 410. 
On the Anatomical Structure of Glandina truncata. Same Jour- 
nal, vol. iv. p. 416. 



FOREIGN AUTHORS. 

Benson, W. H. Mollusca of Chusan, in Dr. Cantor's Fauna of 
Chusan. Annals and Magazine of Natural History, vol. ix. 
p. 485. 1842. 

Bosc, L. A. G. Histoire Naturelle des Coquilles, contenant leur 
Description, Ics Mceurs des Animaux qui les habitent, et leurs 
Usages. Paris, 1802. 5 vols. 18mo. — Being a part of 
Deterville's edition of Buffon's Works. 

Blainville, H. M. Ducrotay de. Manuel de Malacologie et 
de Conchyliologie. pp. 664. 87 plates. 8vo. Paris, 1825. 

Bouchard-Chanteraux. Catalogue des Mollusques terrestres et 
fuviatiles, observes jusqu'it ce jour, <i P^tat vivant, dans le 
Departement du Pas de Calais. 8vo. pp. 94, one plate. Bou- 
logne-sur-Mer, 1838. 

BouiLLET, J. B. Catalogue des Especes et Varietes de Mollusques 
terrestres et fluviatiles de la Haute et de la Basse-Auvcrgne, 
8vo. pp. 166. Clermont-Ferrand, 1836. 



14 CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

BRUGUiiiRE, J. G. Histoire Naturelle des Vers, torn. i. In the 

Encyclop6die M6thodique, 4to. Paris, 1792. 
CoLLARD DES Cherres. Catalogue des Testaces tcrrestres etfluvia- 

tiles des enviroTis de Brest et Quimper, Departement du Finis- 

terre. In the Bulletin d'Histoire Naturelle de la Societ6 

Linn^enne de Bordeaux, vol. iv. 
Deshayes, G. p. Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans Vertebres 

de Lamarck. Deuxieme idition revue et augmentie de Notes, 

<5fc. 4"C. Svo. Paris. Les Mollusques. Tome vii. 1836, 

tome viii. 1838. 
Histoire Naturelle des Vers, dans V Encydopidie Methodique, 

Continuee par Deshayes. 4to. tome ii. 1830, tome iii. 1832. 
Histoire Naturelle Generale et Particuliere des Mollusques, <SfC. 

<Sfc. de Ferussac. Continuee par G. P. Deshayes. 4to. 1839 

— 1841. Several livraisons published ; unfinished. 
Traife Elementaire de Conchyliologie, avec V application de cette 

Science d, la Geognosie. Svo. Paris, 1839 — 1840. Seven 

livraisons published. 

Des Moulins, Ch. Notice sur la Repartition des Especes dans 
les Genres Solen, Solecurte, Sanguinolaire, et Soletelline. 
Actes de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux, tome v. p. 92. 

DiLLvsTYN, Louis Weston. A descriptive Catalogue of Recent 
Shells, arranged according to the Linnean Method. 2 vols. 
Svo. London, 1817. 

D'Orbigny, Alcide. Voyage dans VAmcrique Meridionale. 
Execute dans le cours des annees 1826 ^ 1833. Les Mol- 
lusques, 4to. Paris. Not complete. 
Les Mollusques, dans U Histoire Physique, Politique, et Natu- 
relle de risle de Cuba, de M. De La Sagra. 4to. Paris. Not 
completed. 

Draparnaud, Jaques Philippe Raymond. Histoire Naturelle 
des Mollusques ierrestres et fluviatiles de la France. 4to 
pp. 134. 13 plates. Paris, an 13. (1805.) 

Ferussac, D'Audebard de. Histoire Naturelle Gltnerale et Par- 
ticuliere des Mollusques terrestres et fluviatiles. 4to. Nu- 
merous plates. 1819 — 1832. Unfinished. 
Tableaux Systematiques des Animaux Mollusques classes en fa- 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. ^^ 

millrs naturclks; — suivis d^un Prodrome General pour tous 
Ics Mollusques tcrrestres oufluviatiles. 4to. Paris, Jane, 1822. 

Forbes, Edward. Report on the Distrihution of Piilmoniferous 
MoUusca in the British Isles. Report of British Association 
for 1839, pp. 127—147. 8vo. London. 1840. 

Grateloup, S. Tableau Melhodique des Mollusques tcrrestres et 
Jluviatiles observes dans V Arrondissemcnt de Dax, Departe- 
ment des Landes. In the Bulletin d'Histoire Naturelle de la 
Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux. Vol. iii. 1829. 

Gray, John Edward. Manual of the Land and Fresh-Water 
Shells of the British Islands, by William Turton, M. D. A 
new edition, thoroughly revised and much enlarged. l2mo. 
pp. 324. Colored plates. London, 1840. 

Humboldt et Bonpland. Rccueil d^ Observations de Zoologie et 
d^ Anatomie Comparee. 4to. tome ii. Paris. 1833. 

Lamarck, J. B. P. A. de, Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans 
Vertebres. 7 vols. 8vo. tome vi., 2d part. Paris, April, 1822. 
2d edit. 11 vols, 8vo. 

Leuchs, J. C. Vollstdndige Naturgcschichte der Acker schnecJce. 
8vo. pp. 288. Niirmburg, 1820. 

LiNNE, Carolus a. Fauna Suecica, sistens Animalia Sueciee 
Eegni, <Sfc. Editio altera auctior. pp. 578. 8vo. Holmise. 
1761. 
Systema Naturm. Editio duodecima reformata. 4 vols in 3. 8vo, 
Holmiae, 1766 — 1768. 

Menke, C. T. Synopsis methodica Molluscorum generum om- 
nium et specierum earum qua in Museo Menkeano adservantur. 
Editio altera, pp. 168. 8vo. Pyrmonti, 1830. 

MicHAUD, A. L. G. Complement de V Histoire Naturelle des Mol- 
lusques tcrrestres et fluviatiles de la France de J. P. R. Dra- 
parnaud. 4to. pp. 116. 16 plates. Verdun, 1831. 

MoRELET, M. A. Description des Mollusques tcrrestres et fluvia- 
tiles du Portugal. 8vo. Paris. 1846. 

MoRiCAND, Stefano. Note sur quelques Especes nouvelles de 
Coejuilles tcrrestres. Memoires de la Societe dc Physique et 
d'Histoire Naturelle de Geneve. Tom. vi. 1833, pp. 537 — 
543. 



IQ CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. 

MiJLLER, Otho F. Vcrmium terrestrium et fluviatilium, seu 
Animalium infusoriorum, hclminthicorum et testaceorum, non 
marinorum, succincta Historia. 2 vols. 4to. Havnias et 
Lipsise, 1773 — 1774. 

NiLSSON, S. Historia Mollusconim Succia terrestrium et fluvia- 
tilium hreviter delineata, 8vo. London, 1822. 

Pennant, Thomas. British Zoology. A new edition in 4 vols. 
8vo. London, 1812. 

Pfeiffer, Lud. Symhola, ad Historiam Heliceorum. 8vo. Casselis, 
1841. Sectio altera, 1842. 
Ahsicht der in Jan. Feb. und Marz, 1839, auf Cuba gesammelter 
MoUuskcn. In Wiegmann's Archiv for 1839, p. 346, and 
for 1840, p. 250. 

Philippi, Rudolph A. Enumeratio Molluscorum Sicilim. 4to. 
pp. 269. 12 plates. Berlin, 1836. 
Ahbildungen und Beschreibungen ncuer oder wenig geJcannter 
Conchylien. 4to. Cassel, 1842 — 1845. 

PoRRO, Carlo. Malacologia terrestre et fluviale delta Provincia 
Comasca. 8vo. pp. 132. 2 plates. Milano, 1838. 

Rackett, Thomas. Description of some Shells found in Can- 
ada. Transactions of the Linnean Society of London. Vol. 
xiii. pp. 42 — 43. 1819. 

Rafinesque, Constantine Schmaltz. Prodrome de soixante 
nouvcaux Genres d'Animaux decouverts dans Pinterieur des 
Etats Unis d'Amirique durant Vannee, 1818. Journal de 
Physique. Tome Ixxxviii. p. 417. Paris, June, 1819. 

Annals of Nature, or Annual Synopsis of new Genera and Species 
of Animals, Plants, Sfc, discoi^ered in North America. First 
Annual Number, for 1820. 8vo. pp. 16. Lexington, Kentucky. 
1821. 

Enumeration and Account of some remarkable Natural Objects in 
the Cabinet of Professor Rafinesque. 8vo.pp. 8. Philadelphia, 
1831. 

Rang, Sander. Manuel de VHistoire Naturelle des Mollusques 
et de leurs Coquilles. 18mo. pp. 390. Paris, 1829. 

RoissY, F. DE. Histoire Naturelle des Mollusques. Vols. v. and 
vi. of Louvini's edition of the vporks of BufFon. 8vo. Paris. 



CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS. ^7 

RossMASSLER, E. A. Icono graphic <Irr Land und Sussicas- 
ser-MoUuskcn, mit vorzuglicher Beruchskhtigung der Euro- 
pdischen noch nicht ahgeUldcten Artcn. 11 parts, 8vo. Dres- 
den und Leipzig. 1835 — 1841. 

SoWERBY, G. B., JuN. Thesaurus Conchjliorum, or Figures 

and Descriptions of Recent Shells. Parts 1 to 5, royal 8vo. 

London, 1842 — 1845. 
Studer. System Verzeichniss der Schweizer-Conchylien. Bern, 

1820. Gartner's Naturwis. Anzeiger, 3ter. Jahrgung, No. 

11 und 12. 
Terver, M. Catalogue des Mollusqucs terrestres et fluviatiles 

observes dans les Possessions Frangaises au Nord de VAfrique. 

8vo. pp. 40. 4 plates. Paris, 1839. 
Thompson, W. Catalogue of the Land and Fresh-Water Molluscn 

of Ireland. In the Annals and Magazine of Natural History. 

Vol. vi. p. 16. 

Wood, W. Index Testaceologicus, or a Catalogue of Shells, 
British and Foreign, arranged according to the Linnean Sys- 
tem. Illustrated with 2300 figures. 2d edition, 8vo. Lon- 
don, 1828. 

Supplement to the Index Testaceologicus. Illustrated with 480 
figures. 8vo. London, 1828. 



VOL. 1, 



P EE F A C E. 



The following pages, prepared during intervals 
of leisure, have served to occupy the attention 
of the author, and have constituted his amuse- 
ment amid the active engagements of business. 
He has esteemed himself fortunate in being able 
to find, in the study of Natural History, a relief 
to the over-burthened mind, a solace in trouble, 
and a protection from the all-absorbing cares 
"which are incidental to mercantile pursuits. If 
to the healthful exercise of body and mind 
which he has himself enjoyed in their prepara- 
tion, he shall be able to add the approbation of 
those who are engaged in similar investigations, 
it will be as ample a recompense as he has ever 
proposed to himself He offers them to the nat- 
uralists of the United States without any other 



20 PREFACE. 

pretension than that of being actuated by a sin- 
cere desire of rendering them accurate and faith- 
ful, in every particular, and, so far, worthy of 
acceptance. 

In bringing together and reviewing the labors 
of others in the same department of science, he 
has endeavored to do strict justice to all, to ac- 
knowledge his obligation for information received 
from each, and to indicate the source from which 
it is derived. If there are any omissions, in this 
respect, they have arisen from inadvertence and 
not from design. It will be noticed that in sev- 
eral instances he differs in opinion from those 
who have preceded him, and that he considers 
several species, described by them, to be merely 
varieties of, or even identical with, animals before 
known. In thus exercising his own judgment 
in opposition to that of persons for whose opinions 
he entertains the highest respect, he trusts that 
he has done it in a manner which cannot give 
just ground of offence. He has no regard for 
his own views, except so far as they shall be 
found consistent with truth, and he expects 
that they will be controverted by others with the 
same freedom, whenever they are supposed to be 
erroneous. 



PREFACE. 21 

The work contains descriptions of all the air- 
breathing mollusks of the United States, living 
upon the land, including both the aboriginal and 
those foreign species which, having been from time 
to time introduced, have now become naturalized 
to the soil ; and of such species belonging to the 
countries adjacent as are known to the author. 
Our knowledge of these animals is brought down 
to the date of publication ; and it is hoped that 
the work will be found to be as complete as any 
record of an actively progressive science can be. 
In its preparation, all the American authorities 
have been consulted, and for the benefit of Euro- 
pean naturalists, some of whom appear to be 
inexcusably ignorant or wilfully neglectful of 
what has been done for Natural History in this 
country, a catalogue of American authors, whose 
works have been used in compiling these pages, 
is given ; a catalogue of the foreign works, 
referred to, is also added. A full synonomy of 
the native species is attempted, and it will pro- 
bably be found to be pretty complete ; but for 
the introduced species a few references only to 
well known works are given. 

Great care has been taken to investigate the 



22 PREFACE. 

history of each species in order to designate it 
hy the name applied to it by its first discoverer. 
The rule adopted is to give priority to tJie fird 
published description or to the first published name 
accompanied by a recognisable figure, and to reject 
all claims based upon the publication of a name 
only, as these, if allowed, would inevitably lead 
to doubt and inconvenience, and in the end 
would afford opportunity for unfairness and 
fraud. The date of the first publication of the 
species is appended to the name of the work in 
which it appeared. The operation of the rule 
will restore to American authors many species 
which were first described by them, but which 
have long had a place in the works of MM. 
Ferussac, Lamarck and Deshayes under the names 
of foreigners who did not know them until after 
they had been described in this country. 

It is one of the aims of this work to point out 
the errors, and to supply the omissions, of those 
and other distinguished naturalists ; but although 
the author hopes to make his own work more 
useful thereby, he is far from presuming that it 
can bear a favorable comparison with theirs in 
any other respect than in giving a more fuU and 



PREFACE. op, 



correct account of the species belonging to liis 
own country. 

It is proper to state here, that when the work 
was nearly ready for publication the annexation 
of the republic of Texas to the United States 
enlarged the area of the author's investigations, 
by the addition of a region of many thousand 
square miles in extent to the vast territory already 
included in the field of his inquiry. He endeav- 
ored to meet the exigency by employing a com- 
petent naturalist to explore the accessible parts 
of that State during the early part of 1846 ; l)ut 
it cannot be expected that the results of that ex- 
ploration can exhibit more than an incomplete 
view of the species living there. A wide field 
of investigation is left for the future naturalist, 
both in Texas and in the whole extensive and 
but partially-explored region west of the Missis- 
sippi river. 

The author takes pleasure in maldng this 
public acknowledgment of his obligations to those 
gentlemen who have kindly furnished him with 
materials used in the preparation of the work. 
To R. E. Grifiith, M. D., late of the University 
of Virginia, a cotemporary of, and fellow-la])<)ror 



24 PREFACE. 

with Mr. Say, he is indebted for much valuable 
information respecting this class of animals, which 
has been the especial object of his attention. It 
is a cause of regret that he should not have per- 
severed in a design, conceived several years since, 
of publishing a work on the same general plan 
as the present, for the judicious execution of 
which he is peculiarly well qualified, both by 
study and observation. To Professor C. B. Ad- 
ams, of Middlebury College, Vermont, he owes 
the loan of his entire collection of his American 
terrestrial mollusks, which have been of impor- 
tant service in the comparison and diagnosis of 
species, and for many facts concerning these ob- 
served by him in Vermont. To S. S. Haldeman, 
of Columbia, Penn., he is under obligations for 
specimens collected by him during a journey 
through the southern and south-western States, 
and for much information respecting the distribu- 
tion of species. To John G. Anthony, Esq., of 
Cincinnati, Ohio, for valuable aid and many facts, 
derived from his own observation, concerning the 
species found in the neighborhood of that city. 
To J. Hamilton Couper, Esq., of Hopeton, near 
Darien, Georgia, for his obliging attention in 



PREFACE 26 

transmitting his observations on the habits of 
Glandina, together with the living animal, and a 
beautiful drawing of it ; and also for the species 
common in the lower parts of Georgia. To Prof 
Jeffries Wyman, for information on the anatomy 
and habits of the animals ; and to Prof J. P. 
Kirtland, of Cleveland, Ohio ; Dr. J. W. Mighels, 
of Portland, Me. ; Dr. Edmund Ravenel and Prof 
Lewis K Gibbes, of Charleston, S. C. ; Prof W. B. 
Rogers, of the University of Virginia ; Isaac Lea, 
Esq., of Philadelphia ; John C. Jay, Esq. and B. 
W. Budd, M. D., of the city of New York ; Dr. 
T. B. Ingalls, of Greenwich, N. Y. ; Dr. W. New- 
comb, of Troy, N. Y. ; Prof G. W. Benedict, of 
Burlington, Vt. ; and T. J. Whittemore, Esq., of 
Cambridge, Mass., for their active kindness in 
affording the opportunity of examining species 
which, without their aid, would not have been 
procurable. 

To Dr. A. A. Gould, of Boston, he presents 
his thanks, for frequent and various aid and ad- 
vice, often asked for, and always bestowed with 
alacrity and liberality ; and to John S. Phillips, 
Esq., of Philadelphia, for his unremitting atten- 
tions in superintending the preparation of the 



VDL. I. 



26 PREFACE. 

plates, mostly engraved and colored in that city 
— a labor of good will, •which has required 
time and patience that no one except a gen- 
tleman thoroughly imbued with a desire to pro- 
mote the cause of Natural History could have 
performed, and without which, the work could 
not have appeared. 

To the venerable Alexander Lawson, the en- 
graver of the Birds of Wilson, the author's 
acknowledgments are due for his efforts to ren- 
der the illustrations, mostly engraved by him, 
worthy of his own reputation as an accurate 
zoological engraver, and worthy of the confidence 
of naturalists. 

The author is gratified in announcing that the 
anatomical details of the species, together with 
the dissections and drawings, are exclusively due 
to the labors of Joseph Leidy, M. D., of Philadel- 
phia. They constitute the most novel and impor- 
tant accessions to science contained in the work, 
and are an honorable evidence of a skill and 
industry which entitle him to a high rank among 
philosophical zoologists. 

Before commencing the descriptive part of the 
work, the author has found it convenient to enter 



PKEFACE. 27 

upon some general considerations connected with 
the suhject, for the purpose of tracing the rela- 
tions of the animals he is about to describe, but 
more especially of recording those facts and ob- 
servations, connected with the general subject, 
which he has derived from the study of the spe- 
cies belonging to this country. These are ar- 
ranged under distinct heads, and are treated of 
in the following chapters of the Introduction. 



INTRODUCTION. 



" NOTITIAM AUTEM NATURALItJM, TEER^ ALICUJTJS INDIGENAEUM, (ECONO- 
MIC MELIORI EJUS INSXITUENDC NONNIHIL SUPPEDITARE, CEETUM EST." 

O. Fabricius. 

"MODO AD AUGMENTUM SCIENTLE NATURALIS QUCDAM NOTATU NON 
INDIGNA, NEQUE LECTU INJUCUNDA, CONTULISSE DICAR." 



OF THE RISE OF SCIENTIFIC ZOOLOGY IN THE UNITED 
STATES, WITH NOTICES OF NATURALISTS PARTICU- 
LARLY CONNECTED WITH THE SUBJECT OF THIS WORK. 



The impulse given to the study of Natural History 
in Europe, at the close of the last and the commence- 
ment of the present century, by that emment school of 
naturalists and philosophers which arose in France, 
contemporaneously with its great political Kevolution, 
imparted to the Natural Sciences an importance which 
they never before possessed. A crowd of gifted and 
ambitious minds, freed by that event from the shackles 
of established opinion, and thus enabled to direct their 
energies to such ends as suited their respective inclina- 
tions, entered upon a new career of intellectual exer- 
tion. With untu'ing perseverance, they investigated 
the past and present conditions of all organized exist- 
ences, and interrogating nature in the very recesses of 
her temple, drew from her responses a philosophy which 
swept away the received theories of that day, as com- 
pletely as the new pohtical institutions took the place of 
the anti(|uatcd government to which they succeeded. 



32 INTRODUCTION. 

The earth, which had been to man a sealed book, was open- 
ed, and, read by the light of the new philosophy,, disclosed 
tlie history of its own creation. The order of events, 
in the production and succession of animal life upon its 
surface, began to be understood. The relations of 
different bemgs to each other were studied, and all 
were seen to be mutually dependent. Order and sys- 
tem were thus substituted for confusion, and philosophi- 
cal zoology became one of the prominent subjects which 
claimed the attention of the speculative and the learned. 

The active interest in this science, originating in 
France, gradually extended to such parts of the conti- 
nent of Europe as were influenced by the French 
language and hterature, or were occupied by her armies, 
which were often attended by commissions of scientific 
men, and sometimes numbered, among their officers, 
naturalists of the highest merit. In England, when in 
consequence of the wars growing out of the French 
Revolution, and continmng imtil the dethronement of 
Napoleon, a state of non-intercourse with France existed, 
the new impulse was not felt until a later date. When 
it was received, however, it produced a decided impres- 
sion, and Avas soon followed by a rapid advance in this 
department of knowledge. Its results have been the 
training of a numerous body of scientific natiu-ahsts, 
among whom are some of the most distinguished men of 
the present age. 

At the period first alluded to, the United States, then 
not long emerged from colonial subjection, was engaged 



INTRODITCTTON. 






in organizing and estal)lishing new political institutions. 
The people, tliinly spread over a vast territory, -were 
busied in developing its resources, or were engrossed by 
the excitements resulting from the unsettled condition of 
pubhc affairs, and the frequent collisions mth foreign 
powers, which disturbed the peace of the country for 
twenty-five years, until the termination of the war with 
England, in 1815. At the close of that conflict, which 
finally established for the country a rank among nations, 
and left it in repose, the movement which had sometime 
before been communicated from Europe, began to pro- 
duce sensible effects here. 

The state of society was not, at that time, suited to 
the favorable reception, much less to the rapid diffusion 
of science. Wealth was so equally distributed, that few 
were rich ; and, although a respectable degree of intel- 
ligence was common, all the energies of the people 
were spent in pursuits immediately connected with the 
practical utilities of business. As a consequence of this 
condition of things, few were willing to cultivate science 
for its o-wTi sake, and most of these were persons who 
had not yet become engaged in the serious labors of 
life. It was by the young men of that period, therefore, 
that the Zoology of the modern school was welcomed to 
North America, and the earliest efforts made to promote 
its study. Their exertions were at first of the most 
unpretending character, but they sufficed to attract the 
attention of those possessing similar tastes, and led to 
the establishment of institutions in our principal cities. 



34 INTRODUCTION. 

between the years 1812 and 1820, devoted to the cul- 
tivation of Natural History. Some of these could not 
sustain themselves, and became extinct ; but others 
were more successful, and have continued, with various 
prosperity, to the present time. These, together with 
societies estabhshed in the interval, have exercised, and 
yet maintain, an important influence on the public mind. 
Throvigh their efforts, scientific infonnation is no longer 
confined to the professedly scientific, but has become 
familiar to the intelligent part of the commmiity, and 
leisure is found by many to cultivate its various branches. 
The public, ceasing to condemn that, the immediate util- 
ity of which it cannot understand, now cheers, with its 
approbation and aid, undertakings of a purely scientific 
character ; and the government extends to them, occa- 
sionally, an imcertain and hesitating patronage. 

The institutions referred to served as nuclei, around 
which gathered those who were interested m zoological 
studies ; and the investigation of the zoology of the 
country, then but imperfectly known through the works 
of Europeans, was soon commenced by the young 
natiu-alists who composed them. Beyond their limits 
there appears to have been but little enconragement for 
such pursuits, and hence the names of nearly aU the 
early natm-alists of the United States may be fomid 
connected with the history of these associations. As 
the materials collected by them acquired importance, it 
became desirable to make them known, and the pubHca- 
tion of their respective transactions was undertaken. 



INTRODUCTION. 35 

The Academy of Natural Sciences of riiiladolphia 
issued the first number of its Journal in 1817. The' 
Annals of the New York Lyceum of Natural History 
appeared in 1823. The Contributions of the Maclurian 
Lyceum in 1827, and the Journal of the Boston Society 
of Natural History in 1834. Besides these, which arc 
exclusively appropriated to Natural History, there are 
others of a mLxed character, in which considerable 
prominence has latterly been given to the same class of 
su])jects ; such are the Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society, and the Memoirs of the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences. Several private Jour- 
nals also in the same interest, have from time to time 
appeared ; none of which, however, have obtauied a 
permanent establishment, except the American Journal 
of Science and Arts, edited by Professor Silliman, 
which commenced its career in 1819, and yet enjoys a 
vigorous existence. This work contains numerous and 
valuable contributions to zoology, and has always exer- 
cised a wholesome and effective influence in diffusing 
correct ideas of the value of all the Natural Sciences. 
It is in these publications alone, that we must look for 
the great mass of original materials available in the 
compilation of any work on the zoology of the United 
States ; and they are the sources often resorted to in the 
preparation of these volumes. 

During the last ten years, however, several important 
works of a different character have appeared. A gen- 
eral and growing comiction, in the public mind, that the 



36 INTRODUCTION. 

application of scientific knowledge to the investigation 
of the natural resources of the country woiild hasten 
the discovery of new sources of prosperity, and disclose 
the best and most economical mode of developing and 
improving those already known, induced the Legislatures 
of more than half the States of the Union, to establish 
scientific Commissions for the examination of the Geology 
and Mineralogy of those States respectively. In some 
of them the Commissions Avere directed to collect infor- 
mation respecting Zoology and Botany. In accordance 
with this authority, extensive and elaborate works on the 
Zoology of Massachusetts and of New York have been 
given to the pubhc, at the expense of those States, and 
catalogues of the species, with short notices of the 
animals of other States, have also been prepared. These 
have contributed much to elucidate the general subject, 
and, especially, have added largely to what was before 
known of the geographical distribution of species. 

The two classes of publications Avhich have been men- 
tioned, are believed to comprise all the materials, of any 
importance, relating to the particular department of 
Zoology here treated of, except the article entitled Con- 
cliology in the third American edition of Nicholson's 
Encyclopedia, wliich bore the date of 1819, and con- 
tained descriptions, by Mr. Say, of several native land- 
shells. In this exception must also be included the 
papers of Mr. Rafinesque, which Avill be presentl}'- 
noticed, but which, for reasons hereafter given, are not 
deemed worthy of any consideration. The next paper 



INTRODUCTION. g-j' 

succeeding the article on Conchology, also by Mr. Say, 
published in the Journal of the Philadelphia Academy, 
is dated in January, 1821. These are the two earliest 
pubhcations relatmg to this subject ; and, although their 
date is so recent, they anticipated all foreign pubhca- 
tions, and secured the priority of the descriptions and 
names contauied in them. The same good fortune has 
attended the later pubhcations here, so that it may be 
said, that with a few exceptions, American species 
have been first described by American naturalists. The 
exceptions are, descriptions by MM. Mliller, Ferussac, 
and others, of species common to the Antilles, and some 
parts of the shores of the Gulf of Mexico, as well as to 
the United States ; and by ]Mr. Rackett, of a smgle 
species from Canada, pubhshed in the Linngean Transac- 
tions in 1822. It seems remarkable, considering the 
frequent intercoui'se between this country and Europe, 
and the activity that already prevailed among European 
naturahsts in procuring new objects from foreign coun- 
tries, that so few American species fell into their hands 
previous to the time when the American publications 
commenced. Indeed, they seem to have been better 
known to JNIr. Lister in 1770, than to M. Lamarck in 
1822, the former having given figures of nine or ten of 
them, against descriptions of only five by the latter. 

The titles of the various papers, memoirs, catalogues, 
and more elaborate works, relatuig to the terrestrial 
mollusks, may be found in the catalogue of American 
authors contained m the preceding pages. On reference 



38 iNTRODUcrrioN. 

to it, it will be seen that the laborers in this branch of 
Natural Ilistorj have been numerous, and that a respect- 
able amount of materials has been accumulated. No 
attempt has hitherto been made to combine these into 
a work upon American Conchology, or upon the partic- 
ular branch of it which is now presented. In bringing 
together these materials for the first time, it would be 
interesting and proper to give some history of them and 
of their authors, and thus to trace the science from its 
first dawnings in this country to the present time ; but 
there are circumstances which render it inexpedient to 
do so. It is only within a few years that any considera- 
ble attention has been given to such subjects, and con- 
sequently, these pubhcations are so recent, that with 
few exceptions, their authors are yet upon the stage, 
and have not yet passed the active period of life. Such 
an account would almost necessarily partake of a critical 
character, and would therefore place the author in the 
position of a self-appointed judge of the labors of his 
contemporaries and friends, an office which he would 
not willmgly assume, and for which he is but \R qualified. 
There are, however, two names, both connected with the 
rise of Natural History in the United States, and both 
having exercised an influence in its promotion, but with 
far diflbrent results in usefulness to science, and in honor 
to themselves, about wliich it is necessary to make some 
remarks, and to which the objections above indicated do 
not apply. These are the names of Thomas Say, and 
of CoNSTANTiNE ScHMALTZ Rafinesque. The latter 



LNTKODUCTION. ^q 

indeed, not an American, but for a quarter of a ccnturj 
a resident in the United States. 

Mr. Sat, a native of Philadelphia, the son of a phy- 
sician, but himself for some years a merchant, seems to 
have been the earliest scientific naturalist, of the modem 
school, which the country has produced. He possessed 
a well-balanced mind, powers of accm-ate observation and 
discruninating perception, and a facility of expressing his 
thoughts in a brief and condensed style. He was trained 
to habits of industry and perseverance ; his temper was 
mild and equable ; and liis manners were so modest and 
retirmg as to excite remark. His acquii-ements as a 
naturahst were due to his private studies alone ; for at 
the period when Ms character was foruung, there were 
few or none engaged in kindred pursuits, — no associa- 
tions of naturalists, in the bosom of which he could find 
sympathy and support, and few libraries to which he 
could resort for knowledge and assistance. The gi-eat 
zoological names which have illustrated the nineteenth 
century had not then appeared, or, in consequence of 
the disturbed relations of this government with European 
powers, their works were mostly unknown here. But, 
notwithstanding the deficiency of his means and oppor- 
tunities, he possessed himself of the learning and accom- 
phshments of the day, in a much greater degree than 
could have been expected in his position ; and was ready 
and prepared, at the commencement of the new career 
of science on which his country entered soon after the 
termination of the European wars, to make that advance 



40 INTRODUCTION. 

in the branch of knowledge to Avhich he had devoted 
hunself, which has forever associated his name with the 
history of Zoology in the United States, and which ought 
to entitle him to the honor of bemg styled its fomider. 
His pubHshed works, commencing about the year 1817, 
continue through a period of eighteen years untU liis 
death in 1834 ; and embrace descriptions of a vast num- 
ber of animals until then entirely imknown, or but 
imperfectly miderstood. The invertebrated classes 
received the greater part of liis attention, and his con- 
tributions to their history must, necessarily, form an 
important portion of the means of any writer who shall 
seek more fully to elucidate them. The major part of 
the subjects described in this volume were first described 
by him ; and so fully had he occupied the groimd, that 
the additions to our knowledge of species made during 
the twelve years, since his decease, have not exceeded 
the number contributed by him, although within that 
time many new mquirers have commenced their investi- 
gations, and large districts of country, which he never 
examined, have been explored. His descriptions are for 
the most part so accurate, and his observations so just, 
that there is httle left to his successor except to brmg 
them together in their proper order. Some obscuiity, 
indeed, attends several of his species, in consequence of 
his not having uniformly placed specimens in a pubhc 
depository for reference ; for, when objects resemble each 
other so closely as do several species of the genera Helix 
and Pupa, it is very difficult to distinguish them T)y 



INTRODUCTION. 



41 



description alone ; and differences of opinion will arise 
as to -which, among analogous species, corresponds with 
a particular description. As, however, American natu- 
ralists have felt it to be a pleasure, as well as a duty, to 
render full justice to the merits of Mr. Say, by verifying 
and confiramig his discoveries, nearly all the species 
described by liim, though some of them were for a time 
lost, have been re-discovered and restored ; and with a 
few exceptions only, they are retained as well defined 
and authenticated. A particular account of the contri- 
butions made by him, and also by other authors, to each 
genus, will be given in the remarks on the respective 
genera. 

The character and career of M. Rafinesque, though 
offering points of resemblance to those of Mr. Say, are 
in most; respects strongly contrasted with them. He 
was of French origin, but born in a suburb of Constan- 
tinople, and bred to the mercantile profession. He early 
imbibed a taste for the study of natural objects, which 
grew with his years, and finally so far absorbed his 
thoughts as to unfit liim for other pursuits. He visited 
the United States on a tradmg voyage m 1803, and 
remained untU 1805. He was known at that time as a 
botanist, and made the acquaintance of the few botanists 
and naturalists then existing in the coimtry. On return- 
ing to Europe, he estabhshed himself as a merchant in 
Sicily, Avhere he continued until his final departure for 
the United States in 1815. During this interval, he 
was industriously employed in mvestigatmg the natural 

VOL. I. 5 



42 INTKODUCTION. 

history of that island, and pubHshed numerous works on 
botany and various branches of zoology, the most impor- 
tant of the latter relating to ichthyology. There is no 
published evidence that he had at this time much ac- 
quaintance with the mollusks, although by his own state- 
ment, his collection of shells amounted at the period of 
his embarkation from Sicily, to the mcredible number of 
600,000 specimens ! On reaching the coast of the 
United States he suffered shipAvreck, by which his col- 
lections, manuscripts and library, the fruits of the labor 
of years, were lost, and his property was so much im- 
paired, that he never recovered from the blow, but sunk 
into a state of poverty and even of destitution, in which 
he continued until his death in 1840. 

It is conceded on all hands, that the wi'itings of M. 
Rafinesque, previous to liis departure from Sicily, indi- 
cate the possession of considerable talent, and a degree 
of sagacity which placed him in some respects m advance 
of his contemporaries. It is stated indeed by one of his 
partial friends, that he anticipated by ten years, a large 
proportion of the generic and sub-generic ichthyological 
distinctions which were subsequently taken up in the 
Regne Animal.^ But it is at the same time evident, 
that his judgment was even then unsound, his discrimi- 
native perceptions of uncertain force, and that his mind 
was too easily captivated by new and original views, 
without sufficiently establishing the facts on which they 

' Swainson. Cabinet Cyclopedia. Fishes, Amphibians and Reptiles, 
Vol. i. pp. 60 — 62. 



INTRODUCTION. 43 

were based. The leadmg fault of his character as a 
naturahst was, a behef in the specific difference of all 
natural objects which present any variations among them- 
selves, even of the most unimportant characters ; and a 
passion for combining mto new groups, according to real 
and ob\'ious affinities, when such existed, or to fancied or 
trifling ones in their absence, all the objects which came 
witlun his observation. His gi-oups consequently were 
of very mieqvial value ; and Avhile some of them were 
combined according to their natural and fixed relations, 
others were brought together by resemblances perceived 
only by himself. He possessed, however, a peculiar 
facility m the formation of the language of nomenclatm'e, 
and liis generic and specific terms might, with advantage 
to science, be imitated by some of the naturalists of the 
present day. The adoption in one of his works of this 
motto, 

" De Linne le genie il a choisi pour guitle," 

shows that he imitated the brief and comprehensive style 
of Linnajus ; but in his hands it often became obscure, 
and rendered it difficult to recognise the subjects of his 
descriptions. 

M. Rafinesque appears to have been well received in 
the United States. His claims to a standing as a natu- 
ralist were at once admitted, and he immediately com- 
menced taking an active part among the few who were 
investigating its natural history. His name fre(piently 
appears in the record of the early proceedings of the 
Lyceum of Natural History in New York, and many 



44 INTRODUCTION. 

papers on botanical and zoological subjects were published 
by him in the journals of the day. In 1818 he visited 
the country west of the Alleghany mountauis, and was 
soon after appointed Professor of Natural History in 
Transylvania University, at Lexmgton, in Kentucky. 
The residts of liis visit to the "West were exhibited in 
several memoirs sent to Europe for publication, and in 
others which appeared in tliis country. About this time 
the faulty quaUties of his character began to increase, 
and gradually overshadowed the more useful ones.* He 

' His personal habits and manners were at this time very peculiar and 
eccentric, and indicated that diseased state of the mind, which, at a later 
period, became more marked and decided. Mr. Audubon, in one of those 
graphic episodes which relieve the scientific monotony of the early volumes 
of liis Ornithological Biograjihy, has given a very amusing account of a 
\asit made to him by M. Rafiuesque, at his residence on the banks of the 
Oliio river, in Kentucky. He entitles his episode, the "Eccentric Natu- 
ralist," and mentions Mr. R. under the fictitious name of M. de T — . It 
may be interesting to make a few extracts. 

" ' What an odd-looking fellow ! ' said I to myself, as, wliile wallong by 
the river, I observed a man landing from a boat, with what I thought a 
bimdle of dried clover on his back. 'How the boatmen stare at him! 
Surely he must be an original.' He ascended with rapid step, and, ap- 
proacliing me, asked if I could pouat out tlie house in wliich Mx. Audubon 
resided ? ' Why, I am the man,' said I, ' and will gladly lead you to my 
dwelhng.' The traveller rubbed his hands together with dehght, and draw- 
ing a letter from his pocket, handed it to me without any remark. I broke 
the seal and read as follows : ' My dear Audubon — I send you an odd fish, 
which you may prove to be imdescribed, and hope you will do so in your 
next letter. Beheve me always yorn- friend, B.' 

" With all the simphcity of a woodsman, I asked the bearer where the 
odd fish was ; when M. de T. smiled, rubbed his eyes, and with tlie greatest 
good humor said, ' I am that odd fish, I presume, Mr. Audubon.' 

" Clean clothes were offered, bij.t he would not accept them, and it was 



INTRODUCTION. 45 

became entirely neglectful of what had been accomplished 
by other naturalists, rarely mentioning their names or 

with evident reluctance that he performed the lavations usual on such occa- 
sioas, before he sat down to dinner." 

"He chanced to turn over the drawing of a plant quite new to him. 
After inspecting' it closely, he shook his head, and told me no such plant 
existed in nature. I told my guest that the plant was common in the im- 
mediate neighborhood, and that I would show it to liim on the morrow. 
' And why to-morrow, Mr. Audubon ? Let us go now.' We did so ; and 
on reacliing the bank of the river, I pointed to the plant. I thought M. de 
T. had gone mad. He plucked the plants one after another, danced, hugged 
me to his arms, and exultingly told me that he had got, ' not merely a new 
species, but a new genus.' 

" Wlien it waxed late, I showed him to the apartment intended for him 
during liis stay, and endeavored to render him comfortable, leaving hun 
writing materials in abimdance. I was indeed heartily glad to have a 
naturahst under my roof We had all retired to rest. Every person I 
imagined was in deep slmnber, save myself, when of a sudden I heard 
a great uproar in the natvu-alist's room. I got up, reached the place ui-a 
few moments, and opened the door, when, to my astonislunent, I saw my 
guest running about the room naked, hokling the handle of my favorite 
violin, the body of which he had battered to pieces against the walls in 
attempting to kill the bats, which had entered by the open window, proba- 
bly attracted by the insects flying around his candle. I stood amazed, but 
he continued ruiming round and round, mitil he was fairly exhausted ; 
when he begged me to procure one of the animals for liim, as he felt con- 
vinced tliey belonged to a ' new species.' 

" M. de T. remained with us for three weeks, and collected multitudes 
of plants, shells, bats, and fishes." "We were perfectly reconciled to his 
oddities, and finding him a most agreeable and intelligent companion, hoped 
that Ills sojourn might be of long dm-ation. But one evening, when tea was 
prepared, and we expected him to join the family, he was nowhere to be 
foimd. His grasses and other valuables were all removed from liis room. 
The night was spent in searching for him in the neighborhood. No eccen- 
tric naturalist could be discovered. Whether he had perished in a swamp, 
or had been devovu-ed by a bear or a gar-fi.sh, or had taken to his heels, were 
matters of conjecture ; nor was it until some weeks after, that a letter from 
him, thanking us for our attention, assured me of his safety." 



46 INTRODUCTION. 

quoting their works, and he treated every object which 
he met with, even the most familiar and best known, as 
if then for the first time discovered. His passion for 
constituting new genera and species increased to a 
confirmed monomania, under the influence of which, old 
genera were divided and subdivided, the number of 
species prodigiously enlarged, and new animals, never 
seen except by himself, Avere announced. To provide 
materials for liis creations, he relied not solely on his 
o-\vn observation, but resorted to the vague accounts 
of travellers, and the still more uncertain authority of 
vulgar rumor, in both of which he credulously con- 
fided ; and however extraordinary it may seem, some 
of his species and even genera have no better foundation. 
He adopted also, the practice of sending to naturalists 
in Europe, with his own specific names appended, ob- 
jects which had been already characterized here, and 
were knoAvn and recently published by American natu- 
rahsts. It was in tliis way, undoubtedly, that M. Fe- 
russac was induced to apply M. Rafinesque's names to 
several species of Helix previously described by Mr. 
Say ; an unfortunate compliance with M. Rafinesque's 
pretensions, which has caused much confusion. 

These proceedings of M. Rafinesque very soon caused 
other naturalists to withdraw their confidence, and, 
sooner or later, to rehnquish all intercourse with him. 
As his opinions no longer possessed authority, his writ- 
ings, now become very numerous, were refused admis- 
sion into the journals. The same reasons prevented 



INTRODUCTION. 47 

his success as a teacher. He rapidly lost the position 
which he had held, and was thus compelled to retire into 
obscurity. But, he was not the less devoted to his 
favorite science, nor less industrious, and he poured 
forth from his retreat a multitude of fl}ang leaves in 
which, with harmless egotism, he magnified the impor- 
tance of his o^^Ti discoveries. He ascribed his reverses 
to the machinations of secret foes, and to the disposition 
among mankind to " compel genius to slumber or to 
crawl ; " and, to the end, considered himself to be a 
most deserving, though unrequited laborer for the pro- 
motion of human knowledge.' 

1 The character and works of M. Rafiiiesque have been here considered 
only as connected with zoology. His whole life might however be cited 
as a continuous example of per\-erted talent, and would afford materials for 
a very amusing- and interesting' biography. In his last years he became a 
dreaming schemer, and projector of various joint-stock iinanciEd, mercan- 
tile, and literary undertakings. Li his retu-ement he meditated gigantic 
labors, and projected voluminous works in various, branches of hterature 
and science, which he had neither the intellectual ability, nor other means 
to accomplish. He appears to have been entirely satisfied with himself, 
and characterizes the younger men, who were puttmg themselves in ad- 
vance, and bearing away the honors of science, as a " crowd of yoimg, un- 
skilled, inexperienced or incompetent candidates, who push forward and 
are preferred to the modest and able men who have labored for years with 
skill and zeal." He entertained hopes that some of the various State sur- 
veys which were commenced about the time he pubhshed his autobiography, 
would, as he expresses it, " call him to another field of utihty," but in this 
he was again doomed to disappointment, and to find that he was entirely 
forgotten. The closing paragraph of his Life of Travels is an amusing 
in-stance of his vanity, and presents a summary view of his own acquire- 
ments and powers as imderstood by himself. " Versatility of talents and 
of professions is not imcommon in America," says he ; " but those which 
I have exhibited in these few pages may appear to exceed belief; and yet 



48 INTRODUCTION. 

As, for reasons which may be gathered from the pre- 
ceding remarks, the genera and species of the pneumo- 
brancliiate mollusks proposed by M. Rafinesque, are 
considered to be destitute of authority, and entirely 
imworthy of notice, no mention will be made of them 
in the text. But, to sliield the author from a charge, 
from any quarter, of having designedly suppressed them, 
a brief account of all of them known to him, is here 
added. In a memoir published in the Journal de Phy- 
sique, Paris, June, 1819, M. Rafinesque proposed no 
less than seventy new genera of North American ani- 
mals, among which eight were formed out of the genus 
HelLx. These are founded, upon only slight variations 
of the aperture of the shell, and so similar are some of 
them to each other, that where he saw reasons to create 
generic distinctions, others, at the present day, can see 
only such diflFerences as belong to varieties of species. 
The genera proposed by him at that time, were the 
followmg : — 

Odotropis. " Lip reflected, umbilicus covered, tooth upon 
columella. 

it is a positive fact, that in knowledge I have been a Botani-st, Natnrahst, 
Geologist, Geographer, Historian, Poet, Pliilosopher, Philologist, Economist, 
Pliilanthropist. — By profession a Traveller, Merchant, Manufacturer, Col- 
lector, Improver, Professor, Teacher, Lawyer, Draftsman, Architect, En- 
gineer, Pulnaist, Author, Editor, Bookseller, Librarian, Secretary, . . . and 
I hardly know myself what I may not become as yet ; siiice whenever I 
apply myself to anything ivJdch lUle, I never fail to succeed if depending 
on me alone, unless impeded and prevented by lack of means, or tlie hos- 
tility of the foes of manlcind."' 



INTRODUCTION. 49 

Mesomphix. " Umbilicus expanded, exhibiting the volu- 
tions. 

Tkiodopsis. "Umbilicus large, lip thick, aperture nar- 
rowed by three teeth, one upon each lip and one upon 
the columella. 

XoLOTREMA. " Differs from the preceding by absence of 
umbilicus ; or, it is small and covered by the reflected 
lip ; aperture transversal, linear ; the inferior tooth a 
lamellar carina. 

Chimotrema. " Aperture transverse, extremely curved, 
resembling a simple fissure. 

ToxoTREMA. " Differs from the preceding by the emargi- 
nate lip. 

Stenotrema. " Differing from the two preceding by a 
thick emarginate lip, and a second lip flattened to the 
spire and uniting with the true lip ; a transversal carina 
above. 

Aplodon. " Aperture rounded, columella with a single 
tooth; umbilicated. 

In his Enumeration and Account of Remarhable 
Objects in his cwn cabinet, published at Philadelphia in 
1831, Toxotrema and Stenotrema were changed to Tox- 
ostoma and Stenostoma; two new genera, Trophodon 
and Odomphium, and one sub-genus, jMenomphis, were 
indicated by name, and the two following genera were 
characterized : — 

Mesodon. " Differs from Helix by lower lip with a tooth. 
Omphalina. " Differs from Helix by no lips, l)ut an 
umbilicus. 

VOL. I. 6 



50 INTRODUCTION. 

In tlie last-named papei-, M. Rafincsque describes 
two species of Agatina, for such was the orthography 
he adopted for Achatma. 

^^ Agatina variegata. Baf. 1820. Six spires, smooth, yel- 
lowish, variegated with brown spots near the sutures, first 
spire with some narrow colored strias, concentric. Nearly 
two inches ; from Louisiana. 

" A -fuscata. Raf. 1822. Eight spires, smooth, reddish 

brown, with broad longitudinal black bands on the spires, 
of a lanceolate flexuose shape. Over two inches ; from 
Texas." 

Persons acquamted with our Hehces, will readily 
distinguish nearly all the species on which M. Rafin- 
esque founded the above genera, for it is apparent that 
he had actually before him American specimens, and 
did not depend upon liis memory or imagination. It is 
singular, however, that with his fondness for publisliing 
species with the contraction " i^a/." appended, he 
nowhere described these Helices. Descriptions may, 
indeed, exist unnoticed in some of the loose fragments 
which heralded his pretended discoveries ; but this is 
not hkely. The probable explanation of the fact is, that 
he became acquainted with most of the species in Phila- 
delpliia, (m the Aviuter of 1818 and 1819, after his 
return from his first visit to the West,) where they had 
already been announced by Mr. Say: a supposition 
which is supported by the fact, that in two letters from 
him to the New York Lyceum, pubhshed in the Ameri- 
can Monthly Magazine and Critical Review, in Septem- 



IXTRODUCTION. §]_ 

bcr ancT October, 1818, -wliicli were intended as a sort 
of prodi'omus of his discoveries in the West, he nowhere 
speaks of havmg collected land shells, although the flu- 
viatile species, divided as usual into several genera and 
sub-genera, occupy considerable space. As he could 
not, without a- gross infraction of that comity practised 
among natui-ahsts, which secures to each his own discov- 
eries, and which even he was not prepared, at that time, 
entirely to disregard, openly assume the species described 
or made known by Mr. Say, he could publicly gratify 
his mania for genera-makuig only by the construction of 
these new genera. But, he gave to the specimens in 
his own cabinet, specific names wliich he thought more 
appropriate than those of Mr. Say, and they gradually 
found their way to his correspondents abroad, and par- 
ticularly to M. Ferussac, with these names attached. 

In his Annals of Nature for 1820, M. Rafinesque 
proposed three new genera and several species, viz. : — 

GENUS PHILOMYCUS. 

Philomycus. " Differs from Limax by no visible mantle, 
the longer pair of tentacula terminal and club-shaped, 
the shorter tentacula lateral and oblong. The name 
means, friend of fungi, on which they feed. 

" Philomycus quadrilus. Gray, back smooth, with four longi- 
tudinal rows of black spots, long tentacula black and ap- 
proximated; rather attenuated behind, tail obtuse. On the 
banks of the Hudson, length over half an inch. 



(( 



(( 



52 INTRODUCTION. 

"P . oxurus. Fulvous gray, slender, back wrinkled 

longitudinally ; tentacula brown, the lateral ones very small ; 
tail acute, carinated above. Length two thirds of an inch, 
in New York. 

P . fuscus. Entirely brown, tentacula thick, back 

smooth, tail compressed, acute. In Ohio, length one fourth 
of an inch. 

P .fiexuolaris. Fulvous, back variegated, with flexu- 

ose brown lines, slightly wrinkled transversely ; attenuated 
behind, tail obtuse. Length from one to two inches, it 
may change its shape. Found on the Catskill mountains. 
There are many other species of this genus in the United 
States. 

GENUS EUMELUS. 

EiTMELTJS. " Differs from Limax by no visible mantle, the 
four tentacula almost in one row in front and cylindrical, 
nearly equal, the smallest pair between the larger ones. 
Name mythological. 

" Eumelus nehulosus. Body nearly cylindrical, rounded at both 
ends ; back smooth, crowded with gray and fulvous spots 
intermixed of the same tinge, without spots beneath ; tenta- 
cula brown. Length about one inch, in Ohio and Kentucky, 

" E . lividus. Livid brown above, grayish beneath, anten- 
nae black, obtuse beliind, back smooth and convex. Length 
one inch, in Ohio, Indiana, and Kentucky. 

GENUS HEMILOMA. 

Hemiloma. (Univalve Land Shell.) " Spire raised and 
smooth : opening obliqual elliptic, with an anterior raised 
half margin on the inside lip, a little twisted ; columella 



INTRODUCTION. 



53 



dccurrent on the whorl obliquely and with a very small 
umbilicus. The name means half margin. 

"Hemiloma ovata. Ovate, very obtuse, smooth, six spires, 
breadth two thirds of the length. Found near Lexington 
in a nearly fossil state ; whitish, length three sixteenths of 
an inch. 

In the same paper lie also describes a species of 
Limax, viz. : 

"Limax gracilis. Body slender, head and lower tentacula 
fulvous, neck gray, upper tentacula brownish, mantle dark 
fulvous, back smooth brown, beneath dirty white ; tail brown, 
obtuse above, mucronate and acute beneath ; probably a real 
Limax. Yet it has the two long tentacula inserted above the 
neck, while the small ones are terminal and all slightly club- 
shaped. It may, perhaps, form a sub-genus Deroceras. 
Length over one inch. Kentucky, in the woods. 

The shell upon which the genus Hemilonia was found- 
ed has not been recognized ; it was probably a fossil. 
There is reason to beheve, that Philomycus and Eumelus 
origmated in the defective and careless observation of 
M. Rafinesque. Certain it is, that no other observer 
has yet found naked slugs with the four tentacles in one 
row and nearly equal, with the two long ones inserted 
above the neck, or without a more or less developed 
mantle. A hasty examination of small individuals of 
the animal, which in this work is included in a genus for 
which the author has proposed the name of Tebennopho- 
rus, might readily deceive any one who did not suspect 
their peculiar characteristics, as the mantle is often so 



54 INTRODUCTION. 

closely pressed to the body, that the line of separation 
is not visible. Such an error would account for the 
principal characteristic of these two genera. But, 
"whether M. Rafinesque was deceived in this way or not, 
it is apprehended that under the circumstances, these 
genera cannot be received, although endorsed by the 
adoption of M. Fdrussac. Whenever animals with the 
characteristics which he records, shall be discovered, it 
will be time enough to renew his names. ^ 

Havmg thus briefly reviewed the character of these 
two authors, and criticized the works of one of them, it 
remains only to repeat, that the result of the labors of 
each, upon tliis branch of natural history at least, has 

' M. Rafinesque seems to have been conscious, that he might be ob- 
noxious to tlie charge of pubhsliing, as his own, discoveries that were 
already well knov^m, and he pleads liis defence, in anticipation. He says, " The 
ditficulty of ascertaining sometimes, whether my discoveries are totally 
new, will not prevent me from offering those which I consider such. If a 
few shall afterwards prove otherwise, the blame, if any, must lay with those 
European compilers who give us now and then, theii' buUcy, costly, and 
learned Cyclopedias, Dictionaries of Natm-al History, and Systems, without 
following the wise linnean plan of detailing all the former discoveries." " In 
such a state of science I shall not be prevented from pubhsliing my new 
species, because it may happen that one out of fifty may be pre\aously 
noticed in some costly and inaccessible work." Having thus easily disem- 
barrassed liimself of one of the chief obligations of a zoological writer, to 
wit, that of fully investigating the works of his predecessors, he thus defines 
the principles which guided lumself. " The priuciples of these tracts shall 
belong to the true linnean school of improvement. I shall follow all the im- 
provements that the worthy Linnaeus would have adopted, if he had lived 
in tliis age ; but I shall carefully avoid any deviation from the fundamental, 
rational and everlasting niles of nomenclature, and descriptive liistory." 
Aiuicds of Nature. 



INTRODUCTION. 55 

been very different. The one has left a favorable record 
of liimself throughout ; -vvhilc of the other, only traces 
enough rem am, to mark his errors. 

The other principal contributors to the elucidation of 
this branch of zoology mil be named in the general 
remarks on the respective genera, and a particular 
account of their contributions to the history of the genus 
will be given. 