m 





WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 



'The kernels of nuts and the resins of trees, 
The nectar distilled by the wild honey-bees, 
Should be thrown in together, to flavor my words 
With the zest of the woods and the joy of the birds !" 

— Thompson. 



WHAT I HAVE DONE 
WITH BIRDS 



^ o o 



CHARACTER STUDIES OF NATIVE AMERICAN BIRDS WHICH, 

THROUGH FRIENDLY ADVANCES, I INDUCED TO POSE 

FOR ME, OR SUCCEEDED IN PHOTOGRAPHING 

BY GOOD FORTUNE, WITH THE STORY OF 

MY EXPERIENCES IN OBTAINING 

THEIR PICTURES 



By 

GENE STRATTON-PORTER 

Author of 
The Song of the Cardinal, Freckles, etc. 



INDIANAPOLIS 

THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY 

PUBLISHERS 



Copyright 1907 
The Bobbs-Merrill Company 









LIBRARY of CONGRESS 

Two Cooies Received 

MAY 6 190T 

Copyright Entry 

CLASS tO* XXc, No. 

COPY B. 





TO 

BOB BURDETTE BLACK 

WHO HAD A HAND IN IT 



Thanks are due to Outing, The Metropolitan 
and The Ladies' Home Journal for the privilege 
of reproducing pictures copyrighted by them 





CONTENTS 



CHAPTER PAGE 

I What I Have Done With Birds 1 

II The "Queen" Rail— In a Swamp 31 

III The Wood Thrush— In the Valley of the Wood 

Robin •. 43 

IV The Barn Owl— In Deep Forest 53 

V The Killdeer— On the Ground 65 

VI The Black Vulture— In the Limberlost . 75 

VII The Loggerhead Shrike— In Field Trees 91 

VIII The Purple Martin— In the Air 103 

IX The Cat-bird— In Thickets Ill 

X The Belted Kingfisher — In Embankments 123 

XI The Yellow-Billed Cuckoo— In Small Thickly 

Leaved Trees 143 

XII The Blue Heron — In the Great Lake Regions 163 

XIII The Mourning Dove — In Deep Wood 171 

XIV The Cow-bird— In the Pastures 179 

XV The Cardinal Grosbeak — In Small Trees and 

Bushes 197 

XVI Robin— In the Dooryard 211 

XVII The Blue Jay— In the Orchard 227 

XVIII The Humming-bird— At the Cabin 243 

XIX The Quail— On the Ground 251 









;-?V 






m 

1 




{fin * 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

Brooding Cuckoo Frontispiece 

Male Cardinal Doing Sentinel Duty xxii 

Owl 1 

Dusky Falcon 3 

Chicken-hawk 7 

Black Vulture 11 

Sheilpoke 15 

Cardinal Grosbeaks Courting 19 

Baby Grosbeak 22 

Kingfisher 23 

Young Tanager 25 

Hen's Nest Containing Egg of Chicken-hawk 25 

Hen Brooding on Egg of Chicken-hawk 26 

Brooding King Rail 30 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS— Continued 

PAGE 

Rail Hiding Egg 31 

Nest of King Rail 35 

Eggs of King Rail 39 

Pair of Young Bell-birds 42 

Nest of Wood Robin With Snake Skin 43 

Nest of Wood Thrush 45 

Young Bell-bird Hiding Under Leaf 50 

Barn Owl 52 

Owl Head 53 

Barn Owl Leaving Its Home 55 

The Face a Perfect Heart Shape 61 

Young Killdeer 64 

The Killdeer Nest 65 

Baby Killdeer Just From Shell 72 

The Black Vulture's Nest With Egg and Young 74 

The Black Vulture's Front Door 75 

"Little Chicken" 77 

Young Vulture Three-fourths Grown 81 

Full-grown Vulture 85 

Vulture Taking Flight 88 

Young Loggerhead Shrikes 90 

Pair of Young Shrikes 91 

Nest and Eggs of Shrike 94 

Pair Half -grown Shrikes 95 

Young Shrikes 99 

Purple Martin 102 

A Martin Double House 103 

Martin Standing Sentinel 108 

Cat-bird Nest and Eggs 110 

Young Cat-bird Ill 

Pair of Young Cat-birds 113 

Cat-birds 119 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS— Continued 

PAGE 

Kingfishers on Favorite Fishing Log 122 

Waiting For Lunch 123 

Father Kingfisher 129 

Young Kingfishers at Entrance to Nest 135 

Kingfisher Flats 139 

Cuckoo Eggs in Abandoned Nest of Larger Bird 142 

Brooding Cuckoo 143 

Typical Cuckoo Nest 146 

Evolution of Cuckoos, — Pair in Nest 150 

Pair Leaving Nest 150 

Pair One Day From Nest 151 

Mother Cuckoo Brooding While I Worked Behind Her 156 

Beady for the Mercies of the World 159 

Great Blue Heron 162 

Heron Swallowing Frog 163 

Indian Biver Plover 168 

Pair of Young Doves 170 

Nest of Doves on Fence 171 

Pair of Young Doves in Nest 176 

Black-masked Warbler and Cow-birds 178 

Cow-birds Clustering About Cattle 179 

Nest of Indigo Finch Containing Egg of Cow-bird 183 

Nest of Bed-eyed Vireo With Cow-bird Egg 187 

Pair of Young Vireos 190 

Nest of Song Sparrow With Walled-in Egg of Cow-bird. . . 191 

Pair of Young Cow-birds . 194 

Male Cardinal Grosbeak Taking Sun-bath 196 

Young Cardinals 197 

Nest and Eggs of Cardinals 199 

Male Cardinal Singing 203 

Male Cardinal 207 

Nest and Eggs of Bobin 210 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIOXS— Continued 



PAGE 



Robin on Bench 211 

Xest and Young Robins 215 

Robin on Limb 223 

Blue Jay Calling 226 

Jay on Stump 227 

Xest and Eggs of Jay 228 

Mother Jay and Xestling 230 

Mother Jay and Xestling With Open Bill 231 

Male and Female Jays Feeding Young 233 

Young Jays Ready to Fly 237 

Young Jay 240 

Humming-bird on Rose 242 

A Chilly Humming-bird 243 

Xest of Humming-bird 248 

Grown Quail 250 

Quail X T est 251 

X T est of Shells 257 




WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 




Cried Falco Sparverius: "I chased a mouse up this log. 
Hooted Scops Asio : "I chased it down a little red lane." 



'The bubbling brook doth leap when I come by, 

Because my feet find measure with its call ; 
The birds know when the friend they love is nigh, 

For I am known to them, both great and small. 
The flower that on the lonely hillside grows 

Expects me there when spring its bloom has given ; 
And many a tree and bush my wanderings knows, 

And e'en the clouds and silent stars of heaven." 



— Very. 




CHAPTER I 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 




The greatest thing possible to do 
with a bird is to win its confidence. In 
a few days' work about most nests the 
birds can be taught so to trust me, that 
such studies can be made as are here 
presented of young and old, male and 
female. 

I am not superstitious, but I am 
afraid to mistreat a bird,, and luck is 
with me in the indulgence of this fear. 
In all my years of field work not one study of a nest, or of any 
bird, has been lost by dealing fairly with my subjects. If a nest 
is located where access is impossible without moving it, an ex- 
posure is not attempted, and so surely as the sun rises on another 
morning, another nest of the same species is found within a few 
days, where a reproduction of it can be made. 

Recently, in summing up the hardships incident to securing 
one study of a brooding swamp-bird, a prominent nature lover 
and editor said to me most emphatically, "That is not a woman's 
work." 

"I do not agree with you," I answered. "In its hardships, in 
wading, swimming, climbing, in hidden dangers suddenly to be 
confronted, in abrupt changes from heat to cold, and from light to 
dark, field photography is not & woman's work ; but in the matter 
of finesse in approaching the birds, in limitless patience in await- 
ing the exact moment for the best exposure, in the tedious and 

1 



WHAT I HAVE DOXE WITH BIRDS 

delicate processes of the dark room, in the art of winning bird 
babies and parents, it is not a man's work. Xo man ever has had 
the patience to remain with a bird until he secured a real character 
study of it. A human mother is best fitted to understand and deal 
with a bird mother." 

This is the basis of all my field work, — a mute contract be- 
tween woman and bird. In spirit I say to the birds, "Trust me and 
I will do by you as I would be done by. Your nest and young 
shall be touched as I would wish some giant, surpassing my size 
and strength as I surpass yours, to touch my cradle and baby. I 
shall not tear down your home and break your eggs or take your 
naked little ones from the nest before they are ready to go, and 
leave them to die miserably. I shall come in colors to which you 
are accustomed, and move slowly and softly about, not approach- 
ing you too near until your confidence in me is established. I 
shall be most careful to feed your young what you feed them; 
drive away snakes and squirrels, and protect you in every way 
possible to me. Trust me, and go on with your daily life. For 
what small disturbance is unavoidable among you, forgive me, 
and through it I shall try to win thousands to love and shield 
you." 

That I frequently have been able to teach a bird to trust me 
completely, these studies prove ; but it is possible to go even fur- 
ther. After a week's work in a location abounding in every bird 
native to my state, the confidence of the whole feathered popula- 
tion has been won so that I could slip softly in my green dress 
from nest to nest, with not the amount of disturbance caused by 
the flight of a Crow or the drumming of a Woodpecker. This 
was proved to me when one day I was wanted at home, and a 
member of my family came quietly and unostentatiously, as she 
thought, through the wood to tell me. Every Wren began scold- 
ing. Every Cat-bird followed her with imperative questions* 




WISDOM DUSKY FALCON 

"A Dusky Falcon is beautiful and most intelligent' 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 

Every Jay was on a high perch sounding danger signals. With 
a throb of great joy came the realization that I was at home and 
accepted of my birds ; this other was a stranger, and her presence 
was feared and rejected. 

So upon this basis I have gone among the birds, seeking not 
only to secure pictures of them by which family and species can 
be told, but also to take them perching in characteristic locations 
as they naturally alight in different circumstances ; but best and 
above all else, to make each picture prove without text the disposi- 
tion of the bird. A picture of a Dove that does not make that bird 
appear tender and loving, is a false reproduction. If a study of 
a Jay does not prove the fact that it is quarrelsome and obtrusive 
it is useless, no matter how fine the pose or portrayal of markings. 
One might write pages on the wisdom and cunning of the Crow, 
but one study of the bird that proved it would obviate the neces- 
sity of the text. A Dusky Falcon is beautiful and most intelli- 
gent, but who is going to believe it if you illustrate the statement 
with a sullen, sleepy bird, which serves only to furnish markings 
for natural -history identification? If you describe how bright 
and alert a Cardinal is, then see to it that you get a study of a 
Cardinal which emphasizes your statements. 

A merry war has waged in the past few years over what the 
birds know ; and it is all so futile. I do not know what the birds 
know, neither do you, neither does any one else, for that matter. 
There is no possible way to judge of the intelligence of birds, save 
by our personal experience with them, and each student of bird 
life will bring from the woods exactly what he went to seek, be- 
cause he will interpret the actions of the birds according to his 
temperament and purpose. 

If a man seeking material for a volume on natural history, 
trying to crowd the ornithology of a continent into the working 
lifetime of one person, goes with a gun, shooting specimens to 

5 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 

articulate and mount from which to draw illustrations, he will no 
doubt testify that the birds are the wildest, shyest things alive, 
because that has been his experience with them. 

If he goes with a note -book, a handful of wheat and the soul 
of a poet, he will write down the birds as almost human, because 
his own great heart humanizes their every action. 

I go with a camera for the purpose of bringing from the fields 
and forests characteristic pictorial studies of birds, and this book 
is to tell and prove to you what my experiences have been with 
them. I slip among them in their parental hour, obtain their like- 
nesses, and tell the story of how the work was accomplished. I 
was born in the country and grew up among the birds in a place 
where they were protected and fearless. A deep love for, and a 
comprehension of, wild things runs through the thread of my dis- 
position, peculiarly equipping me to do these things. 

In one season, when under ten years of age, I located sixty 
nests, and I dropped food into the open beaks in every one of 
them. Soon the old birds became so accustomed to me, and so con- 
vinced of my good intentions, that they would alight on my head 
and shoulders in a last hop to reach their nests with the food they 
had brought. Playing with the birds was my idea of fun. Pets 
were my sort of dolls. It did not occur to me that I was learning 
anything that would be of use in after years; now comes the 
realization that knowledge acquired for myself in those days is 
drawn upon every time I approach the home of a bird. 

When I decided that the camera was the only method by which 
to illustrate my observations of bird life, all that was necessary to 
do was to get together my outfit, learn how to use it, to compound 
my chemicals, to develop and fix my plates, and tone and wash 
my prints. How to approach the birds I knew better than any- 
thing else. 

This work is to tell of and to picture my feathered friends of 

6 




ANGER CHICKEN-HAWK 



I once snapped a Chicken-hawk with a perfect expression of anger on 

his face" 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 

the woods in their homes. When birds are bound to their nests and 
young by the brooding fever, especially after the eggs have quick- 
ened to life, it is possible to cultivate, by the use of unlimited pa- 
tience and bird sense, the closest intimacy with them and to get 
almost any pose or expression you can imagine. 

In living out their lives, birds know anger, greed, jealousy, 
fear and love, and they have their playtimes. In my field ex- 
periences I once snapped a Chicken-hawk with a perfect expres- 
sion of anger on his face, because a movement of mine disturbed 
him at a feast set to lure him within range of my camera. No 
miser ever presented a more perfect picture of greed than I fre- 
quently caught on the face of a young Black Vulture to which it 
was my daily custom to carry food. Every day in field work one 
can see a male bird attack another male, who comes fooling around 
his nest and mate, and make the feathers fly. Did humanity ever 
present a specimen scared more than this Sheilpoke when he dis- 
covered himself between a high embankment and the camera, and 
just for a second hesitated in which direction to fly? Sometimes 
by holding food at unexpected angles young birds can be coaxed 
into the most astonishing attitudes and expressions. 

I use four cameras suited to every branch of field work, and 
a small wagon-load of long hose, ladders, waders and other field 
paraphernalia. 

Backgrounds never should be employed, as the use of them 
ruins a field study in two ways. At one stroke they destroy at- 
mosphere and depth of focus. 

Nature's background, for any nest or bird, is one of ever 
shifting light and shade, and this forms the atmosphere without 
which no picture is a success. Nature's background is one of deep 
shadow, formed by dark interstices among the leaves, dense thick- 
ets and the earth peeping through; and high lights formed by 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 

glossy leaves, flowers and the nest and eggs, if they are of light 
color. 

Nature revels in strong contrasts of light and shade, sweet 
and sour, color and form. The whole value of a natural-history 
picture lies in reproducing atmosphere, which tells the story of 
out-door work, together with the soft high lights and velvet shad- 
ows which repaint the woods as we are accustomed to seeing them. 
It is not a question of timing; on nests and surroundings all the 
time wanted can be had; on young and grown birds, snap shots 
must be resorted to in motion, but frequently, with them, more 
time than is required can be given. It is a question of whether 
you are going to reproduce nature and take a natural -history pic- 
ture, or whether you are going to insert a background and take a 
sort of flat Japanese, two-tone, wash effect, fit only for decora- 
tion, never to reproduce the woods. 

Also in working about nests when the mother bird is brooding, 
the idea is, or should be, to make your study and get away speed- 
ily ; and this is a most excellent reason from the bird's side of the 
case as to why a background never should be introduced. In the 
first place, if you work about a nest until the eggs become chilled 
the bird deserts them, and a brood is destroyed. On fully half 
the nests you will wish to reproduce, a background could not be 
inserted without so cutting and tearing out foliage as to drive the 
bird to desert; to let in light and sunshine, causing her to suffer 
from heat, and so to advertise her location that she becomes a prey 
to every thoughtless passer. The birds have a right to be left 
exactly as you find them. 

It is a good idea when working on nests of young birds, where 
you have hidden cameras in the hope of securing pictures of the 
old, and must wait some time for them to come, to remember that 
nestlings are accustomed to being fed every ten or fifteen min- 
utes, and even oftener. If you keep the old ones away long, you 

10 




2 

> 



bl 






H3 
U 

bJD 



0) 

- 
<u 

?-( 
o 



c 

= 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 

subject the young to great suffering and even death; so go to the 
woods prepared, if such case arise, to give them a few bites your- 
self. In no possible way can it hurt a young bird for you to drop 
into its maw a berry or worm of the kind its parents feed it, since 
all the old bird does, in the majority of cases, is to pick a worm or 
berry from the bushes and drop it into the mouth of the young. 

In case you do not know what to feed a nestling, an egg put 
on in cold water, brought to a boil and boiled twenty minutes, 
then the yolk moistened with saliva, is always safe for any bird. 
While you are working so hard for what you want yourself, just 
think of the birds and what they want occasionally. 

The greatest brutality ever practised on brooding birds con- 
sists in cutting down, tearing out and placing nests of helpless 
young for your own convenience. Any picture so taken has no 
earthly value, as it does not reproduce a bird's location or charac- 
teristics. In such a case the rocking of the branches, which is 
cooling to the birds, is exchanged for a solid location, and the 
leaves of severed limbs quickly wither and drop, exposing both 
old and young to the heat, so that your pictures represent, not the 
free wild life of thicket and wood, but tormented creatures lolling 
and bristling in tortures of heat, and trying to save their lives 
under stress of forced and unnatural conditions. If you can not 
reproduce a bird's nest in its location and environment, your pic- 
ture has not a shred of historical value. My state imposes heavy 
fines for work of this sort and soon all others will do the same. 

The eggs of almost all birds are pointed and smaller at one 
end than the other, and mother birds always place these points 
together in the center of the nest. If you wish to make a study 
of a nest for artistic purposes, bend the limb but slightly, so that 
the merest peep of the eggs shows, and take it exactly as the 
mother leaves it. If you desire it for historical purposes, repro- 
duce it so that students can identify a like nest from it. Bend 

13 



WHAT I HAVE DOXE WITH BIRDS 

the limb lower so that the lining will show, as well as outside 
material, and with a little wooden paddle turn at least one egg 
so that the shape and markings are distinct. This can not possi- 
bly hurt the egg and when the bird returns to brood she will 
replace it to suit herself. 

If you find statements in the writings of a natural-history 
photographer that you can not corroborate in the writings of your 
favorite ornithologist, be reasonable. Who is most likely to 
know? The one who tries to cover the habits and dispositions of 
the birds of a continent in the lifetime of one person, or the one 
who, in the hope of picturing one bird, lies hidden by the day 
watching a nest? Sometimes a series of one bird covers many 
days, sometimes weeks, as the Kingfisher; sometimes months, as 
the Vulture; and sometimes years, as did the Cardinals of this 
book. Does it not stand to reason that, in such intimacy with a 
few species, much can be learned of them that is new? 

All that my best authority on our native birds can say of the 
eggs of a Quail is that they are "roundish." He hesitates over the 
assertion that Cardinals eat insects, and states for a fact that they 
brood but once a season. Xo bird is so completely a seed- or in- 
sect-eater that it does not change its diet. Surely the Canaries of 
your cages are seed-eaters, yet every Canary-lover knows that if 
the bird's diet is not varied with lettuce, apple, egg and a bit of 
raw beefsteak occasionally, it will pull out its feathers and nibble 
the ends of them for a taste of meat. Chickens will do the same 
thing. 

Certainly Cardinals eat insects, quite freely. The one lure 
effective above all others in coaxing a Cardinal before a lens was 
fresh, bright red, scraped beefsteak. Xine times out of ten this 
bird went where I wanted him when a dead limb set with raw 
meat was introduced into his surroundings. He would ven- 

14 




CO 



En « 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 

ture for that treat what he would not for his nestlings. And how 
his sharp beak did shear into it ! 

Ornithologists tell us that the diet of a Black Vulture is car- 
rion. To reasonable people that should be construed as a general 
principle, and not taken to mean that if a Vulture eats a morsel of 
anything else it can not be a Vulture. Once during a Vulture 
series in the Limberlost a bird of this family in close quarters 
presented me with his dinner. In his regurgitations there were 
dark streaks I did not understand, and so I investigated. They 
were grass! Later I saw him down in a fence-corner, snipping 
grass like a Goose, and the week following his mate ate a quan- 
tity of catnip with evident relish. Then some red raspberries 
were placed in the door of their log and both of them ate the 
fruit. 

In the regurgitations of a Kingfisher there can be found the 
striped legs of grasshoppers and the seeds of several different 
kinds of berries. All grain- and seed-eaters snap up a bug or 
worm here and there. All insect-eaters vary their diet with bugs 
and berries and all meat- and carrion-eaters crave some vegetable 
diet. 

Through repeated experience with the same pairs I know that 
Cardinals of my locality nest twice in a season, and I believe there 
are cases where they do three times, as I have photographed young 
in a nest as late as the twenty-ninth of August. Had it not been 
that a pair were courting for a second mating about a nest still 
containing their young, almost ready to go, such a picture as this 
pair of Courting Cardinals never would have been possible to me. 
But after one brooding they became so accustomed to me that 
they flitted about their home, making love as well as feeding the 
nestlings. Repeatedly in my work I have followed a pair of 
cardinals from one nest to a new location a few rods away where 
they continued operations about a second brooding. 

17 



WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS 

Neither does an authority who tells you certain kinds of birds 
are the same size, male and female, mean anything except that 
they are the same on an average. All accepted authorities state 
that Black Vultures are the same size. My male of the Limber- 
lost was a tough old bird, of what age no one could guess, his eyes 
dim, his face wrinkled and leathery, his feet incrusted with scale, 
and he was almost as large as his cousin, Turkey Buzzard. His 
mate was a trim little hen of the previous year, much smaller and 
in every way fresh compared with him, but they were mated and 
raising their family. No ornithologist can do more than lay 
down the general rules, and trust to your good sense to recognize 
the exceptions. 

. There are pairs of birds in which the male is a fine big speci- 
men, the female small and insignificant. There are pairs where 
the female is the larger and finer, and where they are the same 
size. Sometimes they conform in color and characteristics to the 
rules of the books and again they do not. Twice in my work I 
have found a white English Sparrow, also a Robin, wearing a 
large white patch on his coat. I once came within a breath of 
snapping an old Robin of several seasons with a tail an inch long. 
It did not appeal to me that he was a short -tailed species of Robin, 
— there is a way to explain all these things. The bird had been in 
close quarters and relaxed his muscles, letting his tail go to save 
his body. 

A large volume could be filled with queer experiences among 
birds. Once I found a baby Robin that had been fed something 
poisonous and its throat was filled with clear, white blisters, until 
its beak stood wide open and it was gasping for breath. I punc- 
tured the blisters with a needle and gave it some oil, but it died. 
Another time I rescued a Robin that had hung five inches below 
its nest by one leg securely caught in a noose of horsehair, until 

18 