.6(^i 




WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 



I. JACK IN THE PULPIT 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

13 : 67-68. May 1912. 



[Reprinted from Journ.vl OF the New York Botanical Garden, May, 1912.J 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 
I. "Jack in the Pulpit" (Arisaema triphyllum (L.) Torr.) 

(With Plate XCIII.) 

When the trees are unfolding their fresh green leaves in May 
and June, and the violets and spring-beauties are in bloom, Jack- 
in-the-pulpit may be found in moist woodlands and on shady 
banks, where the earth is soft and loamy. It is a perennial herb, 
and if left undisturbed, it sometimes lives many years and attains a 
height of three feet, with a subterranean corm as large as an apple. 
This corm has given to the plant the name of "Indian turnip" 
though it is not edible, when raw, for it has an acrid taste, 
irritating to the tongue, on account of the acicular crystals of 
calcium oxalate which it contains, known as raphides. It propa- 
gates by forming smaller secondary corms around the older ones 
and in this way new plants are started. It often bears no fruit 
in the vicinity of New York, not only on account of the depreda- 
tions of children, but because it is dioecious and the proper insect 
visitors, on which it is dependent for pollination, seem to be 
lacking. Usually the leaves turn yellow and the plant disappears 
in June and July, though this varies in dififereni: porrions of its 
range, which extends throughout the Eastern and Central states, 
as far north as Nova Scotia and Ontario and south to Florida 
and Louisiana. It bears what would appear to most children 
to be a single large flower, but is really a cluster of small simple 
flowers, borne at the base of a fleshy club-shaped spadix, which 
is enclosed by the convolute base of the spathe, the summit of 

• Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 



68 

which arches over it, and is either pale green or a dark glossy 
brown, often striped with white. 

There are usually two leaves, which are three-parted, graceful 
in shape and beautifully veined. The leaf-stalks are sheathing 
at base and enclose that of the flower-cluster. The staminate 
plants are often smaller and paler than the pistillate and wither 
as soon as they have discharged their pollen. Their flowers 
consist of only 2-4 almost sessile, white or purple anthers, borne 
on the fleshy mucilaginous base of the spadix. The pistils are 
crowded together, without calyx or corolla, green, globose and 
tipped with a sessile white stigma; occasionally a few stamens 
may be found above the pistils. The fruit cluster, when ripe, 
is usuaUy prostrate, from 1-3 inches long and the berries are 
bright scarlet. 

Plukenet appears to have been the first to figure this plant 
and he described it in his Phytographia in 1691 as "Arum 
triphyllum minus atrorubente" from plants sent to him by Ban- 
nister from Virginia. Linnaeus in his Species Plantarum, 1753, 
quoted this description and called it "Arum triphyllum." It 
resembles some of the European species of Arum and belongs 
to the Araceae, a family of plants, most of which are tropical 
in their distribution and which includes about 105 genera and 
over 900 species, many of them being large and showy plants 
often climbing on trees and rocks. 

Elizabeth G. Britton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
II. SPRING BEAUTY 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 

13 : 91-92. June 1912. 




•SPRING BEAUTY" 
(Claytonia virginica L.) 



[Reprinted from Journal OF the New York Botanical Garden, June, 1912.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 
2. "Spring Beauty" (Claytonia virginica L.). 

(With Plate XCV.) 

In wet meadows, on grassy banks and even shady woodlands 
the Spring Beauty covers the ground in May with quantities of 
white flowers. It blooms consecutively for two or three weeks, 
opening a new blossom each day, gradually lengthening out its 
racemes, till sometimes they have borne as many as fifteen flowers. 
These measure half an inch or more across, have five white or 
pale pink petals, veined with rose-color; the stamens are five 
with pink anthers, and the style is three-lobed. There are two 
fleshy spreading sepals and the pedicels lengthen gradually from 
one half to an inch in length and become reflexed as the three- 
angled capsule matures. Half-way down the stem below the 
raceme, two narrow fleshy leaves, three or four inches long, 
clasp the stem, and a few basal ones arise from the large tuberous 
root which is buried rather deeply in the ground. Usually only 
the flowering stems are picked, so that the plant survives, but 
it will make no seed and stand little chance of spreading. The 
seeds are brown, reniform, slightly roughened, and the embryo 
is curved. 

The Spring Beauty was named by Linnaeus in 1753 in honor 
of John Clayton, an American botanist and correspondent, who 
wrote, in 1743, a flora of Virginia. It was first figured by Plu- 
kenet in his Phytographia in 1691. There are about twenty-five 

* Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 

91 



92 

species of Claytonia known to grow in northern North America, 
of which three occur in the eastern United States, one of these 
with broader leaves, C. caroliniana Michx., having about the 
same range as C. virginica, from Nova Scotia southward along 
the Alleghanies to Georgia and Texas. 

They belong to the Purslane family, or Portulacaceae, with 
which they agree in their fleshy leaves, and flowers that bloom 
for a short time. The family is a large one, but the plants are 
usually small, few of them with showy flowers like Portulaca 
grandiflora, which occasionally escapes from cultivation. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 




■i> v^^^ 



\ 



■>.=^~- 



"WILD PINK" 
(Silene caroliniana Walt.) 



[Reprinted from Journal OF the New York Botanical Garden, July, 1912.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 
3. "Wild Pink" (Silene car oliniana Walt.). 

(With Plate XCVII.) 

Before the trees cast much shade, while their greens are still 
so exquisitely fresh and varied, a bright flash of color will attract 
the eye to the Wild Pink, growing in hilly places on rocks or often 
in their cracks and crevices with the Saxifrage. The beautiful 
rose pink and size of its flowers renders it very conspicuous, for 
it often makes a large patch or cushion with a number of stems 
about six to ten inches high, each bearing from three to five 
showy flowers more than an inch across. Each petal is wedge- 
shaped, with a long, pale white, basal claw enclosed in the tubular, 
5-notched calyx and crowned at the summit of each claw by 
two erect, white appendages. The stamens are immersed in the 
tube, ten in number, five long and five short with purple anthers 
and slender white filaments attached at the base of the ovary 
which terminates in three short styles. The pod is stipitate, 
developing in the upper half of the withered calyx, splitting at 
apex into six recurved segments. The seeds are borne on a 
central column and are small and numerous, kidney-shaped and 
brown, with a rough surface. 

The whole plant is viscid with glandular hairs forming a ciliate 
margin to the leaves, which are opposite, clasping at base a 
swollen joint of the stem; usually each stem has three pairs of 

1 Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes' Fund for the Preservation of Native 
Plants. 

109 



no 

leaves decreasing in size upward. The basal shoots have longer 
leaves, all gracefully recurved, and forming a crowded cluster 
at the summit of a long strong fibrous tap-root, which often 
penetrates deep down into some crevice and breaks off when 
uprooted. For this reason the plant frequently survives, in spite 
of its showy blossoms, though it is not abundant any longer, 
where it is frequently picked. 

The Wild Pink was described by Thomas Walter in his Flora of 
Carolina in 1788, and redescribed by Andr4 Michaux in 1803 as 
Silene Pennsylvanica. It often grows in sandy or rocky soil on 
the borders of woods from Maine to Georgia in the Eastern States, 
along the Alleghanies, and flowers from April to June. 

It belongs to the pink family or Caryophyllaceae a large family 
of about seventy genera and over 1,500 species, which are widely 
distributed, mostly in temperate regions. The generic name 
Silene was given by Linnaeus in 1753 in reference to the viscid 
hairs and about 250 species are known of which many are showy 
graceful plants, the showiest perhaps being the Fire-pink, Silene 
virginica, and the most graceful, the Starry Campion, Silene 
stellata. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



'1 


■ A 








• . 1, 




'O. il) 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
IV. WILD COLUMBINE 



ELIZABETH G. BRITtON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 
13 : 123-124. August 1912. 



Journal of the New York Botanical Garden. Plate XCVIII. 




WILD COLUMBINE. 



[Reprinted from Journal of the New York Botanical Garden, Aug., 1912.J 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.i 

4. "Wild Columbine" {Aquilegia canadensis L.). 

(With Plate XCVIU.) 

Nodding in the cool winds of spring-time, and so lightly poised 
on its slender stems, that it is almost impossible to take its 
photograph, the wild columbine adorns the rocks and ledges in 
May with its gay, red and yellow blossoms and occasionally is 
found in fields at middle elevations where it blooms until July. 
The flowers are pendent, about 1-2 inches long, bright red, the 
five short red sepals overlapping five tubular spurs which ter- 
minate below in thickened honey-sacs and broaden out above 
into five short yellow petals attached around a long-exserted, 
cluster of slender yellow stamens, about fifty in number. These 
are attached in five rows to a disc at the base of the ovaries, 
which are five in number and hairy with five long slender styles; 
they develop into five follicles with long spreading points. Each 
follicle contains about fifteen shining black seeds attached along 
the ventral suture. 

The basal leaves are pale green beneath, three-parted and each 
leaflet again divided into three, toothed lobes; smaller, short- 
stalked, simpler leaves also grow on the flower stalks and diminish 
into bracts above. The stems vary in height from one to two 
feet and are smooth or slightly hairy above. The root is fibrous 
and easily uprooted and for this reason the plant largely depends 
on its seeds for reproduction and is likely to be quickly exter- 

' Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 



124 

minated on account of Its showy flowers. Occasionally plants 
are found with pale yellow blossoms growing among the normal 
ones. 

It ranges from Nova Scotia to Northwest Territory south to 
Florida and Texas and ascends to high altitudes in the Alle- 
ghanies and the Rocky Mountains. 

It was first described and figured by Cornuti in 1635 and was 
called Aqtiilegia canadensis by Linnaeus in 1753. The generic 
name refers to a fancied resemblance of the spurs to the talons 
of an eagle; on this account and the wide range of the genus 
throughout the United States, it has been strenuously advocated 
for the honor of being called the national flower. About fifteen 
species of Aquilegia are known from the United States, ranging 
through the Rocky Mountains into Mexico and the western 
states; all have showy flowers varying from white to yellow and 
blue, and are greatly prized in cultivation. 

This genus belongs to the crowfoot family, Ranunculaceae, 

of which about thirty-five genera and one thousand and fifty 

species are distributed throughout the temperate regions of the 

world. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION 
q. "BIRD'S-FOOT VIOLET" 



ELIZABETH G. BRITTON 



Reprinted, without change of paging, from the Journal of the New York Botanical Garden 
13: 135-136. September 1912. 




BIRD'S-FOOT VIOLET' 

(Viola pedata L.) 



[Reprinted from Journal of the New York Botanical Garden, Sept., 1912.] 



WILD PLANTS NEEDING PROTECTION.^ 

5. "Bird's-foot Violet" (Viola pedata L.). 

After the spring is well advanced, and most of the other 
violets have been in bloom for nearly two weeks, the bird-foot 
violet comes to show how lovely a violet can be! Its flowers are 
larger and more delicate in color than any other of our wild 
species, the petals spread with a jaunty air, like a pansy, and 
vary in color from deep violet to pale lavender or white. They 
stand above the leaves on long stout pedicels and when 
growing in masses, as they used to on the Hempstead Plains of 
Long Island and Todt Hill on Staten Island, are as showy as any 
of the Alpine violets of Europe, comparing favorably with the 
long-spurred pansy of the Alps, Viola calcarata. 

The leaves give the plant its specific and common name from a 
fancied resemblance to a bird's foot. They are palmately 
divided almost to the base, into narrow segments which are entire, 
or again divided into 3-5 wedge-shaped subdivisions. There is 
great variability in the shape and size of the leaves and they also 
vary from nearly smooth to quite hairy. The rootstocks are 
erect and stout, scaly above, and bear a large number of leaves 
and flowers on each, so that the temptation is to pull up the 
whole plant at once. When growing luxuriantly, they sometimes 
reach a foot in height with a dozen or more flowers open at once. 
The leaf-stalks and pedicels are tinted with purple and vary from 
2 to 6 inches or more in length. The two upper petals are bent 
backward over the short spur, the two lateral ones are spreading 

' Illustrated by the aid of the Stokes Fund for the Preservation of Native Plants. 

135 



136 

and the lower is broader and keeled, paler and veined with dark 
purple stripes, the base projecting to form a spur, in which a 
fragrant honey is found. The stamens are five, the two lower 
ones spurred, and all bear an orange-colored prolongation beyond 
the anthers, which project and surround the green club-shaped 
stigma, with a very small central stigmatic surface. The ovary 
is superior, one-called, three-angled, three-parted when ripe and 
bears the seeds in three rows on the walls. The five sepals also 
are unequal, thickened at base and auricled. The peculiar 
structure of the stamens and the fact that two of them have 
claws extending down into the honey-bearing spur are evidently 
aids in the fertilization by insects, and many of the violets are 
known to hybridize. 

Viola pedata was named by Linnaeus in 1753 in his Species 
Plantarum but it was first described and figured by Plukenet in 
1 69 1 as " Viola virginiana tricolor, foliis multifidis, cauhculo 
aphylla." In the vicinity of Washington, D. C, and Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania, the form known as hicolor, in which the two upper 
petals are dark purple, is more common. About one hundred 
and fifty species of violets are known from all the temperate 
parts of the globe. A few occur at high altitudes in the tropics. 
The Violaceae comprise fifteen genera and three hundred species, 
widely distributed ; some of them are trees. 

Elizabeth G. Brixton. 