
HI 


■ 



i 




Ex LlBRIS 

The Pennsylvania 
Horticultural Society 



ELSA FORT 

6123 Cedar Avenue 

Merchantville 8, New Jersey 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2011 with funding from 

LYRASIS Members and Sloan Foundation 



http://www.archive.org/details/americanflowerga1852buis 



AMERICAN 

FLOWER-GARDEN DIRECTORY : 

CONTAINING 

PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE CULTURE OF PLANTS, 

IN 

THE FLOWER-GARDEN, HOT-HOUSE, GREEN-HOUSE, 
ROOMS, OR PARLOUR-WINDOWS, 

FOR EVERY MONTH IN THE YEAR. 

WITH 

A DESCRIPTION OF THE PLANTS MOST DESIRABLE IN EACH, THE NATURE 

OF THE SOIL AND SITUATION BEST ADAPTED TO THEIR GROWTH, 

THE PROPER SEASON FOR TRANSPLANTING, ETC. 

WITH 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR ERECTING 

% lat-lmi» ; tew-lmitt, niiu Xntjing rnit 

THE WHOLE 

ADAPTED TO EITHER LARGE OR SMALL GARDENS. 

WITH INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARING THE SOIL, PROPAGATING, 
PLANTING, PRUNING, TRAINING, AND FRUITING 

THE GRAPE VINE, 

WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE BEST SORTS FOR CULTIVATING 
IN THE OPEN AIR. 



ROBERT BUIST, 

NURSERYMAN AND SEED-GROWER. 

if If 1 1) ISliition, toftij jtfumetous gltiintfons. 



PHILADELPHIA: 
A. HART, late CAREY & HART. 

1852. 



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1S51, 

BY A. HART, LATE CARET AND HART, 

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. 



ffl<f 



\ l 



$ 



C. S H E K M A X, P R I N T E R. 



9984 
EEHom 



INTRODUCTION. 



V \ 



We are again called upon to present to the public the 
fifth edition of this popular work on the Culture of 
Flowers — a taste that is now widely disseminating itself; 
in fact, a knowledge of which is requisite before a refined 
education is completed. We boldly and fearlessly say that 
no country has made such rapid advancement in the art and 
science of Horticulture in so short a period as the United 
States. Wherever the taste prevails, it diffuses a peace and 
harmony among its participants without either symbol or 
mystery. In this edition, a feast of new materials has been 
served up ; entire lists have been cancelled and replaced with 
those of newer and finer forms and habits ; extraneous mat- 
ter and plants of indifferent character are dropped. The 
great and successful adaptation of Hot water to Horticultural 
purposes is explicitly described, and to those who wish to ex- 
amine the results, we say " Come and see." A new and dis- 
tinct list of hardy Evergreens has been added, and a new 
chapter on the ever-to-be-admired ROSE, and every im- 
provement in the art up to this present time introduced. 

True, we have not dilated on the wonderful effects of 
electricity upon vegetation, nor have we been extravagant 
in the results of guano in the growth of plants. With re- 
gard to the former, the capability of its reduction to general 
practice has yet to be proven — and the latter has to be 



IV INTRODUCTION. 

cautiously used, and even then its beneficial effects are not 
universal. However, it can in a liquid state be used to 
advantage on almost any plant, especially those of -strong 
habits, such as the Hose, Geranium, Fuchsia, Heliotrope, 
Chrysanthemum, &c. . To such, the following proportions 
will be very beneficial : 1 lb. of guano to 5 galls, of water ; 
after standing 12 or more hours, can be used in the routine 
of watering once a week or even once in two weeks ; but 
to plants that have more delicate and silky rootlets, such as 
Epacris, Erica, Azalea, &c, the liquid must be reduced one- 
half. 

Our descriptions of plants have been conveyed more with 
the view of giving an idea of their character to the general 
reader than an accurate botanical synopsis, which would 
have been known to the botanist alone. All that wc have 
described and recommended have, with a few exceptions, 
passed under our own observation, and are such as are 
worthy of cultivation, either for beauty of flower, foliage, or 
habit, together with those celebrated in arts and medicine. 
Many may, possibly, have passed unobserved, either from 
not being very generally known or difficult to obtain; but 
in no case has there been suppression, from business preju- 
dices. Where the words " our collections" occur, they are 
meant for those of the country generally. 

All our observations have been guided by dint of practice ; 
and, although others may differ, this is designedly and pro- 
fessedly given as the result of our own experience. The 
plan laid down is our own routine of culture ; the soils are 
those which we adopt; but, at the same time, conceding that 
every art and profession is subject to improvement, and none 
more so than American horticulture. The table of soils was 
originally constructed at the expense of much investigation 
and labour, and has, also, in this edition, undergone consider- 
able improvement. To every one that has but a single plant 



INTRODUCTION. V 

it will be found invaluable. Althougb the publications in 
Europe on Gardening and Floriculture are profuse, yet many 
of their directions, when practised in the United States, 
prove almost a dead letter. Not so with their architectural 
and horticultural designs. The estates of the wealthy are 
susceptible of great improvement ; they want more of the 
picturescpie, and (to use the words of the veteran pioneer of 
horticulture) gardenesque effect, to relieve their premises 
from the monotonous erections and improvements which 
seem to govern all. On culture, a work adapted to the cli- 
mate must (and no other can) be the guide in this country : 
on this account, a work like the present has been a deside- 
ratum to aid the very rapid advancement of the culture of 
flowers among the intelligent of our flourishing republic. 

ROBERT BUIST. 

Philadelphia, February, 1852. 



PREFACE 



TO THE FIKST EDITION. 



This volume owes its existence principally to the repeated 
requests of a number of our fair patrons and amateur sup- 
porters, whose inquiries and wishes for a practical manual 
on Floriculture at last induced us to prepare a work on the 
subject. That now offered is given unaffectedly and simply 
as a plain and easy treatise on this increasingly interesting 
subject. It will at once be perceived that there are no pre- 
tensions to literary claims — the directions are given in the 
simplest manner — the arrangement made as lucidly as was 
in our power — and the whole is presented with the single 
wish of its being practically useful. How far our object has 
been attained, of course our readers must judge. Nothing 
has been intentionally concealed ; and all that is asserted is 
the result of minute observation, close application, and an 
extended continuous experience from childhood. We pre- 
tend not to infallibility, and are not so sanguine as to declare 
our views the most perfect that can be attained. But we 
can so far say that the practice here recommended has been 
found very successful. 

Some, very probably, may be disappointed in not having 
the means of propagating as clearly delineated as those of 
culture ; but to have entered into all the minutiae connected 



Vlll PREFACE. 

therewith would have formed materials for two volumes 
larger than the present. We might have described that 
branch, as it has already been done in works published both 
on this continent and in Europe. In one of the former, it is 
said " You may now propagate many kinds {Exotic Plants) 
by suckers, cuttings, and layers, which should be duly at- 
tended to, particularly such as are scarce and difficult to be 
obtained." And the directions given in one of the most ex- 
tensive works in Europe on the propagation of an extensive 
genus varied in character and constitution, ran thus : " Cut- 
tings of most kinds will strike root. From the strongest- 
growing kinds, take off large cuttings at a joint, and plunge 
them in a pot of sand under a hand-glass in the bark bed. 
Of the smaller kinds, take younger kinds and put them 
under a bell-glass, also plunged in heat. The sooner the 
plants are potted off after they are rooted the better." 

Such instructions to the inexperienced are imperfect and 
unavailing, which, we flatter ourselves, is not the character 
that will attach to the present work. We are well aware 
that there are persons who, to show their own superior abili- 
ties, may cavil and say that there is nothing new. To such 
critics it may be answered, if arranging, simplifying, digest- 
ing and rendering Floriculture attainable by the humblest 
capacity, with useful lists and tables on a plan quite novel, 
as we believe, offer nothing new, it may at least be called 
an improvement. However, we submit all to a generous 
public, to whom we are already under many obligations. 

HIBBERT & BUIST. 

Philadelphia, April 18th, 1832. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Flower-garden, laying out a 



PAGE 

13 



JANUARY. 



Of framing, 
Of pruning, 



17 

18 



FEBRUARY. 



Of pruning, . 

Of planting shrubs, 

Of hyacinths, &c, 



19 
21 
24 



MARCH. 

Of framing, 

List of choice annuals for hot-bed, 
List of choice hardy annuals, 
Box-edgings, 
Grass and other edgings, 
List of hardy biennials, 
List of hardy perennials, 
Bulbous roots, 

Carnations, pinks, primroses, &c, 
Auriculas, 

Ranunculus and anemone, 
Roses, 
Roses, climbing, 

Deciduous, ornamental flowering shrubs, 
Grass-plats and walks, . 
Gravel-walks, 

Of grafting, .... 

1 



25 
26 
29 
31 
32 
33 
35 
47 
47 
48 
49 
49 
53 
53 
54 
50 
56 



CONTENTS. 



APRIL. 



Annuals, 

Biennials and perennials, . 

Roses, . 

Hybrid Chinese roses, 

Select list of Chinese roses, 

Hybrid roses, striped, spotted, or marbled 

Perpetual roses, 

Hybrid perpetual roses 

Grafting roses, 

Bourbon roses, 

Bengal roses, . 

Tea rose, . 

Noisette roses, 

Musk roses, 

Climbing roses, 

Microphylla roses, 

Climbing plants, 

Deciduous shrubs, 

Of planting evergreen shrubs, 

Care of choice bulbs, 

Anemones and ranunculus, 

Character of a fine ranunculus 

Auriculas, 

Character of a fine auricula, 

Carnations, pinks, &c, 

Character of a polyanthus, 

Heart's ease or pansy, 

Gladiolus or sword lily, 

Jacoboea lily, . 

Tiger flower, 

Walks, 

Evergreen hedges, 

Box-edgings, 

General care of plants coming into flower, 



PAGE 

58 
58 
59 
59 
59 
61 
61 
63 
64 
65 
66 
69 
72 
74 
75 
78 
80 
83 
84 
85 
87 
87 



89 
90 
92 
92 
93 
93 
94 
95 
90 



MAY. 

Dahlia, propagation of, by cuttings, 

grafting, 

Dahlias, list of, 
Dahlia, character of, 
Annuals, hardy and tender, 
Care of hyacinths and tulip, 
Anemones and ranunculus, 
Tuberose and amaryllis, . 



97 
98 
100 
103 
104 
105 
105 
105 



CONTENTS. 



Auriculas, polyanthus, and primrose, 
Double wallflower, 
General observations, 



TAOK 

106 
106 
106 



JUNE AND JULY. 



Holland bulbs, . 

autumn flowering bulbs, . 

Carnations and pinks, . 

laving of, 

Budding roses, . 
Of watering, 



107 
107 
108 
109 
110 
112 



AUGUST. 



Evergreen hedges, 
Carnations and pinks, 
Bulbous roots, . 
Sowing seeds of bulbous roots, 



112 
113 
113 
114 



SEPTEMBER. 



Of dahlias, 

General care of plants in pots, 
Beds for bulbous roots, 
General observations, 
Sowing and saving seeds, 



114 
115 

115 

115 
116 



OCTOBER. 

Of planting bulbous and tuberous roots, 
Of planting and transplanting, 
Grass and gravel-walks, 
Planting evergreens, 
General observations, 



116 
121 
121 
122 
122 



NOVEMBER. 

Dahlias, ..... 

Tuberoses, tigridias, and amaryllis, 
Erythrinas, ..... 

Primrose, polyanthus, and daisies, 

Choice carnations, pinks, pansies, and auriculas, 

Of protecting plants in the garden, 

Protection of seedling bulbs, . . 

Of planting deciduous trees and shrubs, . 

General observations, .... 



. 122 


123 


. 123 


124 


. 124 


125 


. 125 


125 


. 126 



Xll CONTENTS. 



DECEMBER. 

PAGE 

General observations, ..... 126 



HOT-HOUSE. 

CO'STRrCTIOX OF A HOT-HOUSE,' .... 127 

JANUARY. 

Of firing and fuel, . ..... 134 

Of watering the plants, . . . . .135 

Of insects — their destruction, .... 136 

Of cleansing plants, house, &c, . ... . 139 

FEBRUARY. 

Of insects, &c, ...... 141 

Of repotting plants, . . . . . .142 

Of cleansing plants, house, &c, .... 143 

MARCH. 
Of repotting plants, ...... 144 

APRIL. 

Repotting cacti, &c, ..... 145 

MAY. 

Of repotting plants, &c, . 146 

Of bringing out the hot-house plants, . . . 174 

Succulent plants, as cacti, &c, . . . .175 

JUNE AND JULY. 

General observations, ..... 176 

AUGUST. 

Repotting, ....... 177 

Of painting, repairing, aud cleansing the house, . 177 

SEPTEMBER. 

Dressing the plants, ...... 177 

Of taking in the plants, ..... 178 

General observations, . . . . . .178 



CONTENTS. 



Xlll 



General observations, 



OCTOBER. 



PAGE 

179 



Of air and water, 
General observations, 



NOVEMBER. 



180 
181 



Of shutters, 
Of bulbous roots, 
General observations, . 
Epiphyte, or air plants, 



DECEMBER. 



181 
182 
182 
183 



GREEN-HOUSE. 



Construction of gkeex-house, 



185 



JANUARY. 



Of watering, 

Camellia japonica, 

Of oranges, lemons, &c, . 

Of cape bulbs, . 

Of hyacinths and other bulbs, 



187 
187 
188 
188 
189 



F E B R U A R Y. 



Of oranges and lemons, 
Of cape bulbs, 
Camellia japonica, 
Of shifting, 
Of cleansing, &c, 



190 
190 
191 
192 
193 



MARC FT. 

Of watering, 

Of oranges, lemons, &c, 

Myrtles, oleanders, &c, 

Geraniums, .... 

Herbaceous plants, 

Of cape bulbs, &c, 

Repotting, .... 

Of enarching, or grafting by approach, 



194 
194 
195 
195 
196 
196 
196 
259 



CONTENTS. 



APRIL. 



Watering, ....... 261 

Oranges and lemons, ...... 262 

Myrtles and oleanders, ..... 263 

Geraniums, . • . . . . . . 263 

Flowering plants, ...... 264 

Insects, ....... 264 

Flowering stocks, ...... 265 

m a y. 

Watering, . . . . . .266 

Of bringing out the green-house plants, . . . 266 

Repotting plants, ...... 267 

Camellias, ....... 269 

Cape bulbs, . . . . . .269 

JUNE AND JULY. 

General observations, ..... 269 

AUGUST. 

Geraniums, . . . . . . .270 

Oranges and lemons, ..... 271 

Pruning oranges and lemons, ..... 272 

Repotting plants, ...... 273 

General observations, . . . . . .275 

SEPTEMBER. 

Of watering, . . . . . . 276 

Preparing for taking in the plants, .... 276 

Stocks and wallflowers, ..... 276 

Chrysanthemums, ...... 277 

Cape and Holland bulbs, ..... 277 

OCTOBER. 

Of taking in and arranging the plants, . . . 283 

Of repotting, ...... 2S4 

Camellias, ....... 2S1 

Sowing camellia seed, ..... 280 

NOVEMBE It. 

Of air and water, . . . . . .284 

Of tender bulbs, ...... 285 

General observations, ...... 285 



CONTENTS. XV 

DECEMBER. 

PAGE 

Bulbous roots, ...... 28G 



ROOMS. 

Treatment of plants in rooms, .... 287 

J A N D A R Y. 

Watering, ....... 289 

Of camellia japonica, ..... 290 

Of insects, fee., . . . . . . 290 

Of bulbous roots in general, .... 291 

FEBRUARY. 
General observations, ..... 292 

MARCH. 
Flowering plants, ...... 294 

APRIL. 

Directions for plants brought from the green-house, . . 295 

Flowering plants, ..... 296 

Bringing plants out of the cellar, .... 296 

MAY. 

Cape bulbs, ...... 298 

Repotting, ....... 298 

JUNE AND JULY. 
General observations, ..... 298 

AUGUST. 
General observations, ...... 299 

SEPTEMBER. 
General observations, ..... 300 

OCTOBER. 

Of bulbous roots, . . . . . .301 

General observations, ..... 302 



XVI CONTENTS. 



NOVEMBER. 

PAGE 

General observations, ...... 302 

DECEMBER. 

Roses, ....... 303 

Camellias, ....... 304 



CULTURE OF THE GRAPE VINE. 

Aspect, ....... 308 

On soil, ....... 308 

On the propagation of vines, .... 311 

On erections for the support and protection of the vines in 

out-door culture, . . . . . 314 

Of transplanting the vine, . . . . 316 

On pruning, . . . . ... . 318 

On manure, . . . . . • . 819 

Descriptive catalogue of grapes most suitable for open air 

culture, . . . . . .320 



Table of soils, ...... 332 



LISTS. 



Hardy evergreens, ...... 325 

deciduous trees and shrubs, . . . 328 



THE 



AMERICAN FLOWER-GARDEN 
DIRECTORY. 



ON LAYING OUT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 

The Flower-Garden is chiefly devoted to the cultivation of 
showy flowering plants, shrubs, and trees, either natives of 
this country or those of a foreign clime : it is a refined ap- 
pendage to a country seat, " suburban" villa, or city resi- 
dence ; every age has had its principles of taste, and every 
country its system of gardening. Our limits do not permit 
us to enter minutely into the details of any of these sys- 
tems; but a few hints may not be out of place to those whose 
design is the laying out or improvement of the garden. 
The Italian style is characterized by broad terraces and pa- 
rallel walks, having the delightful shade and agreeable fra- 
grance of the orange and the myrtle. Terraces may be ad- 
vantageously adopted to surmount steep declivities ; and, if 
judiciously laid out, would convert a sterile bank into a 
beautiful promenade, or choice flower-garden. 

The French partially adopt the above system, interspers- 
ing it with parterres and figures of statuary work of every 
character and description. When such is well designed and 
neatly executed, it has a lively and interesting efiect; but 
now the refined taste says these vagaries are too fantastic, 
and entirely out of place. A late writer says of Dutch gar- 
dening, that it " is rectangular formality :" they take great 
pride in trimming their trees of yew, holly, and other ever- 



11 ON LAYING OCT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 

greens, into every variety of form, such as mops, moons, hal- 
berds, chairs, &c. In such a system, it is indispensable to 
order that the compartments correspond in formality, nothing 
being more offensive to the eye than incongruous mixtm-es 
of character. 

The beauty of English gardening consists in an artful 
imitation of nature, and is consequently much dependent on 
aspect and locality. It is a desideratum, where wood and 
water can be combined with the flower-garden, and the prac- 
tical eye can dispose of an object to advantage by interspers- 
ing shrubbery and walks, that the combined objects form an 
agreeable whole. They are not to be disposed with a view 
to their appearance in a picture, but to the use and enjoy- 
ment of them in real life. 

We will now endeavour to give an explicit exposition of a 
system adapted to our variable climate of extreme heat and 
excessive cold. Where choice of aspects can be obtained, 
preference should be given to a southeast or east; but if 
not, south or southwest, and, if possible, sheltered by ris- 
ing ground or fall-grown woods from the northwest and 
north. But to lay down directions for a flower-garden is not 
a little difficult, seeing that there cannot be any given area 
or any description of local circumstances applicable to all 
situations. A good soil is the sure foundation on which to 
rear the grand floral superstructure, and the most genial is a 
sandy loam : I mean by sandy loam a soil which contains 
from one-sixth to one-tenth of sand ; and if on a gravelly or 
sandy bottom, so much the better. Where the general sur- 
face is gently undulating, it will greatly add to the beauty of 
arrangement ; if access to a spring can be obtained, it will 
prove a desideratum in completing the whole : it can be 
available for a fish-pond or an aquarium, or can be convert- 
ed into a swamp for the cultivation of many of our most 
beautiful and interesting native plants, such as Habanaria, 
Lilium, Sarracenia, Dionea, &c, and on the margin of which 
(if partially shaded) can be planted the beautiful varieties of 
Azaleas, and the splendid flowering Rhododendron, which, 
by the by, are almost entirely neglected in all our floral deco- 
rations. With many, the arrangement of a flower-garden 
is rather a matter for the exercise of fancy, than one calling 
for the application of refined taste : true, it may be said 
there is no mathematical law to guide the designer, so that 



ON LAYING OUT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 15 

if be avoid incongruity of arrangement the end is accom- 
plished. But, in commencing these operations, a design 
should be kept in view that will tend to expand, improve, 
and beautify the situation ; not, as we too frequently see it, 
the parterre and borders with narrow walks up to the very 
household entrauce : such is decidedly bad taste, unless com- 
pelled for want of room. For perspicuity, admit that the 
area to be enclosed should be from one to three acres, a cir- 
cumambient walk should be traced at some distance within 
the fence, by which the whole is enclosed; the inferior walks 
should partly circumscribe and intersect the general surface 
in an easy, serpentine, and sweeping manner, and at such 
distances as would allow an agreeable view of the flowers 
when walking for exercise. Walks may be in breadth from 
three to twenty feet, although from four to ten feet is gene- 
rally adopted ; and, to have these dry and pennanent, those 
that are to be much used should have six to eight inches of 
the bottom soil dug out in a concave manner, and in the 
centre of the concave dig out a trench of about nine inches 
square, to form a drain, which may be made with brick or 
filled with rough stone, and the concave may be filled with 
refuse of buildings or broken stone within three inches of 
the desired height, which should be covered with gravel, and 
then firmly rolled with a heavy roller. Where the gravel 
cannot be obtained, sand may be used, mixed with a few 
small stones to bind it, but such needs very repeated rolling. 
Walks, such as described, when completely finished, will last 
for ages ; but many will not be disposed to go to such ex- 
pense; to those we say use tanner's bark, which is very 
cheap, and accessible to all. The outer margin of the gar- 
den should be planted with the largest trees and shrubs ; the 
interior arrangement may be in detached groups of shrub- 
bery and parterres. In order that the whole should not 
partake of a uniform and graduated character, it should be 
broken and diversified by single trees planted in the turf, or 
arising in scattered groups from a base of shrubs. In some 
secluded spot, rock-work or a fountain, or both, may be 
erected; the foundation of the former should consist of 
mounds of earth, which will answer the purpose of more 
solid erections, and will make the stones go farther : rocks 
of the same kind and colour should be placed together, and 
the greatest possible variety of character, size, and form 



16 ON LAYING OUT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 

should be studied, the whole showing an evident and well- 
defined connection. These erections generally are stiff, arti- 
ficial, disjointed masses, and often decorated with plants 
having no affinity to their arid location. The undertaking, 
when well completed, will present a field of varied and in- 
teresting study, and more than compensate for the labour 
and expense bestowed upon it. If it is desired that the flower- 
garden should be a botanical study, there should be some 
botanical arrangement adopted. 

The Linneean system is the most easily acquired. A 
small compartment, laid out in beds, might contain plants of 
all the twenty-four classes, and a few of all the hardy orders, 
which do not exceed one hundred. Or, to have their natu- 
ral characters more assimilated, the Jussieuean system could 
be carried into effect by laying down a grass-plat to any 
extent above one quarter of an acre, and cut therein small 
figures to contain the natural families, which, of hardy plants, 
we do not suppose would exceed one hundred and fifty. The 
difficulties of this arrangement are, that many of the cha- 
racters are imperfectly known, even to the most scientific. 
(See Professor Lindley's Introduction to Botany.) All the 
large divisions should be intersected by small alleys, or paths, 
about one and a half or two feet wide. When there is not 
a green-house attached to the flower-garden, there should be, 
at least, a few sashes of framing, or a forcing pit, to bring 
forward early annuals, &c, for early blooming. These 
should be situate in some spot detached from the garden by 
a fence of Roses, trained to trellises. Chinese Arbor vitae, 
Privet, or even Madura, make excellent fences, and, when 
properly trimmed, are very ornamental : they require to be 
neatly and carefully clipped with shears every September. 
In the Southern States, Noisette, Bourbon, and China Boses, 
with a profusion of Swcetbriar, would make the most beauti- 
ful of all fences, and could be very easily obtained : a fence 
three hundred feet long would only cost about one hundred 
and twenty dollars. Frames for forcing should be made of 
plank two inches thick, and well put together ; the sash 
should be from five to seven feet long, and from three to four 
feet wide, and filled with six by eight glass. In the framing- 
ground should be kept the various soils required for plants, 
and also various characters of manure at all times ready 
for use, the whole in regular heaps, and kept free from 



Jan.'] OF FRAMING, ETC. 17 

weeds. — Having given these brief outlines of a flower-garden, 
we now proceed to give monthly directions for planting and 
keeping the same in order. 



JANUARY. 

If the covering of the beds of choice bulbs, herbaceous 
plants, or tender shrubs, has been neglected last month, let 
it be done forthwith. The season is now precarious, and 
delays are dangerous. For pai'ticular directions, see Decem- 
ber. Any bulbous roots that have been kept out of the 
ground, should be planted immediately, according to direc- 
tions in October. Some writers have recommended keeping 
some of the bulbs until this month, in order to have a con- 
tinued succession. Experience will prove the inefficiency of 
the plan, and will satisfactorily show that the difference is 
almost imperceptible, while the flowers are very inferior, 
and much degenerated; and, in place of having "a long-con- 
tinued succession of bloom/' there appear, along with your 
finest specimens, very imperfect flowers, calculated to discou- 
rage the admirers of these "gaudy" decoratives of our flower- 
gardens. Whereas, every art employed should be to the 
advancement and perfection of nature. 



OF FRAMING, ETC. 

The plants and roots that are in frames, should be protect- 
ed with straw, mats, and boards, and the frame surrounded 
with litter, or leaves, or, what is more advisable, banked 
with turf — the former being a harbour for mice and other 
vermin. For full directions, see December. Under this 
head, the plants, such as Auriculas, Polyanthus, Daisies, 
Carnations, Pinks, Pentstemons, Campanula pyramidalis, 
Double rochet, Double stock, or Stockgillys, Double Wall- 
jloxcer, Anemone, Ranunculus, &c, as previously enumerated 
as frame plants, will require very little water, and be sure 
to give none while they are in a frozen state. If snow 

2* 



18 OF pruning. [Jan. 

should cover them, the plants will keep in a fine state under 
it ; so never remove snow from covering cold frames, even 
suppose it should lie for weeks — nature will operate here 
herself. But when framing cannot be obtained, they will, 
in this latitude, keep tolerably, if gently covered with leaves 
or litter, using means to secure them from being blown over 
the garden. 



OF PRUNING. 

It is not advisable to carry on a general system of pruning 
in this month, in whatever state the weather may be. The 
severest frosts, generally, are yet to come, and too frequently 
what is done now in this operation has to be repeated in the 
spring, causing, at that time, work to a disadvantage ; 
because, if pruning, when done just now, is accomplished 
judiciously, whatever more is requisite to be done in the 
spring on the same bush will be injudicious. Hence, it is 
far preferable to delay it till the frost is nearly over, when 
all can be done to advantage. There are, undoubtedly, hardy 
trees and some shrubs, that may be pruned and thinned out 
at any time from the first of November to the first of March; 
such as Crataegus, Sorbus, Spirea, and even Althea, in the 
Middle States ; (the Double white Althea is very tender, 
and requires to be covered.) The tying together the loose 
branches of Juniper, Cedar, and Arbor vita? should be 
particularly attended to, as heavy snow frequently destroys 
the shape of those handsome shrubs by breaking down the 
branches, &c. — When the snow is heavy," the precaution of 
shaking it off should be resorted to. In many seasons, the 
beginning of this month is open, and admits of the operation 
of digging in open quarters, which if not done, as advised 
last month, ought not to be delayed. The fruits of it will 
appear in the mellowed state of your soil in spring. 

If there is any spare time, tallies, straight sticks, or stakes, 
may be prepared for summer use. Tie them up in neat 
bundles, which will be of great service during the hurried 
period of the year. An opportunity of this kind should 
always be laid hold of; the beneficial results will, in season, 
be displayed. 



Feb.] OF PRUNING, ETC. 19 



FEBRUARY. 

When the borders and various compartments were dug in 
the autumn, and compost, or a thin coating of well-decom- 
posed manure given, the advantage will now, in part, be ex- 
perienced. If the weather is open about the end of the 
month, the pruuing should be done with the utmost dis- 
patch, that all may be prepared for a general dressing next 
month, and let nothing be delayed which can now properly 
be accomplished, under the idea that there is time enough. 



OF PRUNING, ETC. 

Generally, about the end of the month, the very severe 
frosts are over, and when none need be apprehended that 
would materially injure hardy shrubs, they may be freely 
pruned, and the points cut of such shoots as may have been 
damaged by the winter. Most of shrubs require nothing 
more than to be thinned of straggling, irregular, and injured 
branches, or of suckers, that rise round the root, observing 
that they do not intermingle with each other. Never trim 
them up in a formal manner ; regular shearing of shrubs, 
and topiary work, have been expelled as unworthy a taste 
the least improved by reflections on beauty, simplicity, and 
grandeur of nature. 

In fact, the pruning of deciduous, hardy shrubs should be 
done in such a manner as not to be observable when the 
plants are covered with verdure. It may frequently be ob- 
served in flower-gardens, that roses and shrubs of every de- 
scription are indiscriminately cut with the shears, the Amor- 
phas, Viburnums, and Altheas sharing the same fate. 

Robinia^ Coluteas, Cytisus, Rhiis, Genistas, with several 
of the Viburnums, and many others, bear their flowers on 
the wood of last year, and, when thus sheared, afford no 
gratification in flowering. And those shrubs that thus flower 
on the shoots of last year are perhaps worse to keep in regu- 
lar order than those to which the knife can be freely applied ; 
but good management, while young, will insure handsome, 
free, flowering plants. 



20 OF PRUNING, ETC. [Feb. 

Climbing shrubs, and others that are trained against out- 
buildings, walls, or such as are sheltered thereby, and not 
now in danger of suffering by frost, may be pruned and 
dressed. These should be neatly trimmed, and the branches 
moderately thinned out, tying in all the shoots straight and 
regular". Avoid, at all times, the crossing of any shoots. 

There is not a shrub in the garden that agrees so well 
with close cutting as the AWtea, and all its varieties. These 
can be made either bushes or trees, and kept at any desired 
height. Where the wood of last year is cut to about two or 
three inches from the wood of the former year, the young 
shoots of the coming season will produce the largest and 
finest flowers, and likewise more profusely. When they have 
attained the desired height, let them be kept in the most 
natural and handsome shape that the taste of the operator 
can suggest. They will bear cutting to any degree. 

Honeysuckles, of every description, may, with all free- 
dom, be trimmed, providing the frost is not very severe. 
These are very frecpiently allowed to become too crowded 
with wood, and then superficially sheared or cut. The flowers 
would be much finer, and the bush handsomer, if they 
were regularly thinned out, divesting them of all naked and 
superfluous shoots. Of those that remain, shorten the shoots 
of last year. Where any of the honeysuckle kind has be- 
come naked at the bottom, and flowering only at the top of 
the trellis, or extremities of the shoots, one-half of the bush 
should be cut to within four inches of the ground. It will 
throw out plenty of fine, young wood, which give room for, 
and train them straight, and to the full extent, during sum- 
mer. These shoots will flower profusely the following sea- 
son, and in like manner, when thought proper, the other 
half can be cut. 

Roses of the hardy kinds (termed garden roses) that were 
not attended to in November, should, if the weather permit, 
be dressed and pruned forthwith. In small gardens, where 
these are generally attached to the walls and fences, neatness 
should be a very particular object. If any of such bushes 
have got strong and irregular, the most proper method to 
bring them to order will be to cut down each alternate shoot 
of the bush to within a few inches of the surface, thereby 
renovating it, and, in part, preserving the flowers. Those 
that are cut down will put out several luxuriant shoots, 



Feb.'] OF PLANTING SHRUBS, ETC. 21 

which must be regularly tacked in, spreading them in a fan 
shape. These, in another year, will flower well, when the 
others may go through the same operation. Thus, in two or 
three years, the bushes will have resumed a different and 
more agreeable aspect. By the above treatment, these orna- 
ments of the garden will always have a neat and healthful 
appearance, and the roses will be much finer. Where they 
are intended for the borders, they should never be allowed 
to get too high. In a border from four to sis feet, they 
ought never to exceed four feet at the back of the border, 
and in front one foot, after being pruned ; they can be kept 
down by the above method. It is not advisable to cut down 
rose bushes all at once, unless no regard is paid to flowering. 
The roses that are in grass-plats, and interspersed through 
the garden, would have a superior appearance in every 
respect, if they were kept and trimmed like small trees. 
They may be of different sizes and heights, according to the 
distance they are from the walk. A single stem may arise 
from six inches to six feet, with a head in proportion to the 
height of the stem. Where it is necessary to have them above 
two feet, and likewise to carry a good head, inoculation must 
be resorted to, which, in the months of July and August, will 
be fully treated of. All under two feet (except the weak 
growing kinds) will do on their own stems, taking care not 
to allow shoots to arise from the bottom during the summer. 
For directions for pruning climbing roses, see March and 
Api-il. 



OJT PLANTING SHRUBS, ETC. 

As soon as the frost is out of the ground, these should be 
planted, if the soil is not too wet. Where soil is binding, 
upon no consideration plant it while wet; rather defer it until 
the end of March. 

Trees and shrubs, if they are well arranged, are the chief 
ornaments, give the most pleasure, and afford the greatest 
delight that we enjoy in our gardens. Although they give 
no sort of nourishment, nor produce any edible fruits, yet 
they are particularly grateful, and conducive to our enjoy- 
ments. Our walks in summer would be oppressive, but for 
their agreeable shade ; in the fall and winter, we would be 



22 OF PLANTING SHRUBS, ETC. [Feb. 

left exposed to the chilling winds, but for the shelter they 
afford. 

Likewise, they produce a great variety of flowers, a varied 
foliage, and are standing ornaments that give no great trouble. 
In the character of screens, they are particularly useful, 
whether to hide disagreeable objects, or as a guard against 
the weather ; or, if they are planted in masses at a distance, 
they soon become agreeable objects, frequently very much 
improve the scenery of the place, become objects of utility as 
well as ornament, and, in such case, afford the highest satis- 
faction. When formed so as to exclude offices from the view 
of the house, or for sheltering the latter, or for connecting the 
house with the garden, orchard, or any similar purpose, shrubs 
are both useful and interesting. 

Where many shrubs are to be planted, the disposing of 
them properly is a matter of considerable importance to the 
future welfare of the whole ; and, whether deciduous or ever- 
greens be mixed or grouped, that is, indiscriminately planted 
together, or the evergreens planted by themselves, as is fre- 
quently done, a regular and natural arrangement is indis- 
pensable for establishing ornament. 

Arranging, no doubt, depends very much on fancy; still, 
there ought always to be plenty of evergreens planted, that 
the whole may be more cheerful in winter. 

If shrubberies were made to a great extent, the scenery 
would be much more varied and characteristic by grouping 
judiciously than by indiscriminately planting. 

However, in small flower-gardens and shrubberies, the 
latter has to be adopted. In such places, tall-growing kinds 
should never be introduced, unless merely as a screen from 
some disagreeable object, for they crowd and confuse the 
whole. The dwarf and more bushy sorts should be placed 
nearest to the eye, in order that they may conceal the naked 
stems of the others. Generally, when shrubs are planted, 
they are small ; therefore, to have a good effect from the be- 
ginning, they should be planted closer than they are intended 
to stand. When they have grown a few years, and interfere 
with each other, they can be lifted, and such as have died, 
or become sickly, replaced, and the remainder can be planted 
in some other direction. Keep them always distinct, one 
from another, in order that tiny may be the better shown 
off. But, if it is not desired that they should be more 