




NOVEMBER 2009 

The Journal of the American 
Association of Zoo Keeners, Inc. 


ANIMAl KEEPERS’ 

F O R U IVI 



ANIMAL KEEPERS’ FORUM 3601 S.W. 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 

Phone; (785) 273-9149 FAX (785) 273-1980 November 200^ 

Vol. 36, No. 11 


AKF Managing Editor; Susan D. Chan • Associate Editors: Becky Richendollar, North Carolina Zoo • Mark de 
Denus, Winnipeg, MB • Enrichment Options Column Coordinator: Julie Hartell-DeNardo, Oakland Zoo and Ric 
Kotarsky, Tulsa Zoo & Living Museum • Legislative/Conservation Outlook Column Co-Coordinators: Becky 
Richendollar, North Carolina Zoo and Greg McKinney, Philadelphia, PA • Reactions Column Coordinator: 
William K. Baker, Jr., Abilene Zoo, Abilene, TX • ATC Column Co-Cordinators: Angela Binney, Disney’s Animal 
Kingdom; Kim Kezer, Zoo New England; Jay Pratte, Zoo Atlanta • Conservation Station Co-Coordinators: 
Penny Jolly, Greater Orlando AAZK Chapter and Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter • Proofreader: 
Barbara Manspeaker, AAZK Administrative Office. 

Animal Keepers’ Forum is published monthly by the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., 3601 S.W. 29th 
Street, Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the annual publica- 
tion costs of Animal Keepers’ Forum . Postage paid at Topeka, KS. 

AAZK Executive Director: Ed Hansen, AAZK, Inc., Topeka KS 

also serves as AAZK Liaison to the Association of Zoos & Aquariums (AZA) 

AAZK Administrative Secretary; Barbara Manspeaker, AAZK, Inc., Topeka, KS 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Shane Good, Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, Cleveland, OH 44109 President 

Bob Cisneros, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112-0551 Vice President 

Tammy Root, Indianapolis Zoo, Indianapolis, IN 46222 

Gisela Wiggins, North Carolina Zoo, Asheboro, NC 27205-1425 

Penny Jolly, Disney’s Animal Kingdom, Lake Buena Vista, FL 32830-1000 


COMM1TTEES/COORD1NATORS/PRO.TECT MANAGERS 

By-laws 

Chair - Gisela A. Wiggins, North Carolina Zoo 

Grants Committee 

Chair - Shelly Roach, Columbus Zoo 

Behavioral Husbandry Committee 

Chair - Deana Walz, The Living Planet Aquarium 

Professional Development 

Melaina Wallace, Disney’s Animal Kingdom 

ICZ Coordinators 

Shane Good, Cleveland Metroparks Zoo 
and Norah Famham, Woodland Park Zoo 
MediaAVebsite 

Denise Wagner, The Phoenix Zoo, Prctject Manager 


Ethics 

Chair - Bob Cisneros, San Diego Zoo 
Awards 

Chair - Janet McCoy, The Oregon Zoo 

Annual Conferences 

Coordinator - Ed Hansen, AAZK, Inc. 

Conservation Committee 

Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter 

Bowling for . R h inos 

Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Cary, NC 

Products and Membership 

Jacque Blessington, K. C. Zoo, Project Manager 


MEMBERSHIP SERVICES 

Data Transfer Forms 


Available for download at www.aazk.org 


AAZK Publications/Logo Products 

Available through the AAZK website or from The AAZK Administrative Offices/Topeka 

o printed on Recycled Paper 


Table of Contents 

About the Cover/Information for Contributors. ......................450 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt......... ....451 - 454 

From the Executive Director. 456 

In Memorium ~ Gerald “Red” Thomas. ......................................................................................457 

AAZK, Inc. Thanks Its Chapters for Their Support .458 - 459 

Coming Events .......460 - 461 

Call For Papers for Avian Husbandry Issue.......................... ..................461 

Training Tales (Seeking Submissions). 462 

AAZK Announces New Members.... 463 

Letters to the Editor. ...464 - 465 

Crisis Management CD Now Available .466 

Enrichment Options {Humboldt Penguin Enrichment)..... ......467 - 469 

Professional Development Grant Report/Info on AAZK Grants Available .....470 

Assessing Immediate and Long-Term Effects of Environmental Enrichment: 

Implications for Welfare of African Clawless Otters {Aonyx capensis).... 471 - 476 

Care and Management of Geriatric Animals in Zoos (order info)..... 477 

Book Reviews {Bats in Captivity, Vol. 1 - Biological and Medical Aspects; Handbook of Venoms and 

Toxins in Reptiles; and Hey, Mister —Your Alligator s Loose..... 478 - 479 

ZOOTUBE on Display in 10 U.S. Zoos.... 480 

Behavior-based Bear Husbandry for Winter Denning: 

A practical application at Fortress of the Bear, Sitka, Alaska....... 482 - 486 

Conservation/Legislative Update ....487 - 492 



35th Anniversary - 1974 - 2009 

MISSION STATEMENT 
(Revised April 2009) 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

The mission of the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. is to advance excellence in the animal 
keeping profession, foster effective communcation beneficial to animal care, support deserving 
conservation projects, and promote the preservation of our natural resources and animal life. 


This month ’s cover features a drawing of Harris ’ antelope ground squirrels (Ammospermophilus harrisi) 
drawn by Marie Tester, a Docent and Research Volunteer at the Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens, 
Los Angeles, CA. This species is quite small, weighing only about one-quarterof a pound with a body length 
of about six inches. Their coats are grayish with a white stripe down each side. A white ring encircles each 
eye, giving the Harris ’antelope squirrel a spectacled appearance. They hold their three-inch long tails over 
their backs to provide shade in the dry deserts and rocky hills of the southwestern U.S. and northwestern 
Mexico areas where they live. They are diurnal and active during even the hottest part of the day, sheltering 
in burrows at night. They have a higher body temperature (97-107°F/~36-42°C) than any other non- 
sweating mammal and cool themselves by salivating. They practice “heat-dumping, ” lying on their bellies 
in the shade with their legs sprawled out to rid their bodies of excess heat. Their diet depends on where they 
live; cactus fruit and seeds, mesquite beans, and yucca seeds. They store some food in their underground 
burrows. Although mating can take place from December or January until June, peak reproductive activity 
occurs from February-March. Gestation lasts for about 30 days, and the litter size may range from 5-14. 
The average litter size is 6.5. Females give birth to only one litter per year. Newborns are naked and the 
skin is pink and somewhat transparent. In some parts of its range, the Harris ’ antelope squirrel is losing 
habitat to agriculture and other human developments. It is considered threatened in the state of California. 
The Los Angeles Zoo exhibits four of these ground squirrels and patrons enjoy watching them bounce around 
the exhibit like they ’ve been shot from tiny cannons. Thanks, Marie! 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers ’Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for publication. Articles of a 
research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the zoo professionals who serve as referees 
for AKF. No commitment is made to the author, but an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as 
possible. Lengthy articles may be separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The 
editor reserves the right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by 
the author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, selLaddressed, 
appropriately-sized envelope. Telephone, fax or email contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted as space allows. Phone 785-273-9149; FAX (785) 273-1980; email is akfeditor@ 
zk.kscoxmail.com< If you have questions about submission guidelines, please contact the Editor. 


Deadline for each regular issue is the 10th of the preceding month. 
Dedicated issues may have separate deadline dates and will be noted by the editor. 


Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the AKF staff or the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc. Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a copy of the 
reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. If an article is shown to be separately copyrighted by the 
author(s), then permission must be sought from the author(s). Reprints of material appearing in this journal 
may be ordered from the editor. Regular back issues are available for $4.00 each. Special issues may cost 
more. 


E-Mail Addresses: 

You may reach Barbara Manspeaker at AAZK Administrative Offices at: aazkoffice@zk.kscoxmaiLcom< 
You may reach Susan Chan md Animal Keepers’ Forum at: akfeditor@zk.kscoxmaiLcom< 

Mailing Address: 

AAZK, Inc., 3601 SW 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 


AAZK website address: www.aazk.org 
BFR Website: http://aazkbfr.org 


450 Animal Keepers ’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Scoops & Scuttlebutt 

Combined AAZK/ICZ Conference Quite a Gathering 

The combined conference for the American Association of Zoo Keepers and the 
International Congress on Zookeeping, held in September in Seattle, WA, was an 
amazing gathering of zoo professionals from near and far. A total of 406 delegates 
came together for nearly a week of paper sessions, workshops, zoo visits and a chance 
to interact with colleagues representing 25 countries besides the U.S. These included 
delegates from the following countries: Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Cameroon, Canada, Columbia, 
Denmark, France, Gabon, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, The Netherlands, New 
Zealand, The Phillipines, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, 
and the United Kingdom. The Puget Sound Chapter of AAZK and the Woodland Park Zoo are to be 
congratulated on hosting a stimulating and very “green” conference. AAZK appreciates all of the 
hard work by Chapter members, as well as other zoo staff and volunteers, ICZ members and many 
others for their extraordinary efforts in putting on this unique joint conference. 



Seeking Bird Photos 

We are currently planning on producing an issue of AKF dedicated to Avian Husbandry in April of 
2010. We would like to feature a four-color photo cover for this issue. Therefore, we are soliciting 
you photographers out there to submit your best and most colorful bird photos to the editorial staff 
for their consideration. There is a Call for Papers for this issue elsewhere in this issue of AKF 
that has a submission deadline of January 5, 2010. For your photo to be considered for the cover 
of this dedicated issue, it needs to be to the AKF staff by February 1, 2010. Photos should be 
high resolution (300 dpi) and may be sent as jpg or tif files attached to the editor’s email address 
(akfeditor@zk.kscoxmail.com) Those submitting should also include their name, full mailing 
address, email address and daytime or cell phone number. Photographers should also include both 
the common and scientific name of the species featured and a paragraph or two about its natural 
history. If you have questions about making a submission, please contact Susan Chan at the email 
address above or call 785-273-9149. 


Rolling With “Bowling For Rhinos” (BFRJ - from BFR Coordinator Patty Pearthree 
We had an excellent meeting at the AAZK/ICZ conference in Seattle. All three organizations 
supported by “Bowling For Rhinos” funds met with the Board and the BFR coordinator to come 
together to “grow” the BFR program. These organizations are “Lewa Wildlife Conservancy” (LWC), 
“International Rhino Foundation”(IRF) and “Action for Cheetahs”(ACK)-formerly called “Cheetah 
Conservation Fund-Kenya”. 



Our #1 BFR goal for 2010 is to have all 85 AAZK Chapters 
participate in “Bowling For Rhinos”. Don’t panic. If bowling is not 
the thing to do in your area, any type of fundraiser is welcome. Some 
chapters have been very successful with “Wii bowling”, “ Run/ 
Race for Rhinos”, ‘Rummage for Rhinos”, “Rock n’ for Rhinos”, 
“Sailing for Rhinos”. . .and the list goes on. All donations, of course 
are always welcome and count as participation. Remember, it takes 
about five consecutive years for a fundraising event to catch on 
in your community so it is important to keep rolling with BFR in 
order to be successful. 


Our #2 BFR Goal is to raise $400,000 in 2010. If we increase the overall size of the “conservation 
pie” each of the organizations we support will receive a larger amount of money. It will be tough in 
this economy but all three organizations are also feeling the effect of the economy and are in need 
of extra support more than ever. During tough times, poaching pressure increases and the cost of 
protecting wildlife increases. 


Animal Keepers Forum, VoL 36, No. 9 451 


If your Chapter has not yet turned in funds from the 2009 event, it is not too late. Please do so ASAP, 
We raised $273,000 in 2008 and it looks like 2009 will be less than $250,000. If your Chapter is able 
to make a “year-end donation” toward the 2009 BFR event, please send funds by December 1** to: 
Patty Pearthree, c/o BFR, 318 Montibello Dr., Cary, NC 27513 

Checks payable to: “AAZK, Inc-BFR” 

Indianapolis Prize Winning Conservationist Fights for Snow Leopards’ Survival 

As Vice President of Panthera and Senior Conservationist for the Wildlife Conservation Society 
< http://www.wcs.org/saving-wild-places.aspx > , George B. Schaller, Ph.D., is relentless in his pursuit 
to save endangered species across the globe. The winner of the second Indianapolis Prize credits the 
award with helping him reach some important milestones in his work to save snow leopards in 2009. 

Generous with his time and resources, Schaller used a 
portion of the $100,000 Indianapolis Prize to visit China’s 
Qinghai Province in May 2009 to help initiate snow 
leopard programs supported by Panthera, an organization 
whose mission is to conserve the world’s 36 species 
of wild cats. Most of Schaller’s work was conducted 
in the Sanjiangyuan Reserve (“Source of Three Rivers 
Reserve” — Yellow, Yangtze, Mekong), which covers 
nearly 58,000 square miles, primarily at elevations 
above 11,800 feet. In addition to assessing snow leopard 
presence and threats, the trip provided Peking University 
Ph.D. student Li Juan with the training she needs to 
start a snow leopard study this year. Schaller and Juan 
traveled more than 2,600 miles to evaluate potential study 
areas for the student’s research project, and Schaller 
will continue to mentor Juan as she pursues her Ph.D. 

While in Asia, Schaller met with representatives from 
the Snow Leopard Trust and Shan Shui, one of the leading conservation organizations in China, to 
create a new collaborative snow leopard research and conservation program. These organizations 
signed a long-term agreement that will bring much needed expertise and funding to efforts to save 
snow leopards in China, where as much as 50 percent of the remaining wild population exists. 

“George Schaller’s extensive research, fieldwork and training have been essential to 
saving snow leopards in regions of China,” said Tom McCarthy, Director of Snow Leopard 
Programs for Panthera. “I can’t think of a better use of the Indianapolis Prize funds 
than teaching future generations the urgency and necessity of wildlife conservation.” 

“The important aspects of this project for me,” added Michael Crowther, president and CEO 
of the Indianapolis Zoo, “are its collaborative and long-term nature. It’s George’s innate 
ability to bring people together and to forge alliances that overcome the short-term problems 
of political or geographic conflicts in order to serve the greater good that makes him a hero 
for me, and for the world. It seems he has again worked his magic for the snow leopards.” 

Nominees Announced for the 2010 Indianapolis Prize 

Leading animal conservationists vie for $100,000 award 

Twenty-nine animal conservationists who have dedicated their lives to saving the Earth’s endangered 
species have been nominated to receive the biennial Indianapolis Prize, the world’s leading award 
for animal conservation. The nominees’ work spans the globe, representing a range of species from 
insects to mammals, and includes amphibians, elephants, bats, wolves and sharks, among many 
others. The Nominating Committee will review the applications and select the six finalists, who 
will be announced in the spring of 2010. The Prize Jury will then determine the winner who will be 
announced in mid-2010 and honored at the next Indianapolis Prize Gala, to be held September 25, 
2010 in Indianapolis. 



452 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


In addition to receiving the $100,000 Prize, the recipient is also awarded the Lilly Medal, an original 
work of art that signifies the winner’s contributions to conserving some of the world’s most threatened 
animals. The 2008 Indianapolis Prize was awarded to legendary field biologist George Schaller, Ph.D. 
Schaller’s accomplishments span decades and continents, bringing fresh focus to the plight of several 
endangered species - from tigers in India to gorillas in Rwanda- and inspiring others to join the crusade. 

“Following in Schaller’s footsteps will not be easy, but the current nominees are exceptional,” 
said Michael Crowther, president and CEO of the Indianapolis Zoo, the organization 
responsible for initiating the conservation award. “These conservationists are all living their 
own unique and fascinating adventures that battle the odds, but achieve great victories.” 


In alphabetical order, the nominees for the 2010 Indianapolis Prize are: 

• Gerardo Ceballos, Ph.D.: (Institute de Ecologia, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico) 
Leader in designing conservation strategies for endangered species and threatened ecosystems; 
conducted the first geographically explicit analysis of patterns of population and species extinction in 
a major taxonomic group (mammals). 

• Nigel Collar, Ph.D.: (BirdLife International) Researched and compiled a unique and comprehensive 
dataset on globally threatened bird species that was published in groundbreaking regional Red Data 
Books worldwide, 

• Iain Douglas-Hamilton, Ph.D.: (Save the Elephants) Founded Save the Elephants; devotes his life 
to the cause of elephant conservation - from testifying before Congress to leading anti-poaching aid 
programs in Africa. 

• Karen Eckert, Ph.D.: (WIDECAST: Wider Caribbean Sea Turtle Conservation Network) Dedicated 
to research, multilateral marine resource management and the international conservation policies for 
sea turtles for more than three decades. 

• Ruth M. Elsey, M.D.: (Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries) Fostered programs to 
enhance the survivability and sustainability of the American alligator, in addition to parallel efforts for 
other crocodilians. 

• George Fenwick, Ph.D.: (American Bird Conservancy) Founded American Bird Conservancy; 
dedicated to creating and sustaining globally significant biodiversity reserves, tackling policy-based 
threats to birds and generating funding resources for the biodiversity community. 

• Rodney Fox: (Rodney Fox Shark Expeditions/Fox Shark Research Foundation) Miracle survivor of 
one of the world’s worst shark attacks; regarded as a world authority on Great White Shark research, 
observation and conservation, 

• Birute Mary Galdikas, Ph.D.: (Orangutan Foundation International) More than 35 years of 
advancing research on wild orangutan ecology and behavior; established rehabilitation and release 
programs and saved millions of acres of tropical rain forest in Kalimantan. 

• Paul Garber, Ph.D.: (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign) More than 30 years of dedication 
and commitment to research, conservation and educational programs involving the monkeys of Latin 
America. 

• Jack Hanna: (Columbus Zoo and Aquarium) For more than 30 years, Hanna has been the public 
face of zoos, bringing the conservation message to millions of people worldwide; passionately 
dedicated to Rwanda’s endangered animals and its people. 

• Maurice Hornocker, Ph.D.: (Selway Institute; Professor Emeritus, University of Idaho) Devoted 
his career to understanding the ecological role of wild cats and advocating for the conservation of 
large carnivores, including the first-ever field investigation of cougars. 

• Rick Hudson: (Fort Worth Zoo; International Iguana Foundation; lUCN Turtle Survival Alliance) 
Dedicated advocate for reptile conservation, including groundbreaking work with the Jamaican iguana 
and the coordination of the largest turtle rescue event in history. 

• Lisa Hywood: (Tikki Hywood Trust) Works tirelessly to preserve Zimbabwe’s wildlife - including 
captive breeding, management and monitored release of endangered species and conservation 
education in under-privileged, rural areas. 

• Rodney Jackson, Ph.D.: (Snow Leopard Conservancy) Conducted an in-depth radio-tracking study 
of snow leopards in the 1980s; dedicated to building local communities’ capacity as key players in 
conserving the species. 

• Jana Johnson, M.S., Ph.D.: (Moorpark College, The Butterfly Project) Founded The Butterfly 
Project, a center for endangered butterfly propagation and research; helped the Palos Verdes blue 
butterfly population, once presumed extinct, grow from 200 to 10,000. 

• James Earl Kennamer, Ph.D.: (National Wild Turkey Federation) Devoted leader in wild turkey 
research, scientific wildlife management and forging cooperative conservation partnerships to grow 
the wild turkey population from 1.3 million to 7 million in less than 30 years. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 453 


• Thomas H. Kunz, Ph.D.: (Boston University) For more than 50 years, has significantly and 
instrumentally contributed to the conservation and teaching of bat ecology, physiology and behavior. 

• Amanda Lollar: (Bat World Sanctuary) Established Bat World Sanctuary, the largest rehabilitation 
facility in the world dedicated exclusively to bats; created the first nutritionally sound diet for 
debilitated bats, 

• Edward Louis Jr., Ph.D., DVM: (Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo) Tireless conservation advocate of 
island biogeography, including the discovery of 30 percent of known lemurs to date. 

• Laurie Marker, D.Phil.: (Cheetah Conservation Fund) Founded the Cheetah Conservation Fund; 
led a conservation program from humble beginnings in rural Namibia to an unparalleled model for 
predator conservation. 

• Stephen McCulloch: (Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution) Created legislation to fund several 
ongoing marine mammal research and conservation programs while working to construct the first 
teaching marine mammal hospital, science and education center. 

• Rodrigo Medellin, Ph.D.: (University of Mexico) Galvanized bat research throughout Latin 
America by using a multipronged approach including research, education, population biology, 
molecular ecology and community involvement. 

• Gregory Rasmussen, Ph.D.: (Painted Dog Conservation) Diligent advocate of the critically 
endangered African wild dogs; founder of the Painted Dog Conservation, which strives to increase the 
range and numbers of wild dogs in Zimbabwe and elsewhere in Africa. 

• Patrick T. Redig, DVM, Ph.D.: (The Raptor Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Minnesota) Dedicated more than 35 years to protecting raptor populations though extensive field 
work, bench research, clinical work, professional teaching and community service. 

• Lente Lidia Roode: (Hoedspruit Endangered Species Centre) Established the Hoedspruit 
Endangered Species Centre, a nonprofit organization that provides a safe haven for orphaned and sick 
animals, complete with an education center, rescue unit and breeding program. 

• Patrick Rose: (Save the Manatee Club) Worked to help educate opponents, build coalitions and 
focus on specific protection goals for manatees, including protecting the manatee’s habitat and 
advocating for strong growth management laws. 

• Carl Safina, Ph.D.: (Blue Ocean Institute) Brought ocean conservation into the environmental 
mainstream by using science, art and literature to inspire “sea ethic.” 

• Simon Stuart, Ph.D.: (lUCN-World Conservation Union) Developed the lUCN Red List Categories 
and Criteria, which assesses the extinction risk for species. 

• Amanda Vincent, Ph.D.: (The University of British Columbia) First person to study seahorses 
underwater, document extensive commercial trade, and initiate a seahorse conservation project. 

Project Seahorse. 


New Animal Data Transfer Form is Here! Now Find It on the Web 

Do you remember the days when you were transferring an animal to a new facility and had to fill out 
three different ADT forms? You were probably wondering why some of the information on the forms 
was redundant, weren’t you? Well, the redundancy is over! We all know how busy and stressful it 
can be when transferring animals between facilities. It can be very time consuming to fill out all of 
the paper work. In 2007, the Animal Training Committee of AAZK, Inc combined all three forms 
into one easy form to use. 

The Animal Data Transfer form is a form that is used when transferring animals from one institution 
to another. All of us have the same goal: to provide the best possible care for the animals we care 
for. The information on the form provides the receiving institution staff with the right tools that 
they would need to give that animal the best care possible. This form includes all the information 
someone would need about an animal from diet to behavioral history to training and enrichment 
history. The form can be found at www.aazk.org , About Us link at top of page. Animal Data Transfer 
Form link on left side of page. 

AAZK encourages staff working with the animal prior to shipping to fill out the form. Your manager 
doesn’t have to be the one to fill it out. Most of the time, the keepers know the animal history the 
best. Any information you can give the receiving institution, no matter how small you may think it 
is, will be very helpful. 

Happy Animal Transferring! If you have any questions about the form, please contact Tammy Root, 
AAZK National Board Member, at troot@indvzoo.com . 


454 Animal Keepers ’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 



eiEfS 4\§ l9t¥lR§i 4§ 
THii 4NiDMi4L 


Working in partnership with zoos 
and aquariums, MAZURf PhD 
nutritionists develop industry 
leading products specifically for 
each species. From aardvarks 
to zebras, we work hard to give 
your animals the most of what 
they need. 

For more information on 
MAZURF pro duct S”inciuding 

nutritional analyses and research 
findings-visit www.mazuri.com 


or call l-800-ZH7~8941 for the 
location of your nearest dealer. 
Because when it comes to great 
nutrition, we’re committed to 
the health and longevity of 
every animal. 


Ma..ri 

The Exotic Animal Feeding Resource 


www.mazuri.com 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 455 


I pom ine Lxecuiive LJiPecicf 


There is never a good time to raise membership dues. 

Our Association has only increased membership fees three times in the past 25 years. 

This is a difficult decision, but one that must be made. The economy is beginning to rebound so in 
order to maintain our goals, objectives and publications, beginning on January 1, 2010, individual 
membership dues will increase by $5.00. 

Your membership is important to this Association. Beginning in 2010, AAZK will initiate a 
membership recruitment campaign in all categories. We have identified a targeted strategy for 
membership recruitment and we will be calling upon our membership to help this program to succeed. 
There are some interesting gaps that we need to fill. Did you know? 

There are over 200 AZA-accredited institutions, but less than 80 AAZK Chapters. 

In facilities where an AAZK Chapter has been established, less than 50% of those facilities are 
AAZK Institutional Members. It is estimated that less than 15% of the professional animal keepers 
in accredited institutions are members of AAZK. Associate and Affiliate membership in AAZK has 
decreased by over 100 individuals in the past two years. 

The combined membership dollars account for over 55% of our operating budget, with Chapter Fees 
covering another 30%. Increasing membership in all categories and, more importantly retaining 
those members over the course of their professional careers, is a goal that we must achieve beginning 
in 2010. With membership recruitment and retention, it is hoped that membership dues will not have 
to increase until the end of the next decade. 

Thank you for all the hard work you do in support of 
AAZK. 


AMERICAN Ed Hansen 

ExecutiveDirector 


of ZOO KEEPERS 


ASSOCIATION 




456 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


In 7t)cmortum 

Gerald ‘‘Red” Thomas 


November 25, 1936 September 26, 2009 






The American Association of Zoo Keepers lost one 
of its founding members, Gerald “Red” Thomas on 
Saturday, September 26“’. Red was a senior elephant 
keeper at the San Diego Zoo from 1962 until 1999. 


“Red Thomas was a great mentor to new keepers, 
always willing to share his knowledge ,” comments Joan 
Embery, San Diego Zoo’s Conservation Ambassador. 
“He was open to learning new ideas despite his years 
of experience. He put his ego aside, as evidenced by 
the number of times he remained behind the stage 
curtain; on the ready to lend a hand, if necessary.” 
Red worked with 
Joan on many 

Red and San Diego Animal Ambassador Joan occasions while 
Embery walk a couple of zoo residents. she educated 

guests about the 

wonderful world of animals on the “Tonight Show” starring 
Johnny Carson. 


A former Marine, Red had a quiet competence and grace under 
pressure. He didn’t have formal animal training but was good 
at doing things on the fly” noted Ron Ringer, a senior keeper at 

San Diego who 
had worked with 
Thomas. “Red 
learned on the job 
and he was good 
at everything he 
did.” 


Red Thomas, 

DickSweeney, charges at the San Diego Zoo. 
Conrad Grayson, 

Dennis Melvin 

Ken Willingham, Carl Pyle and Walter Bromley 
were the seven Founding Members of the American 
Red and one of San Diego Zoo s Koalas. Association of Zoo Keepers. The concept of a 

professional organization for animal caregivers was 
conceived in 1967 by these seven zoo keepers from 
San Diego. Their goal was to establish an organization 
that promoted professional growth for keepers and 
encourage communication between keepers from 
other institutions. Red was instrumental in forming 
this organization which, 42 years later, has grown 
into a full-scale professional organization with 
over 2400 members from almost 250 animal care 
organizations. 


Red is survived by his wife Bernandette; son Gary; 
daughters Nancy, Ellen and Barbara; step-daughters 
Annie and Kasey; brother Montey and sister Anita; as 
well as 15 grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. 
He will be missed. 

(Photos courtesy of the Zoologiocal Society of San Diego and AAZK, Inc.) 


AKF Editor Susan Chan and AAZK 
Administrative Secretary Barbara Manspeaker 
at the 1987 AAZK Conference in Milwaukee 
where the AAZK Founders were honored. 


Animal Keepers ' Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 457 


AAZK, Inc. Thanks Its Chapters for Their Support in 2009 

In 2006 the Board of Directors adopted a policy of recognizing the monetary contributions of AAZK 
Chapters to the Association. These contributions are a combination of donations, re-charter fees, and 
duty obligations forwarded to the Association. The AAZK Board of Directors and Staff would like to 
thank all of the AAZK Chapters for their support 


Platinum 
($2000 and up) 

The Greater Cleveland Area AAZK Chapter 
Utah Chapter of AAZK 


Gold 

($1000 to $2000) 

Cape May County Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Columbus AAZK Chapter 
Indianapolis AAZK Chapter 
Milwaukee County Zoo AAZK Chapter 
St. Louis AAZK Chapter 
Audubon Park AAZK Chapter 
Phoenix Chapter of AAZK 
Southern Ontario Zoo Keepers AAZK Chapter 


Silver 

($500 to $1000) 


New England Chapter of AAZK 
Greater Philadelphia AAZK Chapter 
North Carolina AAZK Chapter 
South Florida AAZK Chapter 
Birmingham Zoo Chapter of AAZK 
Memphis Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Detroit Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Lincoln Park AAZK Chapter 
Topeka Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Omaha AAZK Chapter 
Tulsa Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Greater Houston AAZK Chapter 
Rocky Mountain AAZK Chapter 
EFBC Chapter 
Puget Sound AAZK Chapter 


Rosamond Gifford Zoo AAZK Chapter 
National Capital AAZK Chapter 
Georgia AAZK Chapter 
Palm Beach Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Nashville AAZK Chapter 
Louisville Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Minnesota Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Greater Kansas City AAZK Chapter 
Sedgwick County Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Little Rock Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Dallas Zoo AAZK Chapter 
San Antonio Zoo AAZK Chapter 
San Diego AAZK Chapter 
San Francisco Bay Area Chapter of AAZK 


458 Animal Keepers’ Forum, VoL 36, No. 9 


Bronze 
(Upto $500) 


AAZK Chapter of New Bedford 
Beardsley Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Greater Baltimore Chapter of AAZK 
Jacksonville AAZK Chapter 
Lion Country Safari AAZK Chapter 
Knoxville Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Toledo Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Battle Creek AAZK Chapter 
Brookfield AAZK Chapter 
Central Illinois AAZK Chapter 
Riverside Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Oklahoma City Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Galveston Chapter of AAZK 
El Paso del Norte AAZK Chapter 
Snake River AAZK Chapter 
Tucson AAZK Chapter 
California Desert AAZK Chapter 
Honolulu Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Point Defiance AAZK Chapter 


Roger Williams Park Zoo AAZK Chapter 
The Seneca Park Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Chesapeake AAZK Chapter 
Greater Orlando AAZK Chapter 
Tampa Bay AAZK Chapter 
Jackson Zookeepers Association 
Greater Cincinnati Chapter of AAZK 
West Michigan Association of Zoo Keepers 
The Scovill Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Ozarks Chapter of the AAZK 
Baton Rouge Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Fort Worth Zoo AAZK Chapter 
West Texas Chapter of AAZK 
AAZK of Cheyenne Mountain Zoo 
Wildlife World Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Los Angeles Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Orange County AAZK Chapter 
Portland AAZK Chapter 
Assiniboine Park AAZK Chapter 


To the 78 Chapters that contributed to the American Association of Zoo Keepers in 2009: 

Thank You for Your Support! 


Big Cat Internships Available 

Join us in 

“Saving Tigers One by One” 

As seen on Animal Planet® 

“Growing Up Tiger” 

Apply at: www.tigercreek.org 

Learn about Big Cat Management. Internship involves Animal Care Apprentice and 
Public Education. We offer experience that counts towards employment. 

TIGER MISSING LINK FOUNDATION / TIGER CREEK WILDLIFE REFUGE 


liil 


P 

[reek 



Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 459 


Coming Events 


Post Your Coming Events Here 
email to: akfeditor@zk.kscoxmail.com 


February 21-24, 2010 - Giraffe Professionals 
Conference to be held in Phoenix , AZ. The 
International Association of Giraffe Care Professionals 
is pleased to announce the first-ever conference “All 
of the Above” devoted to all aspects of giraffe care in 
captivity. AH individuals interested in giraffe and the 
advancement of their care are invited to join us for this 
groundbreaking event. Conference is being hosted by 
the Phoenix Zoo with sponsorship from the Oakland 
Zoo. For more information, registration or for those 
who may be interested in presenting at the conference, 
please visi t http://www.giraffecare.org/ 

March 3-6, 2010 - International Association of 
Avian Trainers and Educators (lAATE) Conference 
held in Albuquerque, NM. It’s not too early to start 
planning to attend the 2010 LAATE Conference hosted 
by Avian Ambassadors in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
TTie 2010 LAATE Conference will provide a wonderful 
opportunity to learn more about avian training, 
show content, educational messaging, enrichment 
ideas, avian health and welfare from the leading 
authorities in the industry. Get ready for Conference 
Trips, Workshops, Visit the Rio Grande Zoo and 
Aquarium, and we are bringing back the Training 
Panel. Stephen J. Bodio is our Keynote Speaker. 
Steve was born and educated in Boston and has lived 
in Magdalena , New Mexico, for over twenty years. 
Lie has traveled extensively in Europe, Africa, and 
especially Asia. His book Eagle Dreams is about 
the Kazakh horsemen of Mongolia . It is the journey 
to and in writing this book that Steve will talk about 
with his slide presentation. We also have Susan G. 
Friedman, Ph.D with a featured paper on Saturday 
morning! Dr. Friedman is a psychology professor 
at Utah State University with a special interest in 
applied behavior analysis (ABA), the technology of 
behavior change so effective with human learners. 
Over the last decade, she has pioneered the 
dissemination of ABA principles, procedures and 
ethical standards to improve the quality of life for 
animals. For more information visit www.IAATE. 
org and start planning today! 

This year, Online Registration is available! Go to 
www.IAATE.org for all registration and conference 
details. Online registrations must be submitted 
and Mail-in registrations must be postmarked by 
February 6, 2010. Walk-in registrations will be 
accepted at the conference. 

Hotel Reservations must be made by February 14, 
2010 to get the special I A ATE rate. 

April 15 -18, 2010 - 4th Otter Keeper Workshop 
the Cincinnati Zoo in Cincinnati, Ohio will 
host. This year the focus of the workshop will 
be expanded to include all of the otters managed 
under the Otter SSP® North American river otters, 
Asian small-clawed otters, African clawless, 
African spot-necked and giant otters. Keepers 
working with any of the species are welcome to 
attend. Topics will include: captive management 


issues, enrichment, training, water quality, health 
care, nutrition, diet, hand-raising, exhibit design, 
lots of sharing of information between keepers. 

Registration will be $75 and the deadline is 
December 15. 2009 . Spots fill up fast so please 
register early. A waiting list will be maintained 
once the workshop is filled. Due to the popularity 
of the workshop, priority will be given to first 
time attendees. Please just one registrant per 
institution. No refunds after January 15, 2010. 
Accommodations: A hotel near the Cincinnati 

Zoo or the Newport Aquarium. Room 
negotiations are ongoing. Roommates are 
encouraged. You will be matched if you 
indicate that you wish to have a roommate. 
Information can be found on: www.OtterSpotter. 
com 

For more information contact: David Hamilton at 
Seneca Park Zoo, 2222 St. Paul St., Rochester, NY 
14617; phone: 585-336-2502; 585-266-5775 fax 
dJb_a_mJ J _L o _ n ^ m .o_n_ro_e_c ojj_ n 4_y_^ 

April 25-30, 2010 - Animal Behavior Management 
Alliance (ABMA) Annual Conference - In Pittsburgh, 
PA. The theme of this 10th Anniversary Conference 
is “Defining a Decade: Animal Management - Past, 
Present, and Future”. 

Conference programming includes: Dr. Vint VLrga, 
a Veterinary Behaviorist as keynote speaker, formal 
presentations, numerous workshops and seminars, 
a poster session, and site visits to animal facilities. 
All conference details can be found at www. 
theabma.org . The conference will be held at the 
Hilton Pittsburgh located in downtown Pittsburgh. 
Mention that you are with the ABMA and receive 
a special room rate of $ 119/night Reservations 
must be made by March 23, 2010 at 412-391-4600. 
Contact Nicole Begley at nicole.begley@aviary.org 
or 412-323-7235 ext 216 with questions. 

May 11-15, 2010 - International Gorilla 
Workshop - 2010 - Oklahoma City Zoo is excited 
to host the 2010 International Gorilla Workshop. 
We hope you’ll join us for these informative 
sessions. Our keynote speakers who are confirmed 
are Dave Morgan and Charlene Jendry. We are in 
final confirmation stage to get Dr. liana Kutinsky 
here as our third keynote. The Gorilla Workshop 
was created to promote and improve husbandry, 
management and conservation of gorillas. It is 
necessary to collaborate with colleagues to better 
provide for and understand gorillas in our care. The 
2010 Gorilla Workshop will include a number of 
topics with an emphasis on multi-male and bachelor 
groups, as well as innovative and best practices in 
gorilla husbandry. The deadline for abstracts is 10 
February 2010. 


460 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Abstracts must contain the following: 

• Author’s name, affiliation, address, e-mail 
address and phone number 

• Title of paper 

• Concise description of paper not to exceed 500 
words (single space) 

• On a separate page please provide a concise bio 
of the author/presenter 

Suggested Topics (1 full day will be devoted to each 
main topic): Innovations and best practices in gorilla 
husbandry: Retro-fitting existing cages; Innovations 
in exhibit and holding design to facilitate husbandry; 
Philosophy driven husbandry programs - What’s 
yours and why does it work for your facility?; How 
to promote mother-rearing; Surrogate programs;; 
Behavioral husbandry - What is working to promote 
innovations in gorilla management?; Multi-male and 
bachelor groups: Best practices - What’s working at 
your facility? What’s not and how can we learn from 
it?; Research Updates; Complexities such as holding/ 
exhibit design; Introduction strategies; Management 
strategies; Field Work and Conservation: Ape 
Sanctuaries/Updates from the Field; Fundraisers to 
support in situ work; and In or Ex-situ conservation 
education programs. 


Please send via e-mail or CD (in Word format) to: 
Laura Bottaro OR Donna Mobbs, OKC Zoo, 2101 
NE 50th St.„ Okla. City, OK 73111 Emails: 
LB ottaro @ okczoo .com DMobbs @ okczoo .com 

Registration fees of $195 are due by 10 February 
2010. A late fee of $30 will be assessed after 10 
February. Ten dollars from each registration will be 
combined to benefit one or more in situ conservation 
project(s). If you have other general question 
about the workshop, OKC, etc, please contact Brian 
Aucone, BrianA@okczoo.com, 405-425-0283. 

August 30 - September 3, 2010 - 7th International 
Penguin Conference - in Boston, MA. Hosted 
by The New England Aquarium. For info email 
ipcboston@neaq.org 

September 28-October 2,2010 - 20th International 
Zoo Educators^ (IZE) Biennial Conference - at 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom, Orlando, I^. For more 
information, please visit http://www.izea.net 

September 7-12, 2010 - NationalAZAD Conference 
Hosted by Brookfield Zoo, Brookfield, IL USA. 


Call for Papers 
for AKF Dedicated Issue 
on Avian Husbandry and Breeding 

Zoo and aquarium animal collections are experiencing a crisis in sustainability. Without 
successful husbandry and breeding we stand to lose the diversity that is vital to great collections. 
This is being strongly felt in the avian world. In March of 2010 there will be a dedicated 
issue to avian husbandry and breeding. We are seeking articles pertaining to what has worked, 
and often more importantly, what has not worked in the art and science of avian husbandry 
and breeding. By sharing information we can begin to make collaborations and work towards 
building stronger and sustainable populations. 

Papers should be submitted electronically in MS Word only to akfeditor@zk.kscoxmail. 
com. Please put Avian Special Issue in your subject line. Papers should be no more then 10 
pages in length. Any charts or graphs should be submitted as separate jpg or tif files along with 
the manuscript. We would encourage photos of your animals to include and these should also 
be submitted electronically as either jpg or tif files. Please make certain all photos are high 
resolution (300 dpi) 

If you cannot submit your materials electronically, you may send them on a disk or CD to: 
Dedicated Issue, AAZK, Inc., 3601 SW 29* St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054. If you 
cannot submit your photos electronically, you may also send 3x4 inch prints. Be sure to include 
proper photo credit and suggested captions for each photo are appreciated. 

You should also include your complete contact information including address, email and 
daytime phone number where you may be reached if we have questions concerning your 
submission. 

Deadline for receipt of articles for consideration is 

****Januarv 5, 2010**** 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 461 


The AAZK Behavioral Husbandry Committee Presents 





Where you can share your training experiences! 


Training Tales Editors - Jay Pratte, Zoo Atlanta; Kim Kezer, Zoo New England; 
and Angela Binney, Disney s Animal Kingdom 

The Behavioral Husbandry Committee wants to hear your ‘Training Tales’ - the good, the bad and 
the fabulous! 

Please submit your “Training Tales” and experiences in operant conditioning to share with Animal 
Keepers’ Forum readers. This opportunity provides a convenient outlet for you to exhibit your 
training challenges, methods and milestones with the AAZK member network. Please submit entries 
based on the following guidelines: 

a) S ubmit a brief description of a training project at your zoo. These can be 500 words or less, 
in text or bullet points. Or it can be longer (up to 1000 words) if you wish to elaborate; 
however, short and simple descriptions with a few images are just as perfect. Details 
should include the following: 

1 . Define the training goal (what did you try to do and for what purpose?) 

2. List important steps (How did you do it - include plans that changed along 

the way/what worked & what didn’t work) 

3. Timeline used (how long did it take) 

4. Tips you learned along the way 

b) Include 1-2 digital photos (jpg or tif in high resoution [300 dpi] that clearly depict the animal 
in the learning process or performing the desired goal. Please list source and photographer 
of each image and a suggested caption for each photo submitted). 

c) Please Note: We do not mind reprinting material if it is particularly useful to our readers; 
however, we want to be sure to give proper credit to previously published material. If your entry 
is not a first time publication, please include publication information (Journal name. Volume, 
Issue, Pages) with your submission. 

Please send entries or questions to: Jay Pratte at ipratte@zooatlanta.org . Kim Kezer at kkezer@ 
zoonewengland.com or Angela Binney at Angela.C.Binnev@disnev.com (use Training Tales Entry 
as the subject line). 


Happy Training! 


462 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


AAZK Announces New Members 

New Professional Members 

Thomas Anderson, Squam Lakes Natural Science 
Center (NH); Caitlyn Hoskyns, Buffalo Zoo (NY); 
Stephanie Vaugh- Williams, Virginia Safari Park 
(VA); Laura Schillinger, Birmingham (AL); Dara 
Kelly, Brookfield Zoo (IL); KellyBriggs, Kansas 
City Zoo (MO); John Fitchett, Audubon Nature 
Institute (LA); Sara Caruso, Fort Worth Zoo 
(TX); Deeanna Croasmun, PUot Peak WUdfife 
Park (NV); and Michael Bates, San Diego Zoo 
(CA). We no longer print the names of those 
Professional Members who do not list their facility 
on their membership application/renewal (There 
was one for October). 

New Institutional Members 

Wildlife Conservation Society 
Bronx Zoo, Bronx, NY 
Steven E. Sanderson, PhD., President/CEO 

Buffalo Zoo, Buffalo, NY 
Donna Fernandez, President/CEO 

Renewing Institutional Members 


Mark Your Calendars! 
Upcoming AAZK National 
Conferences 

2010 - Philadelphia, PA - August 22-26 
2011 - San Diego, CA - August 24-28 
2012 - Syracuse, NY - September 23-27 

For information on upcoming AAZK 
conferences, watch the AAZK website at 
www.aazk.org 


Upcoming AZA Conferences 

September 11-16, 2010 - AZA 2010 Annual 

Conference - Hosted by Houston Zoo, Houston, 
TX. 

September 12-17, 2011 - AZA 2011 Annual 

Conference - Hosted by Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta , GA 


September 8-13, 2012 - AZA 2012 Annual 
Conference - Hosted by Phoenix Zoo, Phoenix, 
AZ 

September 7-12, 2013 - AZA 2013 Annual 
Conference - Hosted by the Kansas City Zoo, 
Kansas City , MO 


Louisville Zoo, Louisville, KY 
John Walczak, Director 

Boonshaft Museum of Discovery 
Dayton, OH 
Mark Mazzei, Director 

Northeastern Wisconsin Zoo 
Green Bay, WI 
Neil Anderson, Director 

Renewing Contributing Members 

John Rowden 
Central Park Zoo 
New York, New York 

Janell Lentz 
Coralville, lA 

William H. Disher 
San Diego Zoo Volunteer 
San Diego, CA 


For info on AZA Conferences, see http://aza.org/ 
ConfWork/AC_Intro/index .html 



THE 

GOURMET 
RODENT, 
INC." 


RATS AND MICE 


Bill & Marcia Brant 


12921 SWlstRd.,Ste 107, 
PBM #434 
Jonesville, FL 32669 


(352) 472-9189 
Fax: (352) 472-9192 
e-mail: GrmtRodent@aol.com 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 463 



Letters to the Editor 



Readers are welcome to comment upon material 
published in Animal Keepers’ Forum through a 
Letter to the Editor. We welcome a free exchange 
of ideas benefiting the zoo keeping profession. 


Dear Ms. Chan, 

I’ve just received my October 2009 issue of Animal Keepers ’Forum, and I noted on the last page, in 
the Conservation/Legislative Update, a news brief about the juvenile chimpanzee at The Institute of 
Greatly Endangered and Rare Species (T.LG.E.R.S.) bottle-feeding an infant puma. 

I was disappointed to see AAZK giving press to this organization, when the practices at T.LG.E.R.S. 
are in such direct opposition, philosophically and ethically, to professional zookeeping standards. 
AAZK is surely aware of the inappropriate husbandry practices used to manage apes that are 
presented in such unnatural circumstances, and of the fact that such undignified portrayals have a 
demonstrably adverse effect on their status as a highly endangered species. 

The Chimpanzee SSP®, Orangutan SSP®’ and Ape TAG are working hard to raise the public’s 
awareness of the endangered status of apes, and presentation of frivolous and harmful images of 
these animals - in a professional publication section headed “Conservation” - counters this critical 
message. 

Performing apes, such as the juvenile presented by T.LG.E.R.S., are taken from their mothers at a 
very young age. This causes tremendous emotional and psychological distress to the mother as well 
as to the infant. Trainers frequently use fear and physical discipline to control their apes, and the 
degree of force increases as the apes grow. 

Such performing apes are youngsters. Audiences see cute, cuddly, human-like animals and they often 
form the impression that they are easily handled. These images make young apes popular as pets 
and for use in the entertainment industry. However, as AAZK is aware, adult chimps are much larger 
than babies, much stronger than humans, very strong-willed, and can seldom be handled. Zoos often 
receive calls for help from owners who can no longer manage these intelligent, powerful animals. A 
zoo or sanctuary may be able to take in a few of these abandoned chimpanzees, but most of them are 
placed back in the pet trade and all too often in very inhumane conditions. 

Images like those promoted by T.LG.E.R.S. serve to undermine the welfare and conservation goals 
that AAZK works hard to achieve. I respectfully request that AAZK review its editorial policies in 
order to prevent such inadvertent promotion of organizations and facilities whose business philosophy 
and ethical position stands in opposition to professional animal management standards. 

Thank you for your consideration. 

Sincerely, 

Lori Perkins Chair, Orangutan SSP® 

Director of Animal Programs, Zoo Atlanta 
AAZK Affiliate Member 


We thank Lori for her thoughtful letter but wish to remind readers that the appearance of any article 
in this publication does not imply endorsement by Animal Keepers ’Forum or AAZK, Inc. We welcome 
your letters on this or other topics of interest related to AKF. ~ Eds. 