



1 NVINOSHliyMs'^Sa 1 d Vbl a n^LI B RAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NC 
Z \ y\ ^ ^ _ CO 


(O 



LlI 


z ■■''^' -j z _ ^ 

5 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIXnXilSNi NVINOSHlIl/MS SaidVdaiT LI 



z 

o 


/^:-J /.'^ ^ 1:5: t _. _. ^ 

O! 

}— 

CO t: (/) \ ^ CO 

II NviNosHims saidVHan libraries Smithsonian institution N( 

:z CO z .CO z 




o 

CO 
X 

— X tl 

2 '^ > '*'' > 

CO -«i: CO *Z co*' Z 

S SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNl NVINOSHIIIAIS S3ldVdan LI 
CO CO z: co 




ivO - , . 

IK Wx 

o DC^ " X^^UjlstiX o ^2 O 

I'^'NVINOSHillNS said Vd an LIBRARI ES^SMITHSONIAN“^mSTITUTION^N( 
r* V Z r- z ^ z 

%x S z 2 

^ t; :o tr ;o 




00 
:c3 
> 

;d 

m ~ m m 

CO ± CO E CO 

> SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNl NVINOSHlItMS SBldVdaiT L« 
2: CO z ^ E 

CO CO ^ ife g X 


CO 




X 
CO 

0 

1 NVINOSHimS^Sa I d Vd a l I^LI B R AR l ES^SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NC 

^ \ ^ CO ~ CO 



CO 



o ^ o -z o 

Z -J 2 _l Z 

5 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNl NVINOSHlIkMS S3 1dVdan LI 



rn ^ Z ^ 

U NVINOSHimS S3ldVdan~LIBRARIES^SMITHS0NIAN”lNSTITUTl0N Ni 

Z CO Z .. CO z _ ^ 




3Nl_NVINOSHillAIS^S3 I dVH 8 ll^LI BRAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN ^INSTITUTION ^ 
z V 5 </5 = <0 

CO ^ uj uj 



ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOlinillSNI NVINOSHillNS SBIdVaan 

° v5 i i >,03 




i\ ^ 
o > 

1 / 73 

3NI NVINOSHIIWS S3 lava an L!B R ARIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



s i 2 .^. w 

y A.."'S H I ^ 

I /f^^l i 

O 

2 > --?8r' s I i > 

ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIlDillSNI NVIN0SHilWS*^S3 I a Va 8 IT^ 
^ Z 5 .V w 2 





CO 


— 

q: 

< 

o '-iaLES-^ “ o o 

>NI^NVIN0SHillNS^S3 I ava a n~‘LI B RAR I es^smithsonian“‘institution^ 

[_ > Z r- z f” 2: 

\ ro ~ ° 



^ z m 'ii f7i 

^ — CO 5 CO 

ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOlifliliSNI NVINOSHilWS SBiavaaiT 

^ " i i ’ g ^ 

JNI_NVIN0SHillAIS^S3 I BV8 8 I T^LI B RAR 1 ES^SMITHSONIAN^INSTITUTION ^ 

z \ ^ ^ CO =: CO 




ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIlflXIlSNl NVINOSHIIIAIS S3l8Vdan 



m 

3NI NVINOSHillNS S3 I a Va 8 n“L 1 B R A R I E s'^SMITHSONIAN -INSTITUTION*^ 
.1 S i .3^ g ^ ■ 





M 


.'4 

I 









I 




I 

I 


i 

i 

I 

! 



QL 

76 

Ajtf" 


Keepers' 

Forum 


January 1992 



Dedicated to Professional Animal Care 


ANIMAL KEEPERS' FORUM . 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 


January 1992 
Volume Nineteen 
Number One 


Editor-in-Chief: Susan Chan 
Associate Editors: Kayla Grams & Gretchen Ziegler 


Animal Keepers' Forum (ISSN 0164-9531) is a monthly journal of the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the 
annual pubhcation costs o f Animal Keepers' Forum . Third Class postage paid at Topeka, KS. Postmaster; 
Please send address changes to: 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Administrative Offices, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 
Barbara Manspeaker, Administrative Secretary 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Ed Hansen, Reid Park Zoo, Tucson, AZ 85716 
Janet McCoy, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 97221 
Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Ellen Bradfield, Zoo Adanta, Atlanta, GA 30315 
Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112 
Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS - PROTECT HEADS 


President 
Vice President 
Immediate Past President 


Awards Committge 

Jan McCoy, Washington Park Zoo 

IlQQk--JR e Yiew Coordinators 

Melba T. Brown, National Zoo - general interest 
Tom Aversa, Boston Metro Zoos - technical 
Staff ■■ Exchange 
Dale Frerking, Kansas City Zoo 
AAZK History Committee 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo 
Public Education Committee 
Elaine Puzo, Newark Museum MiniZoo 
Keeper Accommodations List 

Heidi Manicki, Metro Toronto Zoo 

An Approach to Zookecping 

Pat Sammarco, Gainesville, FL 
Zqq Infant....D£.Y£lnpment Project 
Harmony Frazier-Taylor, Woodland Park Zoo 
AAZK Manual of Resources 

Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo 

Nominations & Elections 

Mike Light, Kings Island 

Membership Directory 


Keeper Training-A-Education 

{includes Library Resources, 

Reference Search, and Keeper Training 
Materials)L.R/R.S. - Marilyn Cole, Metro 
Toronto; KTM - Laura Treschel, Minnesota Zoo 
Research/Grants Committee 

Susan M. Barnard, Zoo Atlanta 

Animal. Data .Transfer-Eorm 

Bemie Feldman, Burnet Park Zoo 

AAZK Liaison to AAZPA 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Biological Values/Gestation 
Toni Danzig, Greater S. F. Bay Area Chapter 

Diet Notebook 

Susan Bunn Spencer, Beardsley Zoological Gdns. 

By-Laws. Review 

VACANCY 

Zoo/Unive rsitv List 
Mike Illig, Washington Park Zoo 

Keeper Correspondent 

VACANCY 


Publications... funding.. C.o.mmitt££ 

Tucson AAZK Chapter, Tucson, AZ Joe Rindler, Columbus Zoo 

Exhibit Design Form - John Brangan, The Virginia Zoo and Eric Krussman, National Zoo - Co-Chairs 

International Affairs Coordinators - Mona Keith, Calgary Zoo (east) Pam McDougall, Calgary Zoo (west) 


Conservation. Preservation. Restoration (CPRJ Committee - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo 
Bowling for Rhinos *92 Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo 
Ecosystem Survival Plan (ESP) National Coordinator - Norman Gershenz, San Francisco Zoo 


Keeper Training Videotape 

Production Coordinator - Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Order/Distribution Center at AAZK Administrative Offices in Topeka 


Liaison and Information Network for Keeners (LINK) 
Coordinator - Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 


printed on recycled paper 


Table of Contents 


Information for Contributors.. 1 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt 2-3 

Births & Hatchings 4-6 

From the President 7 

AAZK Announces New Members 8 

Conference Proceedings Order Form 10 

Bowling for Rhinos ’92 Proposal 11 

A Presidential Message on Bowling for Rhinos 11 

Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary Update from Anna Merz 12-13 

Enrichment Options (rhinos, penguins, reptiles, orangutans, food dispensers) 14-15 

Endangered Species Act Faces Challenge 16-17 

Information Please (African lions, primate puzzle feeder, thrush in eland) 17 

Black-footed Ferrets Released to Wild 18 

Zoo Infant Development Project.... 18 

1992 AAZPA Regional Conference Listing 18 

Recycling: Just Do It... 19 

T-Shirt/Sweatshirt Survey 19 

International News 20-21 

Publications Available 21 

Chapter News 22-24 

Book Review (Encyclopedia of Animal Ecology) 26 

Opportunity Knocks 26 

1991 Index for AKF 27-40 

Regional Coordinator List.... 40 

Information for Contributors 


Animal Keepers' Forum publishes original papers and news items of interest to the animal 
keeping profession. Non-members are welcome to submit articles for consideration. 

Articles should be typed or hand-printed and double-spaced. All illustrations, graphs, 
charts and tables should be clearly marked, in final form, and should fit in a page size no 
greater than 15cm x 25 l/2cm ( 6" x 10"). Literature used should be cited in the text (Brown, 
1986) and alphabetically in final bibliography. Avoid footnotes. Include scientific name of 
species (as per ISIS) the first time it is used. Thereafter use common name. Use metric 
system for weights and measurements (standard equivalents may be noted in 
parenthesis). Use the continental dating system (day-month-year). Times should be listed 
as per the 24-hour clock (0800, 1630 hrs. etc.) Black and white photos only are accepted. 
Color slides should be converted to black and white prints (minimum size 3x5 inch) before 
submission. Clearly marked captions should accompany photos. Please list photo credit. 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers' Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for 
publication. Articles of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the 
zoo professionals who serve as referees for No commitment is made to the author, but 

an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be 
separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The editor reserves the 
right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by the 
author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. Telephone or FAX contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted. However, long articles must be sent by U.S. mail. The phone 
number is (913) 272-5821 Ext. 31. FAX # is 913-272-2539. 

DEADLINE FOR EACH EDITION IS THE 15TH 

■QF THE PRECEDING MONTH 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the 
Animal Keepers* Forum editorial staff or the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a 
copy of the reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. Reprints of material appearing in 
this journal may be ordered from the editor. Back issues are available for $2.00 each. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 1 


This month's cover features a Great White Egret or Common Egret (Casmerodius albus) 
with her nest of chicks. It inhabits both the Old and New Worlds; its best known breeding 
area in Central Europe is at Lake Neusiedel in Austria. In Europe this species breeds in 
reed beds, but in other areas it nests in trees. Numbers of this species were decimated in the 
early 1900's when their breeding season plumes sold for twice the price of gold. This 
month’s artist is Gregg J. Wanciak, an Associate Member from New Orleans, LA. 
Thanks, Gregg! 


Scoops 


and 


Scuttlebutt 


Articles SoUcited for Upcoming AKF Issues 

As mentioned in last month’s From the Editor message, the staff is planning on publishing 
at least two issues of the journal dedicated to specific topics in the coming months. We are 
now soliciting articles on the following topics: Hoofstock (all aspects), Hand-rearing 
( techniques, case histories, etc.) and Enrichment (all aspects). We encourage authors to 
submit black and white photos with their manuscripts. We would like to be able to run the 
first dedicated issue in April or May, so we ask that papers be submitted by 1 March 1992. 
This plan will, of course, be dependent on the response we receive from you, the 
membership. Members are, of course, encouraged to submit articles on any topics 
relevant to zoos and zookeeping at any time. The backlog of articles we have experienced 
over the past couple of years has been thinned out considerably with publication of larger 
issues of AKF so we are again in need of material for the journal. 

You will note that this month we have initiated a column entitled Enrichment Options. 
This column is designed to include behavioral and environmental enrichment ideas for 
all species held in zoos. We encourage you to submit your enrichment suggestions and 
ideas for inclusion in this column. We are also currently working on reformatting the 
Births & Hatchings column and a letter with the new guidelines will be going out to those 
individuals who regularly contribute material for this column. If you wish to submit B&H 
information and are not sure of the format, contact the editor. 

Once again, our sincere thanks to Pam Talbot, a volunteer at the Woodland Park Zoo, 
Seattle, WA, for her efforts in putting together the 1991 index for AKF . You will notice that 
this year all animal listings are placed under categories such as Birds, Mammals, etc. for 
easy reference. 

FINAL REMINDER - this is the last issue in which an order form for the 1991 National 
Conference Proceedings will appear. If you want to purchase a copy, you will need to send 
in your completed order form and payment by 10 February 1992. Order Form on Page 10 • 


Anna Merz Rhino Book Now Available 

’’What Joy Adamson was to lions, Dian Fossey was to gorillas, and Jane Goodall is to 
chimpanzees, Anna Merz is to rhinos...! can promise you that, after finishing this book, 
you will never see rhinos in quite the same light again.” These are the words of Desmond 
Morris in his forward to the recently published book RHINO At the Brink of Extinction by 
Anna Merz, founder and patron of the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary in Kenya. She tells 
how she established the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary at the foot of Mt. Kenya and all she 
has learned about rhinos through her daily observations - revealing them to be 
unexpectedly intelligent and gentle animals with distinctively individual personalities. 
The book may be ordered through Rafiki Books, 45 Rawson Ave., Camden, ME 04843. It is 
hardback, 220 pages, and sells for $25.95 plus $3.00 shipping. 


2 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Scoops & Scuttlebutt. Continued 
APT Forms Available Upon Request 


Animal Data Transfer Forms for zoos and aquariums are available free of charge upon 
request. This is a professional service provided by AAZK. Contact: Bernie Feldman, 
Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Drive, Syracuse, NY 13204. If your facility is not 
already using the ADT form, please encourage your administration to implement its use 
whenever an animal is shipped. 


WANT A CHALLENGE? Produce a Keeper Training Videotape!! 

With only a scant 2 training videotapes in the AAZK collection (Feeds & Feeding and 
Keeper Safety), there is a plethora of subjects to choose from and tackle. These videotapes 
are an invaluable teaching aid, especially for those in the animal care field not fortunate 
enough to have a keeper training program at their facility. Once the videotape is 
completed, you’ll feel rewarded knowing your project will benefit keepers around the globe 
and will generate badly needed revenue for our national body’s treasury from the sales of 
this tape. Don’t hedge, here’s a wonderful chance to display hidden talents, talents you 
weren’t aware you had. Please contact Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo or Anna 
Michael, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR. We can give you information to help you 
get started. And remember, funds are available from the Videotape Project account to 
assist in your production. 

The following tapes are available in VHS format for $25.00 each from AAZK 
Administrative Offices in Topeka: “Keeper Safety: An Attitude Adjustment” and “An 
Introduction to Feeds and Feeding”. Contact Barbara Manspeaker at 1-800-242-4519 for 
ordering information. 


Please Note; 

Individuals needing to contact Pat Sammarco are asked to do so at her home address - 6726 
NW 18th Ave., Gainesville, FL 32605 or call (904) 332-0846. Pat is no longer associated 
with Santa Fe Community College Teaching Zoo. 

In the August 1991 issue of AKF , an article entitled “California Condor - Coming Back 
from the Brink” was submitted by L.A Chapter Liaison Lois Carwile and published under 
the authorship of Susie Kasielke, L.A Zoo Curatorial Assistant. In a recent phone call, 
Susie noted that her article was really more or less a fact sheet on the condor program and 
not intended as an article written specifically for AKF . Susie said that had she known it 
was going to AKF she would have written it a little differently. On behalf of AKF readers, 
we enjoyed the article, found it informative and look forward to updates on the Condor 
Recovery program from Susie. 


Two More Chapters Donate to HLstorv Book Proiect 

Rachel Rogers, Chair of the AAZK History Committee, along with the AAZK Board of 
Directors would like to thank two Chapters that recently sent in donations to help in 
covering the costs of publishing AAZK 25th Anniversary Book. Thanks go out to the 
Western New York AAZK Chapter (Buffalo Zoological Gardens, Buffalo, NY) and the 
Puget Sound Chapter (Woodland Park Zoological Gardens, Seattle, WA). 


AAZK Grants Available 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. announces the availability of two 
$750 research grants in the field of zoo biology. Interested applicants should direct 
their inquiries to Sue Barnard, Chairperson, AAZK Research/Grants Committee, 
Zoo Atlanta, Department of Herpetology, 800 Cherokee Ave. SE., Atlanta, GA 30315. 
The deadline for submission is 31 March 1992. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


3 


Births & Hatchings 



Milwaukee County Zoo ...on 17 December 1990 a 0.1 birth of a Pygmy chimpanzee {Pan 
paniscus) brought the total U.S. zoo population of Bon oho s to 41. Only 80 are in captivity 
world-wide, with an estimated 15,000-100,000 in the wild population. The infant, named 
Eliya, was born to 19-year-old Maringa and was sired by 18-year-old Lodi. Maringa has 
had five offspring, with three surviving. The paiPs seven-year-old son Lomako is housed 
with them. The MCZ also has Bonobo out on loan to Yerkes. 



Shown above is 0.1 ELIYA^ a Pygmy Chimpanzee bom at the Milwaukee County Zoo. That 
facility houses the infant‘s seven-year-old brother, Lomako, along with parents Maringa 
(19) and Lodi (18). There are only 80 Bonobo held in captivity world-wide. ( ©1990 
Milwaukee County Zoo Photo. Photographer: M.A. Nepper) 


4 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Births & H atchings. Continued 

Other Mammal births have included: 1.1 Greater kudu (Tragelaphus strepsiceros 
strepsice), a species seldom seen in zoos. MCZ has had 61 of this species born since 
November 1966. Twin (1.1) Asiatic black bear (Selenarctos thibetanus) births represent the 
first mother-reared cubs of this species at this facility. Twin (1.1) Snow leopard (Panthera 
uncia) births were the first successful litter for these parents. The male was removed when 
the female was determined to be pregnant. The first cub was seen by staff five weeks after 
the birth; the second cub at six weeks. They were weighed at eight weeks, at 7.2 lbs. A 0.1 
Bongo {Tragelaphus eurycerus isaaci) was bom at the end of April 1991. Captive births are 
not common for this species. A Reticulated giraffe {Giraffa Camelopardalis reticulata) 
represents the second successful mother-raised giraffe at MCZ in many years. Both were 
from the same mother. 

The Small Mammals Dept, reports the following significant births: Four Vampire bats 
(Desmodus rotundas) - the MCZ is one of the few zoos that have been successful in 
continuously breeding this species of bat. This breeding colony has a history of 51 births. 
The Ruwenzori long-haired fruit bat {Rousettus lanosus) colony has had seven births this 
past year. MCZ is the only U.S. zoo housing this type of mountain fruit bat. Our Straw 
colored fruit bat {Eidolon heluum) colony had three births. MCZ is the only zoo that has 
been successful with mother-raised babies of this species. 

Birds - between 1 December 1990 and 19 June 1991, MCZ had eight births of the 
Humboldt penguin {Spheniscus humholdti). We have two separate breeding colonies on 
exhibit. The Humboldt penguin, an SSP species, is endangered with less that 30,000 
estimated to be left in the wild. 

Aquarium/Reptile - has reported the following: one Green and Black poison arrow 
frog {Dendrobates auratus) - first for this species at MCZ since the 1970s. Also reported is 
one Chuckwalla {Sauromalus obesus) - a first for MCZ after having this species on display 
for 14 years. The department also received the larvae of the Puerto Rican crested toad 
{Peltophryne lemur) from the Cincinnati Zoo in 1991. The larva was metamorphosed and 
the 60-70 toads will be released to the wild in 1992. This species is endangered due to habitat 
loss and is an SSP species, submitted by Wayne J. Hazlett, Chapter Liaison, Milwaukee 
County zoo AAZK chapter, Milwaukee, WI. 

Ccystal. GardeaiyifitQria. B.Ci. Canadab-»the Aviary department would like to announce 
the raising of five Hyacinth macaw {Anodorhynchus hyacinthinus ) babies in 1991. Also 
twin Slow loris {Mycticebus pygmacus) babies were born on 9 November 1991. submitted by 
Reta Lowry, Curator, Crystal Garden, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 


Philadelphia Zoological Gardens ...reports the following from June-October 1991: 

Re ptiles - the collection has increased in size due to the department) s participation 
in the annual meeting of The Society for the study of Amphibians and Reptiles (SSAR). Out 
of a possible 68 species of native Pennsylvanian amphibians and reptiles, 56 were exhibited 
at the meeting. Many of the animals have been incorporated into the zoo's collection. 

Birds - this department has had a couple of exciting hatchings during this time; 
0.0.2 West African crowned cranes {Balearica pavonina pavonina) hatched in August and 
are being hand-raised by zoo staff This is the first successful breeding of this species at 
PZG since 1956. 0.1 Trumpeter swan {Cygnus cygnus buccinator) hatched here and was 
sent to Michigan's Department of Natural Resources for their reintroduction program. 
0.0.3 Caribbean flamingos {Phoenicopterus ruber) hatched this summer bringing our flock 
up to 27 animals. 0.0.2 Micronesian kingfisher {Halcyon cinnamomina) hatched this 
summer. They are the 9th and 10th chicks to survive since PZG began working with this 
species in 1984. 0.0.2 Sunbittern {Eurypyga helias) hatched and are the 4th and 5th viable 
chicks PZG has produced over the last two years. We also received 1.0 Shoebill stork 
{Balaeniceps rex) in august. We are the only zoo on the East Coast to display this species. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


5 


Births & Hatchings . Continued 



Shown at left is one of two West African 
Crowned Crane chicks hatched at the 
Philadelphia Zoological Gardens. The 
chicks are being hand-reared by the zoo 
staff. 


Mammals - significant births during the five month period include: 1.0 Mongoose 
lemur {Lemur mongoz mongoz) was born; the third offspring of this pair. 0.1 Western 
lowland gorilla {Gorilla gorilla) was born on 4 July to our female, Snickers - this is her 
first daughter. The baby was named “ Uhuru” which means freedom in Swahili. This is 
the name given to Kenya’s Independence Day. 1.0 Indian Rhinoceros {Rhinoceros 
unicornis) was born in July to our pair held at PZG. This same pair have produced four 
offspring with three surviving. 0.1 Matschie’s tree kangaroo {Dendrolagus matschiei), 
who we estimate was born in late January 1991, finally showed his face in June. He’s now 
out of the pouch and doing well. This is the second offspring from the pair; unfortunately 
the first DNS. 0.1 Malayan tapir {Tapirus indicus) was born to our female. She has had 
three other offspring but this is the first fathered by our current male. 0.1 Spectacled langur 
{Presbytis obscura) was born in October; the third offspring of this female. Our group now 
has eight animals. 

Some significant acquisitions are 4.5 Rodriguez fruit bats {Pteropus rodricensis) 
that came from the London Zoo and Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust and are part of an 
international conservation/breeding program for the species. We received 1.1 
Klipspringers {Oreotragus oreotragus) from the Chipangali Wildlife Trust in Bulawayo, 
Zimbabwe. We acquired 0.1 Six-banded armadillo {Euphractus sexcintus) on loan from 
the Tulsa Zoo to be paired with our single male. This now gives us two breeding pairs. 

This summer a member of our staff went to Kenya to collect more Naked mole rats 
{Hetercephalus glaber). We acquired 234 specimens in eight different colonies. So far a 
colony has been sent to each of the following zoos: Roger Williams Park Zoo, National Zoo,, 
Phoenix Zoo and the Toledo Zoo. -submitted by Beth Schwenk, Chapter Liaison, 
Philadelphia Zoo AAZK Chapter, Philadelphia, PA. 


6 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


From the President 


On behalf of the newly elected and incumbent members of the AAZK Board of Directors, I 
would like to welcome you to 1992, the 25th anniversary year of our Association. During the 
past 25 years, AAZK has contributed to raising the standards of quality animal care in all 
aspects of our profession. Whether you have been a member for 20 years or just 1 year, you 
should take pride in the accomplishments of AAZK 

This year shall bring many challenges to the membership of AAZK - the most important of 
which is a quest for financial stability. For many years, AAZK has operated on the edge of 
breaking even. We have not been able to realize a comfort zone financially that will let 
AAZK evolve progressively in the 1990s. Many members have asked why this has happened 
and the answer is very simple. While operating costs have increased 3-10% per year, for the 
past five years, membership has stagnated. We have not had a significant increase in 
membership, in any category, in a number of years. Encourage your fellow professionals 
to join our Association and get involved. 

It has been gratifying to see that some of our Chapters have recognized the value and 
importance of supporting the parent organization and have sent unsolicited donations to 
help meet general operating expenses. Our thanks go to the North Carolina AAZK Chapter 
and The Virginia Chapter AAZK, whose letters follow my column, for their generous 
support. 

Oliver Clafifey, outgoing president of AAZK, in his inaugural address to the membership 
called the 1990s “The Deciding Decade”. The AAZK membership has chosen to support 
conservation issues and causes with monumental efforts over the past few years. In just two 
years, ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ has raised close to $300 thousand. Since its inception, the 
Ecosystem Survival Plan has raised approximately $200 thousand. Keepers have asked me 
for a number of years, “So what does AAZK do?” You have contributed a half a million 
dollars for species and habitat conservation in just a few years. Take pride in your efforts - 
wear them like a badge of accomplishment. 

In 1992, membership will also see a change in the communication practice of the AAZK 
President and Board of Directors. In an effort to keep the Animal Keepers’ Forum just that - 
a Forum for the exchange of animal-related information, I will be addressing Association 
issues in detail directly to Chapters in quarterly updates. LINK updates will also be coming 
in these same packets. Members of our Association who do not belong to Chapter will 
receive the same information in synopsis through AKF . I firmly believe in open 
communication and I encourage you to contact me directly with comments, concerns and 
suggestions regarding our Association. 

In conclusion, I would like to thank outgoing Board Members Oliver Claffey, Frank Kohn 
and Bob Debets for time and effort dedicated to our Association. Their contributions are far 
too numerous to list. What is unique about these outgoing officers is that they each started 
their participation in AAZK at the Committee or Conference Chair level, and worked their 
way up to Board election. At the current time we have openings for Committee Chairs and I 
ask you to consider this avenue if you wish to make an impact on your profession. 

I am looking forward to a productive and positive year with open communication between 
the AAZK Board and the membership, culminating in a professional celebration of our 25th 
Anniversary at the National Conference in San Diego. 



Ed Hansen, AAZK President 
Reid Park Zoo 
1100 S. Randolph Way 
Tucson, AZ 85716 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


1 


From the President. Continued 
October 24, 1991 
Dear Sirs: 

Enclosed is a check for $116.46. We have been selling ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ T-shirts during 
the past few months, and we wanted to give a percentage of the profits to AAZK National. 
(The majority of the profits went to Ngare Sergoi Support Group.) 

We are a small group, with only about five active members, but we want to show our support 
to our national organization. We know you will put it to good use. 

Sincerely yours, 

Betty Jean Schmitt, Treasurer 
The Virginia Chapter AAZK 
Norfolk, VA 


November 9, 1991 
Dear AAZK, 

Enclosed is a check in the amount of $200.00 from the North Carolina Chapter AAZK. It is 
being sent to show our support of the National Organization, and can be used any way you 
deem necessary. 

Thanks for the support your office offers us throughout the year. 

Sincerely, 

Lucy Segerson, President 
North Carolina Chapter AAZK 
Asheboro, NC 



AAZK Announces New Professional/Contributing Members 


Martha Valleriani, Metro Boston Zoo (MA) 

Lori Collins, Silver Springs Attraction (MD) 
Jody Hackman, Busch Gardens (FL) 

Tiffani Thompson, Sea World of Florida (FL) 
Steven O. Norris, Nashville Zoo (TN) 

Anne Marie Moorman, Jackson Zool. Prk (MS) 
John H.P Ward, Brookfield Zoo (IL) 

Faye Krumm, Tulsa Zoo (OK) 

Joseph Roccotagliata, Sea World of Texas (TX) 


Kitty Dolan, Bronx Zoo (NY) 

Virginia Stamos, Lowry Park Zoo (FL) 
Betty Mickler, Lowry Park Zoo (FL) 
Denise Hansbury, Lowry Park Zoo (FL) 
Kelly Hixon, Jackson Zool. Prk. (MS) 
Nancy C. Smith, Jackson Zool. Prk. (MS) 
Heidi Hellmuth, Brookfield Zoo (IL) 
Chris Pfefferkorn, San Antonio Zoo (TX) 
Kelly Casale, Coyote Point Museum (CA) 


Renewing Contributing Members 

Dickerson Park Zoo, Springfield, MO 
Gerald W. Murrie, San Diego, CA 


8 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


e 



SraCTRUM 


Quality exotic 
animal diets 


Nutritionally balanced 

Fixed formulation • Economical 


When you need a complete line of 
high-quality dry and frozen 
animal diets for your feeding 
program, call Animal Spectrum. 


NEBRASKA BRAND 


h \ 



SreCTRUM 


BROOD-RITE 

HEATERS 


Frozen feline diets 
Frozen bird of prey diets 
Frozen canine diet 
Chunk and chopped horsemeat, 
hearts, livers, rib, shank, 
knuckle bones, and tailbones 


Banana flavored primate, 15% protein dry 
Banana flavored primate, Pro-Plus 25% protein dry 
Leaf Eater primate dry Omnivore dry 

Llama Vitamins & Minerals dry Polar Bear dry 
Marmoset/Tamarin dry Ratite dry 

Floofstock supplement, with Selenium dry 

Bulbless heaters— nothing to break 
Safe around all animals and 
bedding material. 

Even heat distribution in 240, 500, 
or 750 wattages. 


GENTLE TOUCH^*' bedding 


One call does It all 

FREE 1 - 800 - 228-4005 

FAX 308-534-7015 


Animal Spectrum, Inc. 

P.O. Box 721 

North Platte, NE 69103-0721 


1991 Conference Proceedings Order Form 


If you are interested in obtaining a copy of the Proceedings containing the papers presented 
at the 17th National AAZK Conference held in Toledo, OH, you will need to fill out and 



Funds Only. AUow 4-6 weeks following deadline for receipt of publication. Prices are as 
follows: 


AAZK Member 
Non-Member 


$10.00 

$15.00 


Postage for U.S. orders is included. Canadian and overseas orders should add $3.00 for 
Air Mail postage to Canada and Surface postage elsewhere. Overseas orders wishing Air 
Mail service should add $10.00. Make checks payable to AAZK, Inc. 

Note: Individuals who presented papers at the Conference and submitted a manuscript for 
inclusion in these Proceedings will receive a gratis copy. If a manuscript was not 
submitted, a gratis copy will not be sent, and those individuals will need to order a copy. 

The following papers are included in these Proceedings: Sustaining Captive Primate 
‘Natural’ Behavior Via Psychological Enrichment On the Ground Conservation That 
Really Works: Preakness Clean-up 1991 ~ Cano Palma Biological Station ^ Keepers 

Helping Keepers Across the World - The Evolving Role of the Zoo Keeper ~ The Evolution 
of Conservation in Zoos and Aquariums: The Ecosystem Survival Plan ~ Breeding & 
Handraising the Blue and Gold Macaw in Northern Climates -- The Role of Zookeepers in 
Wildlife Conservation ~ The Keeper - The Resource or Toad on the Road, the First, and so 
far only. Amphibious Rock Hit Single - Hand Rearing Maned Wolves at the Louisville 
Zoo Treating Periodontal Disease in the Lesser Bushbaby ~ An Inexpensive Mechanical 
Restraint Device at the Milwaukee County Zoo ~ The Pancake Tortoise and Its Eggs 
Introduction of the Indianapolis Japanese Macaque Troop ~ Behavioral Training of a 
Llama Herd ~ The Red-bellied Lemur in Captivity ~ A Video ADT Goes to Sacramento ~ 
Use of Fecal Steroid Analysis in Sex Determination of Cranes and Psittacines ~ 
Management and Behavior of the Rodrigues Fruit Bat ~ Environmental Enrichment 
Methods: A Workshop for the Primate Keeper ^ The Evolving Role of the Zoo Keeper ~ 
Project Puffin. 


Proceedings Order Form 


(PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT) 

I wish to order copy(s) of the 1991 Conference Proceedings. 


I have enclosed $. 


plus $. 


for additional postage (if applicable) 


Name 


Address 


City 


State/Province 


Country 


Zip/Postal Code 


ORDERS MUST BE RECEIVED BY 10 FEBRUARY 1992 


During the 1991 National AAZK Conference in Toledo, a ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ (BFR) 
Workshop was held. Conference delegates attending the Workshop represented 23 of the 42 
Chapters that participated in the successful 1991 event. A major topic of discussion at the 
meeting was whether BFR should continue to support the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Project. A 
vote taken regarding continued support for the rhino project was ratified unanimously by 
the attending delegates. In addition to pledging their continued support, members also 
voted to send 100% of all BFR monies raised to the Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. for 
distribution to AAZK approved projects. 

Andy Lodge, coordinator for the Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc., submitted the following 
proposal to the AAZK Conservation, Preservation and Restoration Committee (CPR) and 
the membership for 1992. 

In 1991, AAZK membership voted to fence a portion of land called the Ngare Ndare Forest 
Preserve. This solar powered fence has been extremely successful -in separating wildlife 
from encroaching farmlands and poachers. The 1992 Proposal seeks funding for a fence to 
completely enclose Lewa Downs, expanding the protected sanctuary from 10,000 acres to 
110,000 acres. An expansion is necessary due to territorial overcrowding of breeding age 
males and to combat drought conditions which have now reached the critical point. The 
sanctuary of Lewa Downs contains forest reserve and natural swamps. Fencing this area 
will afford security and badly needed water in times of drought for many species in the 
habitat, especially rhino. 

The CPR Committee is proud to announce that Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo, is 
Coordinator for BFR this year. The committee hopes to raise the $225,000 needed for the 
fencing project.. The time frame for the 1992 BFR will be from March to July. Chapter 
participation is critical to the project and it is hoped that even more Chapters will hold an 
event in 1992. 

The Ngare Sergoi Support group, Inc. has again this year graciously provided prizes for the 
two top fundraising bowlers. The prizes consist of two trips to Lewa downs, all expenses 
paid from New York City. 

Should you require any further information, please contact: Patty Pearthree, P.O. Box 
199026, Indianapolis, IN 46219-9026. Phone: (312) 322-8723 OR Bob Debets, Assiniboine 
Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3P OR5 (204) 837-1635 

(home). 


A Presidential Message on Bowling for Rhinos 

In March of 1992, chapters again will be called on to support the conservation of African 
flora and fauna through our own ‘Bowling for Rhinos’, through your efforts over the past 
two years, $300,000 has gone directly to Ngare Sergoi for on-site species conservation. 

As always, 100% of monies raised in the name of BFR and transferred to AAZK, will be 
sent to Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. and forwarded to Africa, to be applied directly to in- 
country species conservation. AAZK is proud to be able to make the statement that 100% of 
monies earned go directly to our membership-supported projects and documentation is 
available on request from AAZKs CPR Committee. 

I have personally bowled quite terribly during the past two years in the name of BFR. I 
encourage all AAZK Chapters to get involved in this important cause. Prizes provided by 
the NSSG will let you see firsthand how much of an impact our money is making on 
conservation in Africa. The AAZK Board of Directors and the AAZK CPR Committee 
support this project 100% and we hope to have 100% support from our chapters. No effort in 
the name of conservation goes without notice. Hansen, AAZK President 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 



Ngare Sergoi Rhino 


Sanctuary Update 


from Anna Merz 
Founder I Patron 


Dear AAZK Members, 

Sadly I must report to you all that this year has been a year of catastrophe for us as well as 
for the Persian Gulf. The rains failed in April, we had only one-half inch and now in the 
middle of November, it looks as if they will fail again. We have also suffered a series of 
disasters with our rhinos. Some drought-related and some possibly so; at least all can be 
described as due to natural causes and not to the negligence of our security forces whose 
standard of training is being continuously updated. 

The first disaster occurred last Christmas Day. Instead of accepting an invitation to 
lunch, I was driving round the sanctuary and happened upon Makora having a major 
battle with the three-year-old white male recently purchased by Halvar. It was a most 
terrifying site with the young male quite literally being hurled up into the air and then 
knelt on by Makora; the noises they were making were every bit as dramatic as the sight. 
After certain dramas I did manage to separate them with the Susuki, shots being fired into 
the air by our rangers had no effect at all on the enraged Makora. Luckily after Fd 
rammed them apart, Cypriano heard my cries for help over the radio and managed to drive 
Makora in one direction while I drove off the young male in another. Dieter came up from 
Nairobi the next day and we captured the young male and did what we could for him, but 
sadly he died from a perforated stomach on the 28th. This has not been a good year for 
Makora who has lived up to his Swahili name of “trouble” - in May he had a battle with 
Gororika which I once more separated with my battered Susuki, no damage done this time; 
and in June he killed my mare Tosca for reasons unknown. 

In January we made a serious attempt to catch the rhino on the mountain between Kora and 
Meru that both we and the Eden Trust had paid guards to try and protect. The mountain is 
heavily forested and very steep. Sadly we failed and a few months later, it was killed. In 
February Gororika gave birth to a lovely male calf and we were all very excited. In April 
the rains failed. Daily we placed lucerne hay near her-she would play with it, sit on it, 
everything but eat it. Oct. 14th the calf died, the postmortem revealed dry grass in its 
stomach but no milk. The other two white cows with older calves are thin but still strong. 
From the end of April until October, we have lived in an ever increasing cloud of dust 
seemingly composed of our own dust, dust from the Phillipine volcano and smoke from 
Kuwait. We have never experienced weather like this before and most of us have suffered 
from sore eyes. On the 9th of May, two of our black males, Osupat and Kikwar seemingly 
had a dispute during the course of which Kikwar ran over a cliff and broke his back on 
landing. Osupat apparently landed on top of him and died a few hours later of massive 
internal injuries. 

On the 28th of May, we opened 400 yards of line fence near the east gate. While our entire 
labor force was working on the fence line, all our trackers were busy rounding up every 
giraffe they could find. When about 150 animals were reasonably assembled, Ted Goss, 
with the Eden Trust helicopter, drove them out through the gap, a most incredible and 
beautiful sight. By evening the fence was back in place and fully operational. Twenty to 
thirty giraffe remain in the sanctuary which has relieved the pressure on our trees, but has 
not helped the situation on Lewa Downs. To date, Ian has succeeded in translocating some 
60 giraffe off Lewa, he hopes to move at least another 300, if not more, if funds allow. This 
has been made possible thanks to the 4WD Mercedes lorry purchased by Andy Lodge and 
the NSSG from funds raised in ‘Bowing for Rhinos’; thanks to Ted Goss and the Eden 
Trust helicopter (as it proved impossible to round up giraffes and get them into the holding 
boma with horses); and thanks for funds raised by Dr. Eva Metzger, Richard Scholl, Fritz 
Bucher, the Animal Welfare Society of Switzerland, and Melinda Atwood. The bright 


12 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary Update. Continued 

orange lorry with its huge superstructure and its cargo of bright chestnut and white giraffes 
peering over the top provides a most amazing sight and a wonderful film of part of the 
translocation has been made by a French TV company. 

August was for us a fairly dramatic month. Two big male rhinos were having a series of 
battles up at the new 01 Pejeta rhino sanctuary. It was feared that one or both would be 
seriously injured or killed if they continued to battle it out, so, despite drought, it was 
decided to move one of them here. In order to prevent complications at this end, it was 
decided that Kelele should be captured and dehorned (with the consent of KWS) and we 
would see if we could keep him safely outside the sanctuary. Kelele‘s capture by Dieter 
provided us with some dramatic moments, but was successful as has been his subsequent 
release outside the sanctuary. At the same time it was decided to send Shaba's five-year- 
old son, Jupiter, up to 01 Pejeta. His capture caused even more dramas and at one stage the 
helicopter had to come to the rescue of my Susuki as I tried to get Dieter in range of Jupiter. 
Shaba did not agree and then there was the incredible moment when Shaba reared up and 
tried to attack the helicopter. Eventually the darted Jupiter went down in the Simba lugga 
where there was no hope of getting the lorry or crate to him. Dieter gave him some of the 
recovery drug, enough to get him on his feet and we proceeded to lead him to the lorry with a 
rope around his nose. By the time we had got him out of the lugga and near the crate, he was 
pretty much recovered and we had a fairly lively time getting him in. He has since settled 
down well at 01 Pejeta which has had good rains. 

Alas for Zero, the 01 Pejeta male who came here-the biggest rhino I have ever seen. On the 
13th of October he was looking as if he were trying to vomit; this I know in a horse means 
disaster and we all presumed it was equally bad for a rhino. Francis flew to Nairobi but it 
was Sunday and no vets were available. The postmortem showed something none of us had 
ever seen before. His esophagus from the throat down to the stomach was packed solid. The 
stomach was empty. Apparently the sphincter muscle at the opening to the stomach was 
paralyzed. Was this drought-related? There is a similar, but very rare disease in cattle 
which is drought-related. 

In September I went to England to help launch my book “Rhino at the Brink of Extinction” 
published in London by Harper Collins. That was for me an interesting, if rather 
frightening, experience. At least I saw bits of England I have never seen before and came 
away with a surprising respect for British Railways which enabled me to do day trips from 
London to as far afield as Liverpool. The book can be be bought in America from Jim 
McLarty, Rafiki Books, 45 Rawson Ave., Camden, ME 04843. I am hoping a paperback can 
be brought out in America later for the Support Group. I must at this stage apologize for a 
serious omission on P. 7 of the hardback edition where thanks to Andy Lodge and the 
Support Group was left out due only to my carelessness. My sincere apologies to Andy and 
you all. 

When I returned here after three weeks it was to learn of another disaster. Poor old 
Rongai had overbalanced and fallen to her death down a GOfoot cliff into the river. Her 3 
1/2 year old calf, Julali seems to be doing all right and much of her time is spent with Juno 
and her calf of the same age. So we have had 6 deaths this year and the only good news is 
the birth of a female calf to Sarnia's mother, Solia, in August. Sarnia herself continues to 
make good progress but is at present coming home regularly to have her diet supplemented 
by me in the form of dairy cubes, lucerne and the thorn bushes in the garden, carefully 
watered for her benefit. 

Because disasters have arrived thick and fast this year, it does not mean we are going to 
give up. We cannot increase the erratic rainfall to which this place is subject, but we can 
and MUST increase the size of the sanctuary. And this time we do not propose just to double 
it, but with the blessing of the ever-generous Craig family, to increase it six fold. We will 
turn the whole of Lewa Downs into a rhino sanctuary plus the Ngare Ndare Forest Reserve 
fenced in this year with a huge thank you to Andy, the Support Group and AAZK. Half of 
Lewa Downs is already fenced; 34 kms remain. We will have a Project proposal out early 
in the New Year which will be sent on request. Please help us and a very happy Christmas 
and ‘92 to you all. _ ^ 

-Jlnna Merz 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


13