
February 2012 



ANIMAL KEEPERS’ FORUM . 3601 S.W. 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 
Phone: (785) 273-9149 FAX (785) 273-1980 February 2012 

Vol. 39, No. 2 

Media Production Editor: Shane Good 'Assistant Media Production Editor: Elizabeth Thibodeaux 
• Senior Editor: Becky Richendollar, Riverbanks Zoo • Enrichment Options Column Coordinators: 
Julie Hartell-DeNardo, St. Louis, MO and Ric Kotarsky, Tulsa Zoo & Living Museum • Legislative/ 
Conservation Outlook Column Coordinator: Greg McKinney, Philadelphia, PA • ATC Column 
Co-Cordinators: Kim Kezer, Zoo New England and Jay Pratte, Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo • 
Conservation Station Coordinator: Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter. 

Animal Keepers’ Forum is published monthly by the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., 
3601 S.W. 29th Street, Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054. Ten dollars of each membership fee 
goes toward the annual publication costs of Animal Keepers’ Forum . Postage paid at Topeka, KS. 

AAZK Executive Director: Ed Hansen, AAZK, Inc., Topeka KS 

also serves as AAZK Liaison to the American Zoo & Aquarium Association (AZA) 

AAZK Administrative Secretary: Barbara Manspeaker, AAZK, Inc., Topeka, KS 


BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Bob Cisneros, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112-0551 President 

Penny Jolly, Disney’s Animal Kingdom, Lake Buena Vista, FL 32830-1000 Vice President 

Kelly Wilson, Detroit Zoological Society, Royal Oak, MI 48067 
Deana Walz, The Living Planet Aquarium, Sandy, UT 84094-4409 
Denise Wagner, Phoenix Zoo, Phoenix, AZ 85008 


COMMITTEES/COORDINATORS/PROJECT MANAGERS 


By-laws 

Chair - Ric Kotarsky, Tulsa Zoo 

Grants Committee 

Chair - Shelly Roach, Columbus Zoo 

Behavioral Husbandry Committee 

Chair - Christina Dembiec, Jacksonville Zoo 

Conservation Committee Chair 

Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter 

Bowling for Rhinos 

Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Cary, NC 

Products and Membership 

Jacque Blessington, K.C. Zoo, Project Manager 


Ethics 

Penny Jolly, Disney’s Animal Kingdom 
Awards 

Janet McCoy, The Oregon Zoo 
Professional Development 
Melaina Wallace, Disney’s Animal Kingdom 
ICZ Coordinator 

Norah Famham, Woodland Park Zoo 
Media/Website 

Denise Wagner, Phoenix Zoo, Project Manager 

Social Media 

Sean Walcott, SeaWorld San Diego, Project Manager 


Conference Program Manager 
Victor Aim, Oakland Zoo 


MEMBERSHIP SERVICES 

Data Transfer Forms 
Available for download at www.aazk.org 

AAZK Publications/Logo Products/ Apparel 
AAZK Administrative Office/Topeka 
or at www.aazk.org 


f \ printed on Recycled Paper 


Table of Contents 

About the Cover/Information for Contributors 50 

From the President 51-53 

The Scoop 54-57 

Letters to the Editor 58-61 

Coming Events 63-65 

AAZK Announces New Members....... 66 

General Announcements 67 

Call for Papers For Dedicated Issue of AKF - CHELONIANS................ 68 

Thank You Commercial Members 69 

The Biggest Loser - Ape Style 70-76 

A Special Partnership Part I 77-80 

Enrichment Options: Lemur Island Enrichment Part II 81 -89 

Training Tales (Catch a Tiger by the Tail: The Next Phase of Tiger Training at 

Disney s Animal Kingdom®) 90-94 

Conservation Station (A Conversation for the Conservationist) 95-96 



AMERICAN 

ASSOCIATION 


Of ZOO KEEPERS 


MISSION STATEMENT 
(Revised April 2009) 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. exists to advance excellence in the animal 
keeping profession, foster effective communcation beneficial to animal care, support deserving 
conservation projects, and promote the preservation of our natural resources and animal life. 


About the Cover - The animal pictured is an adult male drill ( Mandrillus leucophaeus). Drills are among 
the most critically endangered species of primate in the entire world. His piercing eyes almost seem to 
search the hearts and souls of we humans for our help in attempting to bring them back from the brink of 
extinction. The photo was submitted by Douglas Kresl and was a first-place winner in the photo contest 
that supported the very successful 2011 AAZK National Conference in San Diego. 

Drills are closely related to baboons and even more closely related to mandrills {Mandrillus sphinx ). 
They are members of the old-world monkey family Cercopithecidae. According to Wikipedia®, “A single 
dominant male leads a troop of around 20 females and is father to most of the young. Longevity is up to 
28 years. The diet is primarily frugivorous, taking a wide range of fruit, but they also eat herbs, roots, 
eggs, insects, and occasionally small mammals. Drills are among Africa’s most endangered mammals, and 
are listed by the IUCN as the highest conservation priority of all African primates. Drill numbers have 
been declining in all known habitat areas for decades as a result of illegal commercial hunting, habitat 
destruction, and human development; as few as 3,000 drills may remain in the wild, with the highest 
population estimate only 8,000. A total of 174 drills recovered from illegal capture are in semi-captivity at 
the Drill Rehabilitation and Breeding Centre in Nigeria and about 40 in other zoos internationally.” 

Source: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DrillJmammal) 

Please Note New Monthly Deadline and Contact Information 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers ’ Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for publication. Articles 
of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the zoo professionals who serve as 
referees for AKF. No commitment is made to the author, but an effort will be made to publish articles 
as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the 
Editor. The Editor reserves the right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in 
writing by the author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed, appropriately-sized envelope. Telephone, fax or email contributions of late-breaking news or 
last-minute insertions are accepted as space allows. Phone (330) 483-1104; FAX (330) 483-1444; email 
is shane.good@aazk.org . If you have questions about submission guidelines, please contact the Editor. 
Submission guidelines are also found at: http://aazk.org/akf-submission-ffuidelines/. 

Deadline for each regular issue is the 3rd of the preceding month. 

Dedicated issues may have separate deadline dates and will be noted by the Editor. 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the AKF staff or the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc. Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a copy of 
the reprinted material is forwarded to the Editor. If an article is shown to be separately copyrighted by 
the author(s), then permission must be sought from the author(s). Reprints of material appearing in this 
journal may be ordered from the Editor. Regular back issues are available for $4.00 each. Special issues 
may cost more. 

E-Mail Addresses: 

You may reach Barbara Manspeaker at the AAZK Administrative Offices at: aazkoffice@zk.kscoxmail.com . 
You may reach Shane Good and Animal Keepers Forum at: shane.good@aazk.org . 

Mailing Address: 

AAZK, Inc., 3601 SW 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 


AAZK website Address: www.aazk.org 
BFR Website: http://aazkbfr.org 


50 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol 39, No. 2 


From the President 


$4 Million 

As of this writing, Bowling for Rhinos (BFR) 
is about five thousand dollars shy of the $4 
million mark. According to BFR Coordinator 
Patty Pearthree, if all projected funds raised are 
turned in by the remaining Chapters, we may 
well exceed this important milestone in BFR 
history. Even if we fall a few dollars shy of this 
landmark, it will be close enough to really get 
excited about! 

Since 1990, Chapters across the country have 
gathered annually in an effort to support rhino 
conservation. To date, these funds have made 
it possible to help protect rhino species in both 
Africa and Indonesia. In addition to rhino 
conservation, funds generated from BFR events 
also support cheetah conservation in Kenya. AAZK’s flagship conservation program has made a 
profound impact on conservation in these areas. Through your hard work and generous support, you 
help equip Rhino Protection Units on two continents, resulting in better protection against poachers 
in Lewa, Sumatra, and Java. 

Chapters Champion the Cause 

None of the success of Bowling for Rhinos would be possible were it not for the incredible energy that 
AAZK Chapters and individual members exert during the weeks and months that precede this annual 
event. Each year, the pavement gets pounded, the flyers go up and chapters all across the United 
States (even some Canadian Chapters, too) begin the procession of pledges and donations. T-shirts 
are designed and sold, and in one of their finest hours of leadership and camaraderie, Chapters make a 
huge impact on Rhino conservation. Most importantly, not only do you raise funds for conservation, 
you also share the cause and educate others about the need for protecting endangered species and 
their habitat. At my Chapter, BFR brings non- AAZK members together to support a worthy cause. 
I am sure it is the same at your Chapter as well. 



The Trends 

It’s safe to say that that during the first BFR events back in 1990, there must have been a great deal 
of excitement. Since then that energy has taken off, resulting in some pretty impressive totals. If 
you go back and look at the BFR totals over the years, you’ll see some pretty interesting, though not 
so surprising trends. I have taken the liberty to include some graphs for you to make those trends 
stand out more. 

If you look at the Average BFR Totals, you’ll see that BFR has raised between $99,393 and $3 16,397 
annually in its 22-year history. You’ll also notice that with the exception of the 1 8 th year (2007), BFR 
fundraising has been a steady incline. In the second graph (Average Number of BFR Events), 
you’ll see how the number of participating AAZK Chapters has risen over the years. The correlation 
is evident: the more amount of participating Chapters, the greater the totals for BFR. 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


51 


A Plateau 


Looking at the BFR Totals and Average Number of BFR Events graphs, I am surprised to see 
that while we have increased the number of BFR events; our totals raised have essentially reached a 
plateau. The economy has much to do with that, I am certain, but nonetheless, the figures are there. 
The silver lining here is that you have made great strides in increasing Chapter participation in BFR 
with an event increase of over 20% in the last four years! 


Breaking the Pattern 

Recently, at our strategic planning meeting, AAZK established a goal of $500,000 for BFR. 
Considering that BFR’s best year boasted a sum of $316,397, $500,000 is quite a target. To 
effectively reach this target, we need to look at ways to improve our fundraising strategies for BFR. 
Quite simply, it comes down to this: more chapters raising more funds for BFR will help us achieve 
this goal. To help this process gain momentum, we will include a workshop at Syracuse on creating 
a successful event. We will utilize the expertise of Chapters who have a long history of gargantuan 
fundraising results for BFR. We want to set you all up to succeed as well as exceed our expectations! 
In the end, conservation efforts in Africa and Indonesia will reap the benefits. 

BFR is the flagship conservation project of AAZK. Through BFR, we have a long established 
tradition of supporting conservation. And our efforts are measureable; BFR funds help provide 
protection for rhinos and support habitat preservation for rhinos, cheetahs, and other species. 

Congratulate yourselves for a job well done! It is quite an accomplishment to raise $4 million in a 
little over 20 years. It has taken a great team effort; one that I am confident will continue on as we 
forge ahead to our new goal of raising $500,000 annually for BFR. While it’s not possible for us 
to save every species, we can make an impact as an organization, as a Chapter, and as individuals. 

Send me your thoughts. Some of you have seen BFR develop since its inception while for others; 
it is a new adventure in raising funds and awareness for conservation. Feel free to e-mail me at 
bob.cisneros@aazk.org . 

% 




EDITOR ’S NOTE: We did it! Just before this issue went to press, Bowling for 
Rhinos Coordinator Patty Pearthree announced that our flagship fundraiser 




has officially surpassed four million dollars in funds raised since the event's 
inception in 1990. All AAZK members, past and present, should be proud of 
this accomplishment. One of the things that makes any conservation project 

successful is long-term commitment, and since 1990 AAZK members have been 

• . . ■ 

saving species and protecting habitat across the globe. Congratulations on a job 




well done. Let's hope our success carries over into 






liitliil , , 
lltllilll 

km? 


fl 




iffgifi 

tKB 




52 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 





Average BFR Totals 


$350,000 

$300,000 

$250,000 

$200,000 

$150,000 

$100,000 

$50,000 

$0 


$265,205 


$192,789 


$149,249 

| 


|99,39| 

III 

I 

I § I 


S Average BFR Totals 


$7,000 

$6,000 

$5,000 

$4,000 

$3,000 

$2,000 

$1,000 

$0 


Average Amount Raised per Event 

$5,970 


Average Number of BFR Events 

65 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


53 



THE SCOOP 



Photo courtesy of Robert and Carolyn Buchanan, Polar Bears International 


Only 1 month is left in the AAZK Chapters’ Third “Trees for You and Me” AAZK Chapter 
Challenge which runs 1 September 2011 -1 March 2012. The link to “Trees” will be on Polar Bears 
International’s® (PBI) website. We will be helping to build the Polar Bear Forest® in Wisconsin with 
the help of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR). Our goal this year is to raise 
$25,000. Once again for each $1 donated up to 3 trees will be planted in the Polar Bear Forest. The 
winning AAZK Chapter will again have a tree planted in their zoo or community thanks to PBI, along 
with a plaque. “Trees” is a true collaboration between PBI, WDNR, and AAZK to plant trees, reduce 
CO 2 and help polar bears! 


PBI’s link for “Trees for You and Me” to donate; don’t forget to find 
your AAZK Chapter on the scroll and click to win. 
polarbearsintemational.org/programs/trees-vou-and-me-model-nation 


PBI’s link to how the AAZK Chapters are doing in this year’s competition 
polarbearsintemational.org/programs/trees-vou-me-date-0 


AAZK’s link to AAZK/PBI and reforestation 
aazk.org/aazk-and-polar-bears-intemational/ 


Any questions or comments contact 
christv.mazrimas-ott@aazk.org . 



for you and me 

J 



AMERICAN 

ASSOCIATION 


Of ZOO KEEPERS 


54 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Congratulations to the Battle Creek Chapter! 


The Battle Creek Chapter of AAZK is the midpoint leader in our annual Chapter Challenge known 
as “Trees for You and Me”. As the midpoint leader, they will receive a bush to commemorate their 
achievement. At our last tally, we have raised $7,039 towards our goal of $25,000. Here is how the 
top ten Chapters stack up in the annual Chapter Challenge so far: 

1500 Battle Creek AAZK Chapter 

1 000 Tucson AAZK Chapter 

795 Detroit AAZK Chapter 

750 Greater Philadelphia AAZK Chapter 

565 Brookfield AAZK Chapter 

548 Lincoln Park AAZK Chapter 

500 Lion Country Safari AAZK Chapter 

260 Tulsa AAZK Chapter 

250 Orange County Chapter of AAZK 

206 Greater Houston AAZK Chapter 


Member Updates 


Tammy Root Steps Down from AAZK Board of Directors 

Tammy Root, formerly of the Indianapolis Zoo, has 
stepped down from the AAZK Board of Directors to 
pursue her new endeavors as a Researcher with Harlan 
Labs in Indiana. Tammy was a Board Member since 
2007, the Board’s Oversight of the Behavioral Husbandry, 
Awards, and Grants Committees, and was a member of the 
National Enrichment Committee from 2004-2007, and the 
National Animal Training Committee from 2005-2007. 
Tammy was also very active on the local Chapter level. 
She was a very influential member of our Association 
and her leadership will be missed. We wish her well in 
her new endeavors and thank her for her many years of 
commitment to this Association. 



Tammy Root 


Denise Wagner Returns to the AAZK Board of Directors 

AAZK, Inc. is pleased to announce the appointment of 
Denise Wagner of the Phoenix Zoo to replace outgoing 
Board Member Tammy Root. Denise originally served 
on the AAZK Board of Directors from 2001-2009 and is 
a former President of the Association. Denise will assume 
oversight of the Awards and Grants Committees. Denise 
can be reached at denise.wagner@aazk.org . Welcome 
back to the Board Denise! 



Denise Wagner 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


55 



Victor Aim 




Angela Cecil Binney training 
a southern white rhinoceros 
(Ceratotherium simum simum), 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom 
(Off Exhibit) 


Victor Aim Selected as New Conference Project Manager 

AAZK, Inc. is taking on a greater role in helping conference 
hosts with the planning and structure of future conferences. 
To facilitate this, we have added a new Project Manager to 
help coordinate communication and goals between AAZK, 
Inc. and the conference hosts. The Conference Project 
Manager (CPM) will interact directly and act as a liaison 
between the Professional Development Committee and the 
Chapter Conference Committees. 

Victor Aim (Oakland Zoo) has been selected as AAZK’s 
Conference Project Manager. A national member since 2001, 
Victor has spent the last three years serving on the Professional 
Development Committee. No stranger to conferences, 
Victor has attended many of the AAZK Conferences as both 
presenter and workshop facilitator. Victor can be reached at 
victor.alm@aazk.org . Congratulations Victor! 

Mark DeDenus Steps Down from Associate 
Editor Position 

Mark DeDenus, a retired keeper from Tucson’s Reid Park 
Zoo and formerly of Assiniboine Park Zoo, has stepped 
down after many years as an Associate Editor of the Animal 
Keepers’ Forum. Mark was also a former Board Member 
of the Association from 1992-1995, and winner of AAZK’s 
Lifetime Achievement Award. If there were an AAZK Hall 
of Fame, Mark’s bronze statue would undoubtedly grace 
the lobby. We wish Mark a happy retirement and many 
rewarding years in his new job title: Grandfather. 

Angela Cecil Binney Steps Down from BHC 

Angela Cecil Binney of Disney’s Animal Kingdom is stepping 
down from her positions within the Behavioral Husbandry 
Committee and the AKF’s Training Tales Column. Angela will 
be pursuing new endeavors through her recently appointed 
position of Research Coordinator for the Animals, Science & 
Environment Department at Disney’s Animal Kingdom. 

Angela helped begin AAZK’s original Training Committee 
with Beth Stark of the Toledo Zoo in 2000. In 2004, she 
became the committee’s Co-Chair with Kim Kezer of Zoo 
New England, and the Committee’s name was changed to 
the Animal Training Committee. In 2009, she “retired” 
from the Chair position, but remained on the committee as a 
member (when it officially became known as the BHC) and 
Editor of the AKF’s Training Tales column, for which she 
was an Editor from 2006 until recently. 

We wish Angela well in her new endeavors as she moves from 
Animal Keeper/Trainer to Researcher. Let’s hope that she just 
replaces her training columns in the AKF with some papers 
related to her new work as a researcher. I have already dropped 
some not so subtle hints! 


56 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Bontebok SSP Seeks Coordinator 
and Studbook Keeper 

The AZA Antelope and Giraffe TAG is seeking 
a Program Leader (Studbook Keeper and SSP 
Coordinator) for the Bontebok SSP program. 
Those interested in applying for this vacancy 
should contact Martha Fischer, Antelope and 
Giraffe TAG Chair, at fischer@stlzoo.org by 1 
March 2012. 


SAVE THE DATE! - 
Ungulate TAG Meetings 

The AZA Ungulate TAGs will be holding their 
midyear meetings in conjunction with the 
2012 AZA Midyear Meeting in Palm Springs, 

California, hosted by Living Desert. 

This year the meetings will include midyear working meetings for the AZA 
Antelope and Giraffe TAG, the AZA Equid TAG, the AZA Cervid TAG, the AZA 
Caprid TAG, the AZA Wild Pig and Peccary TAG and the AZA Cattle TAG, as well 
as the Annual Ungulate TAG Research Symposium. In addition this year, the AZA 
Avian Scientific Advisory Group and the AZA Ungulate TAGs are collaborating on 
a joint workshop on Bird/Hoofstock Multi-species Exhibit Management. 

We would love for you to join us this year. Please mark your calendar with the 
following date: 



• 26 March, 1-5 pm 

Joint ASAG/Ungulate TAG Bird/Hoofstock Multi-species 


Exhibit Management Workshop 

• 28 March, 9:30 am - 5:30 pm 

AZA Ungulate TAG working meeting (agenda 


is coming soon!) 

• 29 March, 8 am - 5 pm 

AZA Ungulate TAG working meeting (agenda is 


coming soon!) 


For a full conference schedule, please visit aza.org/mymschedule/ 

Registration and Hotel information can be found here: aza.org/midyearmeeting/ 
We really hope to see you there! 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


57 



LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


In the December 2011 issue of the AKF, we reported on the tragedy in Zanesville, 
OH that involved the deaths of 49 exotic animals at a southeastern Ohio animal 
preserve. The report included an editorial and also a special interview with Dr. 
Chris Kuhar, Curator of Primates and Small Mammals at Cleveland Metroparks 
Zoo. What follows is some of your feedback. 


Dear Editor, 

Now is the time for all true animal lovers to join together. We must not let the lives of 49 exotic 
animals die in vain. I have been helping both people and exotic animals for over 38 years. Ten 
years ago I started the non-profit organization, Outreach for Animals. This organization consists of 
law enforcement, firefighters, EMT/paramedics, ER physicians, and veterinarians. Our mission is to 
teach proper behavior around wildlife. I did this because the private ownership of dangerous exotic 
animals has escalated in the United States. I am the subject of the internationally award-winning 
documentary “The Elephant in the Living Room.” Traveling the world, promoting the film and 
lecturing, I have learned that the private ownership of dangerous exotic animals is a phenomena 
found only in the United States. What I mean by that, is in Africa, India, Australia, and South 
America average people do not keep dangerous exotic animals in their homes. They have a healthy 
“respect” for wildlife. We have lost all “respect” for wildlife in the United States. What people see 
on educational TV programs is a man -vs- nature type show or animal experts living with tigers as 
house cats. The animals represented on these shows are usually surgically altered or medicated. 
When an uninformed person tries to bring a tiger into their home, they get a baptism in reality. These 
new owners honestly believe they can take their new pet to the local zoo and turn it in when they can 
no longer handle it, or want it. The worst scenario is what happened in the Everglades, when python 
owners released their oversized pets believing they were saving the animal, a bom free mentality. I 
have learned from asking dangerous exotic animal owners “why did you get this animal?” All have 
responded “because I saw it on TV.” This monkey see, monkey do mentality has become dangerous 
to both animal and owner. I have always said “when you bring a dangerous exotic animal into your 
home, it’s a time bomb waiting to explode.” You never know what is going to trigger it, or when it’s 
going to go off, only that it will. The owners have also signed a death warrant for themselves or the 
animal. One will usually die. The majority of the time it’s the animal. 

The members of AAZK need to be out front for this cause. What other group has more experience 
with dangerous exotic animals? Your knowledge is valuable and needs to be shared with the average 
Joe or Jane who watch Animal Planet. We together have to do what our TV experts have failed to do. 
We need to reach out to the public and teach “respect” for animals. Since the Zanesville Massacre 
the average person has been reaching out for answers. They have realized that their media heroes and 
government officials have failed to tell them the whole story. We need to step up and be the voice 
they need. We need to be the voice of the 49 exotic animal victims of Zanesville, Ohio. Now is the 
time to act. 

Tim Harrison 

Director, Outreach for Animals 

Editor s Note: Tim Harrison is the subject of the internationally award-winning documentary “ The 
Elephant in the Living Room. ” 


58 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Dear Editor, 


I would like to comment on the incident in Ohio. First, it was very tragic and unfortunately has put 
a bad light on private owners, small zoos, sanctuaries, etc. We need to look at the facts here. The 
OWNER supposedly let all the animals out which leads to a few questions. One, why did he have to 
cut fences to let them out? If he’s the owner, he had keys to unlock gates. Second, they said a suicide 
note was found, yet nothing was released about what it said. They also said they weren’t sure how he 
died and I haven’t heard anymore about an autopsy, etc. Wouldn’t it be evident that he died from a 
big cat bite or gunshot wound? We also must remember, this was not an ESCAPE. It was a deliberate 
RELEASE. Escape makes it sound like these animals can get out at anytime and the public needs to 
be scared that these animals can get out of any enclosure at any time, including from zoos. Since it 
was the owners that let the animals out, let’s not blame this because he was a private owner. After 
all, any person who has keys or access to animals in any setting has the potential to let animals out. I 
believe there have been cases in AZA zoos where people have broken into a zoo and let animals out. 

What needs to be put in perspective is why this happened and will it happen again. Instead the media 
has made it seem like anyone with potentially dangerous animals is a ticking time bomb. In this 
particular case, there were animal organizations trying to get these animals taken from this man, but 
authorities refused to get involved. 

I think we all agree that there should be stricter regulations on who can own exotic animals and how 
those animals are kept. Being a sanctuary director, I have seen animals kept in horrible conditions, but 
this hasn’t been limited to just exotics. I see horses starving, dogs chained up so tight and long that the 
skin of the animal grew around the chain, emus let loose in the country when the market dropped on 
them and the list goes on. With so many states starting to impose stricter regulations, exotic animals, 
at least the big cats, are not being sold as pets like they once were. In Texas, most of the breeders have 
gone out of business. Many counties have banned ownership and the private owners that did exist have 
not obtained new animals once their animals died. Big cats became a fad like so many other animals do. 
The fad is ending and unfortunately there are other exotic animals taking their place. Those of us in the 
animal business, especially rescue, know most of those that operate in exotic breeding and know where 
a lot of private owners are and truthfully there have not been as many calls in the last few years to rescue 
big cats from private owners. We are seeing small zoos and other sanctuaries go out of business due to 
the economy and those animals have to be rescued. The media for years has certainly exaggerated the 
amount of big cats in Texas. A new survey was done and we have less than 300 big cats in captivity in 
Texas. Less than 3,000 in the United States and this includes zoos, sanctuaries and private owners. To 
say there are more tigers in Texas than in India or the wild is not exactly a profound statement since we 
are now seeing the possibility of less than 2,000 tigers in the wild. 

It’s time we stop scaring the public about exotic animals and educate them. The fact is, animals can 
escape or be released from any facility. It is our job to make sure safety measures are put into place as 
best as possible to protect the animals and the public. I believe everyone from the small zoo owner, 
sanctuaries, responsible breeders and AZA zoos want to see proper regulations put in place and 
therefore we must all work together to see this happen. We have to remember that extreme animal 
rights groups are trying to stop animals from being kept in many places, including zoos. The first 
attack is the private owner and small zoos. Once those are gone, they move on to the next entity. AR 
groups have already attacked AZA zoos on how their animals are handled, yet they are not the experts 
but are gaining a hold on everyone in the industry. 

Terri Werner, Co-Founder / Director of Operations 
Tiger Creek Wildlife Refuge 
Tyler, TX 
tigercreek.org 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


59 


Dear Editor, 


I read with great interest your editorial in follow-up to the tragedy near Zanesville, OH that unfolded 
on 19 October 2011. Less than a month before that incident our non-profit exotic animal sanctuary, 
located in northeastern Indiana, welcomed filmmaker Michael Webber and Tim Harrison, one of 
the subjects of the prophetic documentary film “The Elephant in the Living Room”, to our facility 
for an educational Q&A about the exploding and epidemic exotic pet trade. As a home to more 
than 80 surrendered and confiscated former exotic “pets”, we had been following this film, and Mr. 
Harrison’s organization, Outreach for Animals, long before Terry Thompson made exotic pets the 
topic of break-room discussions around the nation. Little did we know what would unfold so close 
to home, so soon after an engaging evening with some of our “heroes”. 

In the world of non-profits, we’re told how critical it is to stay focused on the “mission”. At Black 
Pine, we are constantly faced with requests to provide refuge to rabbits, raccoons, and potbelly 
pigs. We have helped such animals in the past, but have learned that although EVERY animal is 
worthy of help, OUR mission is to provide refuge specifically to the most “exotic” of pets, such as 
tigers, monkeys, and bears, that typically face the fewest second-chance opportunities. To allow 
ourselves to sway from that purpose and commitment would surely stretch our resources too thin, 
and ultimately diminish our success. 

While I appreciate, for example, the Columbus Zoo’s involvement during and after the Zanesville 
incident, I am honestly perplexed as to how doing so was acting within their mission. It may indeed 
be a great publicity move, and truly commendable, to be the “hero” in this case, but I’m not sure 
how they and other zoo personnel will explain to every Joe Private owner from here on out why 
they can’t take in THEIR leopard or grizzly bear. This surely must be crossing the minds of zoo 
directors around the nation, not just my own. I believe the mission of most AZA-accredited zoos is 
well-understood by the general public. Swaying from the mission, I fear, would confuse an already 
largely ignorant public. Are zoos really willing to compromise the quality of their populations to 
save someone’s “pet”? I’m doubting that makes sense in the larger picture. 

We have a long way to go in collaboratively educating the public about the differences between 
private owners, private (unaccredited) zoos, sanctuaries, pseudo-sanctuaries, and accredited zoos. In 
my personal experience, I’m not sure the majority of people working in zoos fully understand those 
differences. That may well be a starting point to consider within zoo education programs. Zoos will 
surely continue to take the lead on task forces, in hearings, and to help drive legislative change and 
generally have more financial and human resources to do so. I hope they will also reach out and 
collaborate, as has been done in OH, to help ensure other affected organizations are involved as well. 
Despite the very best intentions, zoos are capable of being driven more by profit than a smaller, less 
“public” sanctuary may be. I believe that contrast is critical to these discussions. 

I look forward to seeing how the next few years unfold. Surely we all believe exotic, potentially 
dangerous animals do not make good pets. If we can start there, and stay focused on making that 
the “mission” of any collaborations that unfold, then I believe we can all be successful in creating 
positive change. 

Lori Gagen, Executive Director 
Black Pine Animal Sanctuary 
blackpine.org 