






Aquilegia: Newsletter of the Colorado Native Plant Society 

Dedicated to furthering the knowiedge, appreciation, and conservation of native piants and habitats ofCoiorado through education, 

stewardship, and advocacy 


STAFF 

Linda Smith, Administrative Coordinator & Sales Manager 
conpsoffice@gmail.com, 970-663-4085 
Jen Bousselot, Membership & Marketing Coordinator 
conpspromote@gmail.com 

Board of Directors 
OFFICERS 

President(Co-): Charlie Turner conpscturner@gmail.com 

President(Co-): Jan L. Turner JLturner@regis.edu 

Vice-President: Irene Shonie irene.shonle@colostate.edu 

Treasurer: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 

Secretary: Denise Wilson deniseclairwilson@gmail.com 

MEMBERS-AT-LARGE 

Jenny Ramp Neale nealejr@gmail.com 

Bob Powell robertlpowell@durango.net 

Lenore Mitchell mitchelllenore89@gmail.com 

Steve Olson sdolsonoslods@aol.com 

Jessica Smithjpsmith24@gmail.com 

Jan L.TurnerJLturner@regis.edu 

Cecily Mui cmui.svcc.gmail.com 

Amy Yarger amy@bigempire.com 

CHAPTER PRESIDENTS 

Boulder: Erica Cooper boulderconps@gmail.com 
Gore Range: Nanette Kuich kix@vail.net 
Metro Denver: Samantha Clark sam1 1 30@hotmail.com 
Northern: Renee Galeano-Popp mtnpoppies@aol.com 
Plateau: Stephen Stern stephen.r.stern@gmail.com 
Southeast: Jeff Jonesjjones@jonestc.com 
Southwest: John Bregarjohnbregar09@gmail.com 
COMMITTEE CHAIRS 

Conservation: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
Education & Outreach: Sara Copp src71 5@gmail.com 
Field Studies: Steve Popovich stevepopovich@hotmail.com 
Finance: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
Florticulture & Restoration: Jim Tolstrup jim@suburbitat.org 
Media: Jan Turner JLturner@regis.edu 
Membership: Charlie Turner conpscturner@gmail.com 
Research Grants: Catherine Kleier ckleier@regis.edu 
Sales: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
Workshops: Ronda Koski ronda.koski@colostate.edu 
Webmaster: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
SOCIAL MEDIA 

E-Newsletter Editor & Social Media Coordinator: Jen Bousselot 
Facebook: Carol English Twitter: Sally White 

AQUILEGIA: Newsletter of the Colorado Native Plant Society 

Aquilegia Vol. 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 201 6 
ISSN 21 61 -731 7 (Online) - ISSN 2162-0865 (Print) 

Copyright © 2016 

Aquilegia is the newsletter of the Colorado Native Plant 
Society. Members receive four regular issues per year 
(Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter) plus a special issue for the 
Society Annual Conference held in the Fall. 

All contributions are subject to editing for brevity, 
grammar, and consistency, with final approval of 
substantive changes by the author. Articles from 
Aquilegia may be used by other native plant societies 
or non-profit groups, if fully cited to the author and 
attributed to Aquilegia. 

The deadline for the Fall issue is October 30. 

Announcements, news, articles, book reviews, poems, 
botanical illustrations, photographs, and other 
contributions should be sent to the editor. 

Editor: Jan Turner JLTurner@regis.edu 

Cartoonist :Rob Pudim Columnists: Mo Ewing, Jim Borland 

Proofreaders: Linda Smith, Nan Daniels, Jen Bousselot, Sophia 

Warsh 

Layout & Design: Jan Turner, Troubleshooter: Charlie Turner 


Inside this issue 

Columns 

News & Announcements 31 

Conservation Corner: Agencies & Organizations 17 

Grow Native 43 

Book Review & New Books 41 

Articles 

Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week 4 

Tass Kelso: Tributes 6 

Dr. Arthur Kruckeberg - Obituary 9 

Superbloom at Rabbit Valley 10 

CoNPS 201 6 Annual Conference & CO Rare Plant Symposium 11 

Forty Years of CoNPS History 15 

Steinkamp Research Report: Regarding DeBeque Phacelia's 

Taxonomic Synonymy 19 

Zen and the Art of Wildflower Science 22 

Crowded Parks 24 

CoNPS Garden Tours 25 

Volunteers Make a Difference 30 

Eastern Slope News & Articles 35 

Browns Canyon Bioblitz 36 

Ute Indian Prayer Trees 36 

Western Slope News & Articles 38 

Bioblitz in the West: Plateau Chapter 38 

Grizzly Peak Research Natural Area 38 

Learning Field Techniques in Sagebrush Country 39 

Amazing Weekend at RMBL 40 


Botanicum absurdum by Rob Pudim 



2 


Aquiiegia Voiume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 




Your Support of CoNPS 

Members support the Colorado Native Plant Society in a number of ways. This serves to fulfill the mission of CoNPS, furthering 
the knowledge, appreciation, and conservation of native plants and habitats of Colorado through education, stewardship, and 
advocacy. 

Your service as volunteers makes a direct contribution to CoNPS' programs, whether it is promoting native plant gardening by of- 
fering your yard for a native plant garden tour, presenting programs for children at a nature center or library, helping pull weeds to 
reduce invasive plants in an area, organizing or leading a field trip so that others can learn about native plants and areas that need 
to be conserved, organizing or teaching a workshop or field seminar so members and non-members receive in-depth knowledge 
of a plant group or other subject, helping with the annual conference so information from a number of experts can be shared with 
a large group of people, giving input on plants or habitats that are being threatened, helping get information to readers through 
the website, social media, and /Agu/Veg/a, or volunteering on bioblitzes. CoNPS has a number of committees that organize mem- 
bers to make a difference in a specific area of education or conservation. We are divided into chapters that offer excellent educa- 
tional opportunities including field trips, chapter programs, and service projects. 

The bottom line is that it is all about you. You can make a difference. You can do it from home on your computer or out in the field. 
You will see volunteers making a difference at the CoNPS Annual Conference. You will see volunteers making a difference when 
you go on a field trip or attend a chapter meeting, . There are so many ways you can help. On page 30, you can read about the 
contribution of two CoNPS volunteers, David and Kate, who have reached a large number of children and adults with their pro- 
grams on plants and pollinators. We are grateful to David, Kate, and the many others who volunteer for CoNPS. You, too, can make 
a difference and have fun doing it! There is a "Volunteer" link on the CoNPS website menu that will lead you to descriptions of the 
CoNPS committees and what they do. The chapters can always use volunteers, tool At the Annual Conference at 6 p.m., attend the 
CoNPS Town Hall Meeting. Ask questions, give suggestions about the future of CoNPS, and find out about volunteer opportunities. 

Toetry By tfie Otfier yeatts* 

*(Not William Butler Yeats or Lora ine Yeatts, but Dick Yeatts, PhD, physicist, poet, writer, musician, and mountaineer) 


Vipsacus 

Herbophyles are want to fuss about die genus Dipsacus. 

A nasty weed, diat is a fact; but teasel has a second act. 
Dipsacus stands tall and proud, brisded heads above the crowd 
Of lesser plants amassed below ividi litde more dian leaves to show. 
In fields nidi limigry moudis to feed, teasels have abmidant seed. 
In all die shops diat fuller wool, teasel is die perfect tool. 

And to erne one’s many ills. Dr. Dipsa has the pills: 

Should you have a broken bone, no need to sit ai omid and moan; 
Or if you have a stomach ache, here’s die medicine to take; 

For liver, kidney, brain or skin, Dipsacus is sure to ivin; 

And to put your mind at ease, teasel cures Lyme disease. 

Now to brighten up your day, try teasel in a doral bouquet. 
Need a pet about die house? Make yourself a teasel mouse! 
Dipsa, here, is Greek for diirst, so let us keep hrst what’s first: 
Lift a glass, you have the knack, become a dipsamaniac. 

Dick Ye 

Photos by Loraine Yeatts 

Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 





Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week 

Proclamation Signed by Gov. John Hickenlooper 

Thanks to the efforts of Colorado Native Plant Society members, Governor John Hickenlooper signed a proclamation designating 
June 1 0 through June 1 6 as Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week. Some other states have Native Plant Days or Weeks includ- 
ing New Mexico, Texas, and California, but this year is the first time that Native Plant Appreciation Week has been celebrated in 
Colorado. The proclamation is significant because it is a recognition by the State of the importance of native plants and habitats 
to the citizens of Colorado and the many reasons to cherish and protect the plants. Special thanks go to Jennifer Bousselot, CoNPS 
Membership and Marketing Coordinator, who made the establishment of a Colorado Native Plant Week a goal when she start- 




WHEREAS, Colorado is known for its beautiful scenery of colorful native wildflowers and diverse native plant 
communities which transition over 10,000 feet of elevation from grasslands, riparian areas with ribbons of 
cottonwood and willow, sagebrush semi-desert shriiblands, pihon-juniper pygmy forests, scrub oak and mountain 
mahogany montane shrublands, montane forests of Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, lodgepole pines, and aspen 
groves that reach into the subalpine forests of Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir, limber pine, and bristlecone pine, 
and to the delicate plants of the alpine t undra; and 

WEIEREAS, our state fiowei; the Rocky Mountain columbine (Aquilegia coerlea), our state grass, blue grama, 
(Bouteloua gracilis), and our state tree, the Colorado blue spruce (Picea pungens) all serve as beautiful symbols 
for Colorado: and 

WHEREAS, the native plants of Colorado, such as the ancient bristlecone pine that is 2,500 years old, a limber 
pine 1, 600 years old, and an aspen grove with a root system over 80, 000 years old, are some of the most ancient 
residents of Colorado; and 

WHEREAS, native plant ecosystems with riparian, wetlands, and fens are important to keeping Colorado’s 
watersheds healthy; and 

WHEREAS, Colorado has over 3,000 native plant species, 132 of those species being endemic, and their habitats 
are in danger of being crowded out by invasive, non-native plants; and 

WHEREAS, Colorado ’s native plants are a critical part of our state 's natural heritage, and over 500 native plant 
species are recognized as rare; and 

WHEREAS, the native ecosystems provide necessary food and habitat for the smallest to largest of creatures: 
pollinators, birds, pika, marmot, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, elk, bears, and other wildlife of the state; and 

WHEREAS, native plants incorporated into the landscaping in our yards and communities helps increase the 
amount of habitat available to our native wildlife displaced by human development and necessary for biodiversity 
and a healthy ecosystem, and helps decrease the amount of resources, such as water and chemicals, used in our 
yards; and 

Therefore, I, John W. Hickenlooper, Governor of the entire State of Colorado, do hereby proclaim, forever after, 
the period between June 10, 2016 and June 16, 2016, as 

NA TIVE PLANTS WEEK 

in the State of Colorado. 

Executive Seal of the State of 
Colorado, this tenth day of June, 

2016 


ed her job with CoNPS in July, 201 5. Cecily Mui, 
CoNPS Board member, was instrumental in bring- 
ing CoNPS' request for a Colorado Native Plant 
Appreciation Day to the attention of the Colorado 
legislature after helping Jen draft a request in 
writing. The proclamation itself was the collabora- 
tive effort of a number of CoNPS members but it 
never would have come to be without the efforts 
of these two dynamic women, Jen Bousselot and 
Cecily Mui. 

The proclamation became effective on June 10, 
2016, the anniversary of the founding of the Colo- 
rado Native Plant Society. A party was held at the 
Audubon Society of Denver Amphitheater at Chat- 
field State Park to celebrate the 40th anniversary of 
CoNPS and the first Colorado Native Plant Appreci- 
ation Week. Board members including Cecily Mui, 
Jen Bousselot, Jan Loechell Turner, Charlie Turner, 
Jessica Smith, Mo Ewing, Amy Yarger, and Denise 
Wilson took turns reading the statements from the 
proclamation. 


CoNPS members were delighted that Jen Bous- 
selot organized the party celebrating this historic 
event. 



Jen Bousselot looks on as Cecily Mui reads from the 
proclamation. Photos by Loraine Yeatts. 



Jen Bousselot, Charlie Amy Yarger and Mo Ewing 
Turner, and Jessica Smith 


4 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


CoNPS 40th Anniversary & 
Native Plant Week Celebration 


The CoNPS 40th Anniversary Party & Native Plant Appreciation 
Week celebration at the Audubon Society of Greater Denver's 
Amphitheater at Chatfield State Park on June 1 0, featured a 
potiuck, the presentation by Cecily Mui of the Native Plants Ap- 
preciation Week proclamation signed by Governor Hickenloop- 
er, talks by Dr. Jack Carter and Dr. Bill Weber, and music by MikI 
Brawner and Eve Reshetnik Brawner of Harlequin's Gardens. 

The Colorado Native Plant Society was incorporated on June 
1 0, 1 976 so June 1 0, 201 6 was the perfect date to celebrate the 
anniversary and Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week. 

The founding of CoNPS was prompted by a 1976 workshop on 
threatened and endangered plants sponsored by the Denver 
Audubon Society and the U.S. Forest Service. Therefore, it was 
quite appropriate that the celebration was held at the Audu- 
bon Society of Greater Denver's facility and that USFS Regional 
Botanist,Tyler Johnson, and Executive Director of the Audubon 
Society of Greater Denver, Karl Brummert, were present. 

The evening started with a delicious potiuck (CoNPS members 
are excellent cooks) that members enjoyed on the deck outside 
the Audubon Nature Center. Pat Murphy staffed the Book Sales 
table and members brought seeds and plants to swap. Rick 
Brune's contribution of seeds and plants was spectacular! 

Following a reading of the statements in the proclamation by 
CoNPS Board members. Jack Carter gave an interesting talk and 
slide presentation on important botanists in Colorado botany 
including the contributions of amateur botanists. Jack also 
announced thatTass Kelso, one of the botanists featured in his 
presentation, had passed away Just days before. Jack and Tass 
were friends and colleagues at Colorado College. Jack success- 
fully battled the bright setting sun and strong winds (Charlie 
Turner held the screen to prevent it from blowing away) while 
giving his PowerPoint presentation. 

Next, long-time Boulder Chapter members and owners of 
Harlequin's Gardens, MikI and Eve Brawner, entertained the 
audience with their songs. Harlequin's Gardens in Boulder is 
well-known for its excellent selection of native plants. 

The evening concluded with a 
fascinating talk by Bill Weber 
about the reason for the strange 
distribution of a species of 
moss. Bill Weber was a founding 
member of CoNPS and the first 
elected president of CoNPS. 


Dr. Bill Weber 





From left to rightiTyler Johnson, Jessica Smith, AmyYarger, Mo Ewing, 
Jen Bousselot (behind Mo), Cecily Mui, Denise Wilson, Jan Loechell 
Turner, Karl Brummert, Executive Director, Audubon Society of Greater 
Denver. Photo by Loraine Yeatts. 



Above: MikI and Eve Brawner performing. 

Below: Potiuck dinner; In foreground, Rick Brune, Charlie 
and Jan Turner. 



Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 



Tributes to a Beloved Colorado Botanist: Tass Kelso 

Botanist and professorTass Kelso, passed away in June. Tass was a remarkable botanist and a remarkable person, whose 
friendship, research, and fine teaching skills touched the lives of many people. Below are some tributes from her friends and 
colleagues. 


Tass Kelso: The Loss of a Dear Friend 

by Jack Carter 


On June 8th we lost Sylvia "Tass" Kelso to pancreatic cancer, and what a terrible loss it was 
for so many reasons. Beyond being an outstanding teacher and distinguished scholar and 
investigator in the plant sciences, Tass had a personality and demeanor that made it a real joy 
to work with her. She had a gentle and quiet attitude towards learning that enticed students 
and faculty alike to want to Join her in the study of plants and the conservation of the natural 
world. She also had the disposition and presence, plus an academic background, that fit into 
the liberal arts and science college campus. 

Her undergraduate degree from Dartmouth College, a Master's Degree from the University 
of Colorado, (where she studied under Bill Weber), and a PhD from the University of Alaska 
prepared her for the Colorado College setting. In 1 987, when she arrived on campus, she 
brought with her an enthusiasm for the alpine and arctic flora of the Rocky Mountains, and she 
had a deep interest in maintaining and contributing to the Jack L. Carter Herbarium. Tass was a 
member of the Botanical Society of America, the American Society of Plant Taxonomy, and the 
Colorado Native Plant Society. 



Tass Kelso 

Photo courtesy of George Maentz 


She devoted many years to the study of systematics and reproductive biology of the Primu- 
laceae, and published several important papers addressing the variation and evolution with- 
in the taxon. Throughout her tenure at Colorado College she continued to study the vascular 

flora of the Pikes Peak region, recently publishing Peak 
to Prairie: Botanicai Landscapes of the Pikes Peak Region, 
and Fiora of the Pikes Peak Region, which are publica- 
tions that will stand the test of time. The quality of the 
written word, the illustrations, and the photos in these 
papers reflect the knowledge and skills of Tass Kelso at 
her best. 

Tass is survived by her wonderful partner and husband, 
George Maentz, who has Joined with her through the 
years to form a powerful team. 




Tass Kelso leading a CoNPS field trip 
Photo © Loraine Yeatts, 2006 


Tass Kelso 

Photo © Loraine Yeatts, 2006 
ofthe donor's choice. 


Memorial gifts in her memory may be made to the Tass Kelso Fund for the Study of Plant 
Diversity in the Pikes Peak Region at Colorado College (Colorado College Advancement, 14 
East Cache La Poudre St, Colorado Springs, CO 80903-3294) or to a conservation organization 


I have always been pleased that the faculty at Colorado College selected Tass to replace me in my retirement, for ours has been a 
wonderful friendship. 

Jack Carter is professor emeritus, Coiorado Coiiege, and author ofthe Trees & Shrubs of Coiorado . 

Tribute to Tass Kelso, Botanist, Master Teacher, Mentor, and Friend 


by M. Shane Heschel and Candace Galen 

Sylvia "Tass" Kelso, Professor Emerita of Organismal Biology & Ecology (QBE) at Colorado College, died in 
June 201 6. Tass was a member ofthe Biology/OBE Departments for 29 years, where as a teacher, scholar, 
and advisor she helped hundreds of students over the course of her career to become better scholars 
and stewards ofthe Earth through the study of botany. 

The geography of her life spanned the breadth ofthe U.S., ranging from coastal New England to the 
Alaskan tundra to the mountains and prairies of Colorado. After graduating from Dartmouth College, 

Photo by George Maentz 



6 


Aquiiegia Voiume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 









she began sharing her love of 
learning with elementary school 
students in New Hampshire. 

Eventually, her interest in plant 
diversity and the habitats sustain- 
ing it led to a Master's Degree from 
the University of Colorado and 
PhD in Botany at the University of 
Alaska. There, her investigations of 
arctic and alpine flora took shape, 
launching a research program that 
eventually led to more than 50 
publications and professional re- 
ports. Her research largely focused 
on the biogeography of alpine 
flora, including habitat require- 
ments, plant-pollinator relation- 
ships, species distributions, and 
phylogenetics. Tass' expertise in 
the genus Primula encompassed detailed studies of its ecology, 
breeding systems and taxonomy that spanned three continents 
and drew upon morphological and genetic studies. Moving 
beyond the "true" primroses, Tass' interest in edaphic special- 
ization drew her attention to a rare evening primrose, Oeno- 
thera harringtonii, endemic to the silty prairies of southeastern 
Colorado. Through the medium of this plant, Tass established a 
large collaborative team ("Dimensions of Biodiversity") whose 
comparative studies of Oenothera have stretched across west- 
ern North America. 


Photo by Candace Galen 2006 


Tass' love of evolutionary biology and systematics was further 
expressed in her work with herbaria, which she began as a 
graduate student at the University of Colorado Museum in 
Boulder. Tass was a champion for herbaria and trained dozens 
of students in the finer points of plant collections. At Colorado 
College, Tass' curatorial work with the Jack Carter Herbarium 
was instrumental in establishing it as a national resource for 
studies of Southwestern flora. 

As a botanist, evolutionary biologist, and conservation scientist, 
Tass was deeply committed to preserving the biodiversity of 
alpine, grassland, and riparian systems in Colorado. For this 
work she was recognized as an Outstanding Volunteer by the 
Colorado Natural Heritage Program. In addition to training 
botanists who have continued in their educations as gradu- 
ate students and practicing conservation stewards, Tass, her 
husband George Maentz, and her students have developed 
detailed management plans for many parks and open spaces in 
Colorado. In Colorado Springs alone, Tass and George's efforts 
led to the preservation of several parks and open spaces, such 
as the land adjoining the University of Colorado and Red Rock 
Canyon. Their work continues to conserve important and 
amazingly diverse habitats. Her efforts as a teacher-scholar 
will richly benefit generations of botanists and lovers of plant 
biodiversity. 

Tass and George welcomed botanists from afar into their home 
and accompanied them in exploring the Rocky Mountain flora. 
Visitors were rewarded with evening pollination performances 
by hawk moths and yucca moths, followed by morning con- 



Photo by Candace Galen 

versation over hearty cups of espresso and walks that revealed 
glimpses of rare and elusive plants hidden in the wetlands, 
fens, meadows and alpine habitats of Colorado. 


Tass' passion for teaching was infectious and her students and 
colleagues richly benefited from their interactions with Tass. A 
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Professor at Colorado Col- 
lege, Tass was a master teacher who regularly taught courses in 
botany, evolution, and conservation biology, and was able to 
inspire every student in the room with a quiet confidence and 
a respect for learning styles that was superceded only by her 
love of plants. Tass' influence as a mentor has been long lasting 
and transformative. She was a 
demanding but gentle advisor 
who modeled hard work, atten- 
tion to detail, and thoughtfulness 
for generations of students. Her 
love of the natural world, her 
enthusiasm for botany, and her 
great talents and generosity 
shaped many lives and careers. 

The botany community has lost a 
master teacher/scholar, a champion for 
biodiversity, and a wonderful person who saw great beauty in 
the world. 



Tass Kelso Photo by 
Maentz 2002 


Contributions in Tass's memory can be made to the Kelso Fund 
for the Study of Plant Diversity in the Pikes Peak Region at Col- 
orado College, PO Box 1117, Colorado Springs, CO 80901 . This 
fund will support student research in botany and especially, 
fund projects making use of the herbarium to study biodiversi- 
ty. 

M. Shane Heschel, Associate Professor and Associate Chair, Organ- 
ismal Biology and Ecology Department, Colorado College; Robert 
Raguso, Professor and Chair, Department of Neurobiology and 
Behavior, Cornell University; Jill S. Miller, Professor of Biology and 
Environmental Studies, Amherst College; Candace Galen, Professor 
of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri. 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


1 



Remembering Dr. Sylvia "Tass" Kelso 

by Denise Culver 

Sylvia "Tass" Kelso, Professor Emeritus at Colorado College, passed 
away on June 8, 201 6 after an 1 8-month struggle with pancreatic 
cancer. 

Since 1 987 she was a member of the faculty at Colorado College, 
teaching courses in botany, conservation, and evolutionary biology, 
among others, and was Curator of the Carter Herbarium (COCO). She 
was dedicated to sharing her enthusiasm and teaching about plants 
with students and with the public. 

Awards and honors include the Colorado College Burlington Northern 
Award for Faculty Achievement in Teaching (1 992); the John D. and 
Catherine!. MacArthur Professor at Colorado College (1992-1994); 
the Verner Z. Reed Professor of Natural Sciences endowed position 
(2004-2007); and she was recognized as Outstanding Volunteer by 
the Colorado Natural Heritage Program. 

Tass' botanical specialties included the systematics and reproductive 
biology of the Primulaceae, on which she authored numerous papers. 

She also studied and published papers on the arctic and alpine flora and its phytogeography, the floras of southeastern Colorado 
and the Pikes Peak region, edaphic endemism, grasslands, the influence of Quaternary environments on plant distributions, plant 
reproductive biology, and the continuing importance of floristic exploration. Her research on Primulaceae has resulted in most of 
her contributions, culminating most recently in treatments of Primula, Androsace, and Douglasia in Volume 8 of Flora of North Ameri- 
ca and Dodecatheon and Primula in the revision of the Jepson Manual of the flora of California. 

Tass and her husband George Maentz have been wonderful supporters of CNHP for over 20 years. The "Bed and Breakfast on Mesa 
Road" in Colorado Springs is a favorite with staff. Several CNHP staff have been students of Tass over the years, so lass's legacy 
continues. On a personal note, one of my favorite memories is of Tass running through the short willows {Salixglauca) on the South 
slope of Pikes Peak with her plant collection bag bouncing along her side! 

Tass' botanical expertise, intellect, and friendship will be greatly missed. 



Tass Kelso (right) and Denise Culver (left) collecting cut-leaved 
groundsel {Senecio eremophilus) on the south slope of Pikes Peak. 


Denise Culver is a Wetland Ecologist with the Colorado Natural Heritage Program (CNHP) and co-author with Joanna Lemly of Field 
Guide to Colorado Wetland Plants (available from the CoNPS Bookstore). Denise teaches workshops and field seminars for CoNPS. 

This article is printed with permission from the Colorado Natural Heritage Program Blog, http://cnhpblog.blogspot.eom/2016/07/remem- 
bering-dr-sylvia-tass-kelso.html (July 13,2016). 



Platyschkuhria integrifolia (Desert Daisy) covered the meadows with waving, golden yellow 
flowers when we arrived on May 4. They were just beginning to unfurl buds and only got 
better and more floriferous as the days passed. 

I returned home with 1,400 photos from a two-week trip. That's an average of 100 photos per 
day! It may be another 6 or 7 years before a display of this magnitude returns to those barren 
shale hills. In the meantime, I will have my photos and my memories to remind me of that 
flowerland paradise. 

Jane Hendrix is a member of the Gore Range Chapter. She and her husband, Klaus, lead 
willdfiower hikes in the Breckenridge area and give tours of their Mountain View Experimental 
Gardens. Jane is a talented botanist, writer, and photographer. Visit her websites at http://www. 
picturetrail.com/snowtrekker7 and http://www.picturetrail.com/hendrix. Photos in this article © 
Jane Hendrix. 


David Goulson, British Bumblebee Expert & Author Speaks in Boulder/Westminster Sept.25 and 26 

Dave Goulson is a British scientist and conservationist who is a leading authority on bumble bees. He will speak publicly in Colo- 
rado on Sunday, September 25th at the Jaipur Literature Festival in Boulder (the last time is 4-5 p.m.) http://www.bouldercolora- 
dousa.com/events/Jaipur-literature-festival/ and on Monday, September 26th at the Butterfly Pavilion. https://bouldercolorado. 
gov/planning/connecting-the-dots CoNPS ENews will have more information. 


8 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


DR. ARTHUR R. KRUCKEBERG 
(MARCH 21, 1920 - MAY 25, 2016) 
by Richard Olmstead 



Two giants of the PNW botany: A.R. Kruckeberg and C.L Hitchcock 


Art Kruckeberg, Emeritus Professor of Botany, University of 
Washington, died on May 25, 201 6, at age 96. Art left a legacy 
as a scholar, teacher, promoter of gardening with native plants, 
and conservation activist. 

Art joined the Botany Department as an Assistant Professor in 
1 950 after completing his Ph.D, at UC Berkeley. He grew up in 
California and was imbued with all things botanical from an 
early age; his family owned a publishing house called Krucke- 
berg Press, which published gardening and horticultural pub- 
lications. He began grad school in 1 941 at Stanford, where he 
spent the previous summer as a field assistant for the famous 
botanical research team of Jens Clausen, David Keck, and Wil- 
liam Heisey (Clausen, Keck, and Heisey rolls off the tongue of 
most botanists the way Tinker, Evers, and Chance does baseball 
afficionados). 

Due to forces beyond his control, graduate study would have 
to wait. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, Art enlisted in the 
Navy and was recruited into their language program, where 
he learned Japanese. He spent the rest of the war years and a 
year of postwar occupation, translating Japanese documents 
and interpreting interrogations of captured Japanese prison- 
ers. To the very end of his life. Art was proud of his mastery of 
Japanese. I had the occasion to spend a week at a conference in 
Japan with Art in 1 989; he could still speak the language AND 
remembered the plants he had seen there even though it had 
been over 40 years since he had left Japan. 

After the war, he returned to California to start grad school 
again, this time at Berkeley. He completed his Ph.D. under the 
supervision of Herbert Mason, with Hans Jenny and G. Ledyard 
Stebbins on his committee. Mason had recently begun study- 
ing the unique flora found on serpentine soils in California. Art's 
dissertation {An Experimental Inquiry into the Nature of Ende- 
mism on Serpentine Soils) helped bring the descriptive work on 
serpentine endemism into the realm of experimental science. 
Art maintained a research program on serpentine plants 
throughout his career, writing several books for both academic 
and lay audiences, in addition to a significant body of scientific 
publications. 


Once Art's academic bona 
fides were well established, 
he increasingly devoted his 
attention to public outreach 
through his writings, promo- 
tion of conservation activism, 
and pushing for the estab- 
lishment of environmental 
legislation to preserve lands for 
their value to biodiversity. In 
1 972, he led the movement to 
create the Washington Natural 
Area Preserves Act, in 1 973, 
he developed the first list of 
rare and endangered plants 
in Washington. In 1976 he 
helped found the Washington 
Native Plant Society, and in 
1 982 he helped create the Wash- 
ington Natural Heritage Program within the Department of 
Natural Resources to oversee management of natural area 
preserves and endangered species, and during those years 
also served on the US Forest Service commission to identify 
parcels of federal land to preserve as Research Natural Areas. 
Art was awarded the prestigious Peter Raven Award for 
public outreach in botany by the American Society of Plant 
Taxonomists in 2006. 

Art leaves a living legacy in the form of the 4-acre garden 
he and his wife Mareen developed over the course of 50 
years in Shoreline. This is the "type garden" for his most 
widely known book. Gardening with Native Plants in the 
Pacific Northwest. This book has turned on generations 
of gardeners to the Joy and conservation value of using 
our native flora in home gardens. When the book was first 
published, it won the "Governor's Award" for outstanding 
books published by Washington authors. The Kruckeberg 
Botanic Garden is now a public garden owned by the City of 
Shoreline and managed by the Kruckeberg Botanic Garden 
Foundation. 

Art served on my Ph.D. committee and I have a debt of 
gratitude for Art's support over the years. During the last 
few weeks, I have been sorting through the detritus of a 
career left behind in Art's last office in the Plant Lab. With 
news of his passing, the many memories into the man who 
influenced me so, take on additional meaning. A legion of 
friends, colleagues, and many who never met him, but were 
influenced by his work, will mourn his passing. 

Gifts in honor of Art can be directed to the Kruckeberg 
Foundation or to the endowment he created in the Depart- 
ment of Biology for Plant Biology. Please make checks out 
to the University of Washington, with "Kruckeberg endow- 
ment" on the memo line. Questions? Contact Lisa at <lisa- 
tran(a)uw.edu> or 206.685.21 85. 

Plates accompanying this BEN obituary are posted at 
http://mpb.ou.edu/ben/507/ben507_plates.pdf 

This article reprinted with permission from Richard Olmstead, Profes- 
sor, Dept, of Biology, University of Washington. Photos are from the 
Kruckeberg family collection. 



Siskiyou collecting trip 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


9 



The Desert is Blooming: 

Rabbit Valley Super-Bloom Dazzles Plant Lovers 

by Jane Hendrix 


1-70 is the fast track from Grand Junction to the stunning red rock country of eastern Utah. Not much to see. Just endless, barren 
shale hills. But when the rains come in late winter, those shale hills burst forth with a palette of colorful wildflowers so numerous 
one can hardly find a bare spot to put down a foot. Hiking slows to a walk and then to a shuffle with many stops to find the next 
spot to step upon without damaging a gorgeous flower. The last time we witnessed such an explosion of color was in May 2009. 
To our delight. May 201 6 was even more floriferous. Here are just a few of dozens of species that delighted us at every turn. 





coccmea 
(Scarlet Globemallow) 

took our breath away! 

So numerous were they 
that they streaked the 
hillsides orange. I hiked 
down from the road to 
get closeup photos of 
this lovely species and 
discovered it also emits a 
delightful fragrance. 


Mirabilis multiflora (Colorado Four 
O'clock) teased me for days. It is unmis- 
takable with its huge, rounded leaves and 
sprawling habit. Festooned with tightly 
closed buds, I tried to catch it in full bloom. 
Contrary to its common name, it does 
not bloom at 4 p.m. (not even correcting 
for Daylight Saving Time). It also doesn't 
bloom at night or at first light. On our last 
day in western Colorado, Klaus found this 
specimen in its full glory. The time was 1 2 
noon MDT. 


Oenothera caespitosa (Tufted 
Evening Primrose) dotted the land- 
scape like lingering patches of snow. 
Its large, white flowers are equally 
showy when they fade to deep pink 
and close in the light of midday. 


Calochortus nuttallii (Sego Lily) were in bloom by the hundreds of thousands - mabe mil- 
lions. Looking closer at each blooming plant, I saw one or two additional buds waiing to Join 
the chorus of this incredible bloom. The Sego Lily ranges in color from snow white through 
soft pink to deep rose-fuchsia. No two flowers have exactly the same color which prompts the 
photographer to try to capture each different hue. When the bloom is done, nothing remains. 
The stalks become dry and brittle and the strong winds break them off at the surface, sweep- 
ing clean those shale hills. 


About 20 minutes after I photographed this one and only clump of deep rose Sego Lilies and 
was out of sight in another area, a returning hiker picked the whole group for her wildflower 
bouquet. My heart was broken. Those happy, smiling flowers were now corpses. I was so glad 
I had not delayed in capturing their essence while they were still alive. The moral of this story: 
Never put off photographing a flower you encounter until the light is better, the rain has 
stopped, the wind is calmer, you go to the bathroom or get a snack. 


Eriogonum oval! folium (Ova I leaf 
Buckwheat) grows in a tight mound 
of small, gray-green leaves with per- 
fectly round clusters of creamy white 
flowers dancing 6 inches above its 
foliage. 


Lygodesmia grandiflora 
(Showy Rush Pink) took 
me by surprise the first 
time I encountered it - Just 
a solitary blossom topping 
spidery-looking foliage. 

It is a large flower for the 
height of the plant, which 
is only about 6 inches, and- 
perfectly designed with its 
soft pinkish-lilac ray flow- 
ers. I look for it every time 
we are in this area in May. 


10 


(cont. on bottom of page 8) 

Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 



CoNPS 2016 Annual Conference 

1976 - 2016: Forty Years of Change: Plants, People, Places 
MacAllister Building, 4001 Discovery Dr., University of Colorado, Boulder 



Above: Monarda fistulosa and Flatirons Photo by Jan L Turner 


CoNPS Annual Conference & 
40th Anniversary Celebration 

Please join us in Boulder, CO, on Sept. 24-25, 
to celebrate the founding of CoNPS 40 years 
ago, honor our founders, and learn about 
changes in botany, plant ecology, native plant 
gardening, and pollination biology from 1976 
to the present. 

The schedules for Friday, Saturday, and Sun- 
day are listed in brief in this issue. For com- 
plete details, see the Annual Conference issue 
of Aquilegia that came out last month. It can 
be found on the CoNPS website on the menu 
under "Resources" -> "Aquilegia Newsletter." 

The next few pages contain some updates 
about the Annual Conference. Already, over 
200 people have registered for the conference. 

Parking at the MacAllister Bldg. Lot 

Parking lot attendants will be selling parking 
permits for $10 per day in the morning until 
9:00 a.m. Cash only. 


Reporters & Photographers Needed for 
Annual Conference 

Would you be willing to take photos at the Rare Plant Sympo- 
sium, CoNPS Conference, or on your field trip for Aquilegia? 
Would you be willing to write a summary of a talk or field trip 
for Aquilegia? If so, please contact Jan LTurner at JLTurner(S) 
regis.edu. 

PHOTO CONTEST DEADLINE EXTENDED - Please 
send in electronic submissions ASAP. Must re- 
ceive 8x10" prints by Sept. 22. 

Lodging & Campgrounds 


Lightning Talks About Current Research 

The Botany Track on Saturday afternoon will feature a number 
of Colorado graduate and undergraduate students reporting 
on their research. Most of the speakers giving lightning talks 
have been selected. 

Jessie Condon. Floristic Inventory of Mclnnis Canyons National 
Conservation Area. Undergraduate of Environmental Sciences 
and Technology. Colorado Mesa University. Grand Junction. 
Advisor: Dr. Stephen Stern. 

Carla DeMasters. How Do Native Annual and Biennial Species 
Affect Cheatgrass Abundance?" 


Some Boulder Chapter members have offered their spare 
bedrooms for Conference attendees in need of lodging. Please 
contact Jan Turner for info. JLTurner@regis.edu. Other options 
will be posted on the CoNPS website. 


Dyan Harden. Strategic Precaution: /W/mu/i/sgem/n/parL/s 
Moisture Content Thresholds for Cold Storage. MS Horticulture 
& Landscape Architecture. Colorado State University. Advisor: 
Dr. Jim Klett 


Charge cards will be accepted at the Bookstore and Silent 
Auction. CoNPS book prices are discounted and usually 
lower than that of Amazon. To participate in the drawing 
for door prizes, cash is needed. 

Silent Auction & Book Sale (Cont. from page 14) 

Door Prize Too! 

Bring some dollar bills with you to the Saturday Conference 
because there will be a cash donation box. For each donated $1 
you will receive 1 door prize ticket. A $5 donation will receive 6 
door prize tickets. The winner of the door prize will receive half 
of the door prize donations! 


James Cooper. Measuring Rates of Vegetative Response to 
Riparian Restoration in the Gunnison Valley. Graduate Student. 
Western State University. Gunnison. Advisor: Dr. Tom Grant III. 

Mat Sharpies. Vascular Flora of the South San Juan Mountains: 
A Natural History Inventory of Two Southern Rockies Slopes. 
Graduate student. University of Colorado, Boulder. 

Joe Statwick. Astragalus linifolius: When the Loss of a Rare Spe- 
cies is a Win for Conservation. Recent PhD graduate from the 
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Denver. Ad- 
vised by Anna Sher at DU and Jennifer Ramp Neale at Denver 
Botanic Gardens, Department of Research and Conservation. 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


1 


13th Annual Colorado Rare Plant Symposium Fri., Sept. 23 MacAllister Bldg. 

8:30 Registration 

9:00 Introduction and ground rules - Jennifer Neale, DBG 

9:1 5 Review of Southwest Colorado G2 plant species: status review, current conservation efforts and priority conservation action 
needs - Jill Handwerk, CNHP 

10:30 Break 

10:45 Breakout Session : Group input for T&E, Gl, and remaining G2 &G3 plant species of Colorado: status review, survey results, 
threats and current conservation efforts 

1 1 :30 Lunch (on your own; the cafe in the McAllister Bldg, may be open on Friday; it is closed on weekends) 

1 :00 Breakout Session: highlights and priority conservation action needs for the coming year 
2:00 Demonstration of interactive county map of rare plants 
2:15 Demonstration of regional interactive herbaria 

2:30 Break 

2:45 Field Season Highlights: ^) Mimulus gemmiparus surveys and reintroduction; 2) Browns Canyon BioBlitz 
3:00 Conservation Success: Ipomopsis polyontha 

4:30 Adjourn 

5- 7 p.m. Friday Night Reception and Tours of the CU Museum (RARE II) and CU Norlin Library (Weber) (Meet at Museum) 



[SmH 


pi£t.ai!irr5-nFn- 


Norlin 

Library 


OJAtC 


FCSH 

ATUS 

CEKIBR 


■.laiAL l« 
ARTS U 


[aETaCtfMSTCT 


^Museum 


CDUfGE AllhUE 


P,IElkCRIU. 

QhlTHI 


U^l 


EJUCffiHACL 


iVjrfFVK 


iDU iirnsr 
INTBIhUTiaMilL 


.IHMJGITY 


MWKyLgy i JtibJ fiiff 



j 








MUSEUM of NATURAL HISTORY 



Parking near the CU Museum 

There is "The Stampede" a RTD bus service from the CU 
Research Park to Main Campus that runs 7 AM-7 PM www. 
colorado.edu/pts/stampede. 

There are two on-campus options to park after 5 PM which 
offer easy access to Norlin Library and CUMNH. The closest 
public parking is Euclid Autopark (the garage portion is cur- 
rently under construction) but they have opened a public lot 
due south of that Autopark in lot #204. (see attached map) 
There is also lot #208, right next to our Museum which is 
usually empty after 5 PM. Payment can be made online, with 
credit card or coins at Pay stations in the parking lot. 


12 


r 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 