
MARCH, 1942 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Pages 

Editorial Pages 1, 2 

Flowering Cherries, By W. H. Warren 3 

Fate, Incorporated — Landscape Architect, by Noble Hoggson 6 

New Hibiscus, by William H. Henderson 8 

Camellias, by Mrs. Donald G. Graham 9 

“He Who Plants a, Rose Plants Beauty,” by Earl William Benbow 12 

The Heaths and Heathers, By Arthur P. Dome 13 

Rock Garden Plants, by Mrs. L. N. Roberson 16 

A Few Outstanding Shrubs of Eastern Washington, by Harold T. Abbott 18 

Daphne and Its Culture, by Theodore Albert 20 

The Genus Primula, by Ida Schibig 21 

Chrysanthemums, by Mrs. George T. Williams 23 

Spring Garden Notes, by C. Wieting 25 

Book Reviews, by Jesse C. Johnson and John H. Hanley 27 


APPLY FOR MEMBERSHIP 

In The 

ARBORETUM FOUNDATION TODAY 

ARTICLE ON PAGE TWO TELLS OF ITS VALUE 


Vl 


R&ieA 


CHOICE WASHINGTON and OREGON 
ISO. 1 GRADE 

TAKEN FRESH FROM THE EARTH 
AT TIME OF PURCHASE. 


PRICES AT NURSERY 

4(H 3 for 1 0# 


Mail Orders 15% Additional to Cover Packing 
and Postage. 

If Residing in State of Washington Add 3% Sales Tax. 
WRITE FOR COMPLETE LIST 



We Have More Than 100 Varieties of Top Grade Rose Bushes. 

WRITE FOR COMPLETE LIST, Which Includes Patented Varieties and Tree Roses. 


Autumn scarlet, cerise gold 

Betty Uprichard— pink orange 

Christopher Stone scarlet 

Condesa de Sastago— coppery rose 

Dainty Bess single pink 

Duquesa de Penaranda— apricot, 
orange and pink 

Hadley rich crimson 

Joanna Hill— dark red 
Lady For teviot— apricot 


Albertine copper yellow 

American Pillai crimson pink 

Bonfir e red 

Dr. Huey— crimson maroon 
Emily Gray— yellow 


Else Poulsen— bright rose pink 

Gloria Mundi orange scarlet 

Kirsten Poulsen scarlet 


BUSH TYPE 

Lady Margaret Stewart yellow 

orange 

Lord Charlemont— deep crimson 

McGredy’s ivory white 

McGredy’s orange 

McGredy’s^— scarlet 
McGredy’s— yellow 
Mrs. C. A. Van Rossem— 
apricot yellow 
Mrs. E. P. Thom— yellow 

CLIMBERS 

Golden Emblem yellow 

Hoosier Beauty— dark red 
Lady Hillingdon— apricot 

Los Angeles salmon pink 

Mermaid — light yellow single 
Mme. Ed. Herriot— coral 

POLYANTHA or BABY ROSES 

Lafayette— •deep red 
La Marne— rosy pink 
Mile. Cecile Brunner— clear pink 
with yellow base 


Oswald Sieper— white 
Padre— coppery scarlet 
Pres. Herbert Hoover - 
scarlet orange 
Rev. F. Page-Roberts— 
yellow and red 
Shot Silk— cherry red-orange 
Sunburst— yellow 
Talisman— gold yellow and 
copper 

Ville de Paris— sun yellow 


Mrs. Aaron Ward— golden buff 
Pres. Herbert Hoover 
orange and red 

Talisman golden yellow 

and orange 


Perle d’Or— yellow with orange 
center 

Wm. Finch— pale flush pink 


— Write for List of Choice — 

Ornamental, Shade and Fruit Trees , Evergreens , Perennials, Fines and Hedge Plants. 

Phone Richmond 1161 
VISITORS ALWAYS WELCOME! 


EST. 

1903 


"Our Business Is Growing’ 

RICHMOND NURSERIES 

Richmond Beach, Washington 


Aurora Ave. (New Everett Highway) to Richmond Highlands 
1 Mile West on Richmond Beach Road. 


OPEN 
ISUNDAYS 





The Arboretum Bulletin 



Vol. V. No. 3 Seattle, Washington March, 1942 

Editor Dr. John H. Hanley 

Advertising Manager Mrs. Jesse C. Johnson 


Vol. V. No. 3 Seattle, Washington March, 1942 

Editor Dr. John H. Hanley 

Advertising Manager Mrs. Jesse C. Johnson 


Address all communications to Arboretum Foundation 
5532 White Building, Seattle, Washington 


The Enlarged Bulletin 

The Arboretum Foundation decided last 
fall to increase the size of its Bulletin for 
the March and September issues. Immediately 
following Pearl Harbor there arose some 
grave doubts as to the feasibility of continu- 
ing with the plan. Largely at the insistence 
of Mr. Donald G. Graham, your Foundation 
president, it was carried through. We offer 
herewith our first product with the hope that 
it may meet with your approval. 

1 i i 

Among Our Contributors 

Mr. W. H. Warren is Superintendent of 
Parks at Victoria, B. C., where they have, for 
a number of years, made detailed studies of 
flowering trees for ornamental purposes. 

i 

An intelligent, energetic young man, Mr. 
Noble Hoggson, has brought a lot of original 
ideas into Northwest landscape architecture. 

i 

Mr. William H. Henderson of Fresno, Cal- 
ifornia, is the well-known breeder of hibiscus 
varieties. 

i 

Mrs. Donald G. Graham, who writes on 
camellias, is chairman of the Membership 
Committee for the Arboretum Foundation. 
In conjunction with the very special garden 
developed by her husband, she has made a 
particular study of camellias and is recog- 
nized as one of our local authorities. 


Rev. Earl William Benbow is a former 
president of the Seattle Rose Society and has 
been affiliated with that organization for 12 
years. i 

Mr. Arthur Dome is the recognized source 
of really valuable information on heathers. 

i 

Mrs. L. N. Roberson is a very prominent 
member of the Western Unit of the American 
Rock Garden Society and, along with her 
husband, operates one of our best nurseries. 

i 

Mr. Harold T. Abbott is Assistant Super- 
intendent of Parks at Spokane, Washington, 
and his wide and varied experiences with 
the plants of that region make this article 
particularly worthwhile. 

i 

Mr. Theodore Albert is specializing in the 
genus Daphne at his nursery near Olympia. 

i 

The Northwest is an ideal country in which 
to grow primroses and Mrs. Ida (Walter) 
Schibig is far and away the leading amateur 
primrose specialist. 

y 

Mrs. George T. Williams has made a special 
effort to gather together and flower a tremen- 
dous number of chrysanthemum varieties, as 
is evidenced from her article. 

i 

Mr. Carol Wieting is one of our assistants 
at the University of Washington Arboretum 
greenhouses. 


Arboretum Membership 

By Mrs. Donald G. Graham 

A LREADY our Arboretum has been rated 
by experts as ranking third among the 
arboreta of the United States. The position 
of the Arboretum as a scientific station is 
now recognized, and it has many friends not 
only in the state of Washington but through- 
out the United States who believe in its value. 
This widespread interest is shown through 
our membership records. Growing from a 
membership of 315 in 1938, there are to date 
1,319 members of the Arboretum Foundation. 
Of this number there are approximately 285 
members from 82 towns and cities in the 
state of Washington outside of Seattle, and 
25 memberships from 11 other states — Cali- 
fornia, Oregon, Arizona, Illinois, Pennsyl- 
vania, Minnesota, New Jersey, Iowa, District 
of Columbia, Massachusetts and Missouri. 

There are now 76 garden clubs from 40 
towns and cities in the State of Washington 
which have memberships in the Arboretum 
Foundation. 

Extremely gratifying have been the five new 
memberships at $50 each which have been 
received within the last few months and the 
12 new memberships at $100. The 12 $100 
“corporate” memberships were taken out both 
by individuals and by business firms. 

Many times within the last few weeks the 
question has been raised as to whether inter- 
est in the Arboretum will continue with Red 
Cross and defense work being uppermost 
in people’s minds. It is significant to note 
that during December, with war declared 
and the distractions of Christmas, the names 
of 25 new members were added to our files. 
During the past month of February, 32 new 
memberships were received. But we need 
more and more new members. 

We are told that all during the World War 
of 1914-18, the English people did not over- 
look or alter their program in the care and 
upkeep of their world famous arboretum — 
Kew Gardens — founded in 1759. It is also 
interesting to note that, at the present time, 
the regular fortnightly flower shows of the 
Royal Horticultural Society, staged in Lon- 
don, have gone on with but a single inter- 
ruption which occurred during the height of 
the bombing there in September, 1940. 


Mr. Wake McLellan of San Francisco 
makes the following comment: “In England 
where the problem is a thousandfold greater 
than it is in our country or ever will be here, 
they have found that flowers play an im- 
portant part in keeping up the morale of the 
people as well as showing real affection, 
which is so appreciated and necessary at 
times like this.” 

Memberships are most valuable in the 
continued progress of this Arboretum of the 
Northwest. We look for the continued sup- 
port of our old members and hope for many 
more new members. W.P.A. work has been 
withdrawn from the Arboretum area and 
additional funds are now needed for the 
development, as well as for the maintenance, 
of that area. Memberships are the most de- 
pendable source of income. These member- 
ships have various classifications — $2.00, 
$5.00, $10.00, $25.00, $50.00, and $100.00, 
and business firms, partnerships and corpora- 
tions are eligible as well as individuals. It is 
the hope that all Arboretum Foundation 
members will at this time give special sup- 
port and aid in increasing the memberships 
of the Foundation. 


ARBORETUM MEMBERSHIP BLANK 


□ Associate $ 2.00 

| | Regular 5.00 

□ Active 10.00 

□ Sustaining 25.00 

□ Foundational 50.00 

U] Corporate 100.00 


The Arboretum Foundation, 

5532 White-Henry-Stuart Bldg., 
Seattle, Washington. 

I hereby apply for membership in the 
Arboretum Foundation and remittance 
for same is enclosed to cover dues for 
the next succeeding 12 months. 

Name 

Address 

All memberships are non-assessable. 


Two 


Flowering Cherries 

By W. H. Warren 

Superintendent of Parks, Victoria, B. C. 

T HE FOLLOWING notes on flowering 
cherries have been accumulated during 
an intensive study over the last ten years by 
the Parks Department in Victoria, B. C., in 
its endeavor to find suitable flowering trees 
to substitute for forest trees on city boule- 
vards. The latter have been a source of 
expense and trouble for many years. The 
uninterrupted service of sewers, drains and 
public utilities on streets naturally takes 
first place over the use of trees. Since street 
trees are used here more for ornamentation 
than for shade, Victoria is using varieties 
which cause least trouble to public services 
and provide the greatest ornamental value 
in flower, fruit and foliage. About 1000 
flowering trees were planted on boulevards 
in Victoria in 1941. 

The coastal section of the Northwest is as 
congenial, climatically, to the growing of 
ornamental material indigenous to the tem- 
perate zone, as any other place on the conti- 
nent. We have not scratched the surface yet 
in accumulating and testing the potential 
value of the vast quantity of material avail- 
able. The services of the University of Wash- 
ington Arboretum in this respect should in 
time be a tremendous boon to horticulture 
on both sides of the line. For instance Reh- 
der lists about 300 kinds of crabapples, haw- 
thorns and mountain ash in his “Manual of 
Cultivated Trees and Shrubs,” not to mention 
the dozens of lesser known named varieties 
of ornamental crabapples which have orig- 
inated in Canada and in the United States in 
recent years. There are in addition several 
hundred species and varieties of flowering 
cherries, exclusive of flowering plums, apri- 
cots, almonds and peaches. Doubtless there 
are many worthless varieties and differentia- 
tions scarcely worthy of varietal names, yet 
notwithstanding there are many fine varieties 
quite unknown to us that deserve a trial. 

In studying flowering cherries the exper- 
ience of the following authorities has been 
very helpful: Mr. Collingwood Ingram, fore- 
most British authority, whose articles have 
appeared periodically in the Royal Horticul- 
tural Society’s Journal, “Gardeners’ Chron- 


icle and Gardening Illustrated”; Paul B. 
Russell, assistant botanist, Bureau of Plant 
Industry, author of the excellent U.S.D.A. 
Circular No. 313, published in 1934, “The 
Oriental Flowering Cherries”; Mr. W. B. 
Clarke, Clarke’s Nursery, San Jose, Califor- 
nia, one of the most informed authorities in 
the United States; the late A. E. Wohlert, 
Wohlert’s Nurseries, Narberth, Pa., and K. 
Wada, a very progressive Japanese nursery- 
man, who visited Seattle a few years ago. 

For a detailed description of varieties, see 
the above bulletin. The following notes are 
intended only to supplement the bulletin. 
The large-growing, single-flowering cherries 
appear to be longer lived and generally more 
suitable for streets. The most promising of 
these are: Higan or Equinox cherry (Prunus 
subhirtella) and its many varietal forms and 
closely related species, Yoshino (P. yedoen- 
sis), Sargent’s cherry (P. Sargenti) and the 
cut-leafed or Pygmy cherry (P. incisa). It 
must be noted that there is still much con- 
fusion in varietal names in America, Europe 
and in Japan. 

The Higan or Equinox Group 

Prunus subhirtella. This cherry varies tre- 
mendously in habit of form and flower. 
Flowers are usually small and fleeting, often 
injured by late spring frosts. The variety 
Beni-higan has small pink flowers and is 
described as tall and upright to 60 feet high. 
Shiro-higan, similar in growth, is a form 
with white flowers up to 1% inches in diam- 
eter, a good specimen of which grows behind 
the museum in Volunteer Park. The ordinary 
Higan is a broad tree up to 25 feet high, 
floriferous in the older trees, but sometimes 
with scant bloom in the younger stages. It is 
to be noted that Rehder makes no such dis- 
tinction between the tall type and the smaller, 
broad type. There are two forms of the 
Shidare or weeping Higan, namely, the pyr- 
amidal and the mushroom type. Beni-shidare 
or Park Weeping exemplifies the first. It 
was propagated from a pink flowered weeper 
growing in Golden Gate Park. New branches 
keep rising from the crown so that the tree 
gradually gains height. Ito-Shidare, the 
thread-branched weeper, also known as 
Eureka Weeping, is the common mushroom 
type. The following notes were recorded in 
Victoria: The variety Sendaica, said to be 


Three 


the best weeping form by Wada, proved to 
be disappointing. It was quite variable, 
probably having been grown from seed. 
Wada claims it is grown for its habit rather 
than the flowers, having thread-like, pen- 
dulous branches in age. Western taste may 
not coincide with Japanese aesthetic values 
in this respect. In addition there is a double 
pink weeping Higan. One grows near the 
entrance to the Conservatory in Volunteer 
Park, Seattle. Rehder and Clarke call it Yae- 
Shidare Higan. Ingram introduced it to Eng- 
land as Sendai-ito-Zakura, and it was at his 
instigation that the Yokohama Nursery pro- 
pagated it, calling it Totsu-zakura. The dou- 
ble subhirtellas are all superior to the singles 
in ornamental value. Prunus subhirtella 
autumnalis, Jugatsu-zakura or October 
Bloomer, is a double pink cherry which 
makes a wide crown. It usually starts to 
bloom in October or November and continues 
intermittently during frost-free weather until 
April. Under our winter conditions the flow- 
ers may be injured by frost but not so the 
buds, which continue to open successively as 
soon as the weather again becomes favorable. 
In providing winter color in the garden this 
tree has high value particularly in sheltered 
positions. The largest tree in Great Britain 
is 21 feet high and 36 feet through the crown. 
Most promising of all subhirtellas are the 
double, upright forms. As particulars of 
these varieties appear to be lacking in Amer- 
ican literature, the following detailed notes 
may be of some value: 

Prunus subhirtella Fukubana (Makino) or 
Momijigari. Under our conditions, the flow- 
ers are red in the bud like Malus floribunda, 
opening a rosy pink, finally fading to pale 
pink. Petals number 12 to 21 and are three 
to four-sixteenths inches wide, i. e., narrower 
than in Atsumori. They are also more sharp- 
ly cleft at the tips than the latter and some- 
what twisted, giving the blossom a frilled or 
fluted appearance. The flowers, % to 1 % 
inches wide, are usually borne in clusters of 
three, but sometimes two or four; pistils one 
or two; leafy bracts on peduncles up to ^ 
inch long. The calyx and stems first appear 
reddish and the leaves are bronze when 
young; it flowers later than all other Higan 
cherries and is a most profuse bloomer, even 
on very young trees. The tree grows vigor- 


ously and the foliage colors well in the fall. 
Like other subhirtellas it does best when fall 
planted and seems to resent late spring plant- 
ing. This may be due to its susceptibility to 
twig blight (brown rot fungus). 

Regarding the nomenclature, which is 
somewhat confused, Ingram wrote me in 
1938: “Clarke’s Momijigari is the same plant 
as the one I received an Award of Merit for 
under the name P. subhirtella rosea plena 
in 1935. Since then I have learned that it has 
been described by Makimo in the Bot. Mag. 
of Tokyo, 1908, as P. subhirtella Fukubana, 
so this must be regarded as its correct name. 
It was Fukubana that I praised in my R.H.S. 
paper (see “Flowering Trees and Shrubs” — 
R.H.S. 1938 ; also colored plate in Gardeners’ 
Chronicle, Nov. 3, 1934).” To illustrate the 
confused nomenclature, Wada sells it under 
the name of Prunus subhirtella ascendens 
pendula rubra flore plena. He states by 
letter that it is the same as Fukubana. He 
also called it P. subhirtella fl. rubro pleno. 
Notcott, an English nurseryman, calls it P. 
subhirtella flore plena, and says it is pretty 
and distinct, quite unlike other forms of sub- 
hirtella cherries. The branches are wreathed 
in cerise pink buds opening to double or 
semi-double, clear, bright pink flowers. It is 
one of the really pink cherries likely to be- 
come a great favorite when better known. It 
should be in every collection. Marchant, an- 
other English nurseryman, claims it is strong 
growing, making a head 10 feet to 20 feet 
wide, according to the soil. The then weeping 
branches are a lovely sight in March and 
April with clusters of flowers like tiny double 
roses, vivid crimson in bud opening to deep 
carmine red. 

Regarding its habit, since we obtained 
stock from Wada, his description of it led 
us to believe it was a true Shidare higan or 
weeping type, but from Marchant’s descrip- 
tion and our observation it is upright in 
habit until maturity when the tips of the 
branches take on a pendulous habit. We note 
also it occasionally has semi-pendulous sucker 
growth on young trees. It is quite rare in 
cultivation. 

To sum up, we like it because of its long 
blooming period, which is characteristic of 
all double cherries, its attractive pink flow- 
ers, strong growth and autumn foliage. 


Four 


The double higan described by Wada as 
Atsumori or Prunus subhirtella ascendens 
rosea flore plena is, so far is I know, sold 
only by him and is unknown in Britain and 
the United States. It is slower in growth than 
Fukubana, upright in habit with larger, paler 
flowers which vary from 1 inch to 1% inches 
wide, red in the bud, opening to an apple- 
blossom pink shade, fading to pale pink or 
almost white. Old blooms have purplish 
calyces and filaments. They are borne in clus- 
ters of two to four, usually three, and each 
has 14 to 21 petals. Pedicels iy% inches; 
peduncle short, up to l/^-inch, usually nearly 
sessile; leaves small, unfolding clear green. 
The petals are 14 to % inch broad with two 
or three round lobes at the tips. The flowers 
appear flat with an open center, a shade 
deeper pink that Jugatsu. The leaves do not 
color much in the fall. It is equally as flori- 
ferous as Fukubana. The blossoms of both 
Atsumori and Fukubana seem to be more 
susceptible to late frosts than the species. 

We have experienced some difficulty pro- 
pagating higan cherries and it is probable 
that they do best grafted on seedlings of the 
same species. Pendulous varieties will be 
found difficult to grow as standards in young 
stages and require careful staking. When top 
grafted they may get one-sided which may be 
obviated by using two scions in a cleft graft. 

Yoshino and Its Varieties 

Yoshino or Prunus yedoensis is sometimes 
called Joshino in Britain. This is a vigorous 
growing, early, single flowering cherry mak- 
ing a large tree in a very short time. It grows 
well on P. avium stock and the autumn color 
is good. For a detailed description see the 
U.S.D.A. bulletin by Russell, who claims it 
will come true from seed though we find 
young trees to be so variable in habit and 
flower that it is wise to propagate vegeta- 
tively. On good soils it makes long growth 
which should be thinned out, properly 
spaced, and tipped back regularly to make 
lateral growth, otherwise it is apt soon to 
grow out of hand making lanky growth with 
few laterals, like the sweet cherry. We note 
that the long flowering stems of Yoshino give 
it a lovely light effect when in full bloom. 

Yoshino is considered to be a hybrid be- 
tween the Prunus serrulata, from which most 
of the double forms of Japanese flowering 


cherries have come, and Prunus subhirtella. 
There are a number of variations and hybrids 
of Yoshino, some of which might be worthy 
of trial. 

Akebono or Daybreak is a pink flowered 
form of Yoshino. Clarke says it is one of 
the most beautiful varieties, grows well, 
makes a good sized tree and blooms freely 
before leafing out. Specimens in Victoria, 
obtained from both Clarke and the Yokohama 
Nursery, lack vigor. Growth is slow and poor 
so far. It may be that it prefers a warmer 
climate although Wohlert in Pennsylvania 
says that it is similar in habit to Yoshino 
with larger flowers of a deeper pink shade. 
We note it is free blooming like Yoshino but 
the floral effect is bunchy because of the short 
14 -inch flower cluster stalks. 

The variety perpendens, sometimes called 
pendula, grows straight into the ground and 
does not impress us favorably. Ingram says 
the flowers are smaller than the species and 
it is not so beautiful as the original tree. 
Praecox is a variety supposed to be three 
weeks earlier than the type, according to 
Wada. Ours make a very late semi-pendulous 
growth. The trees were as green at Christ- 
mas, 1941, as in midsummer and we find 
those which make such growth do not give 
good floral displays in the spring. The wood 
is apt to be injured too easily by winter 
weather. Pandora, a double form of English 
origin, is a cross between Yoshino and P. 
subhirtella. Grown by Waterer of Bagshot, 
England, it received an Award of Merit from 
the R.H.S. The flowers are short stalked, 
rosy blush, single and of medium size. 

Shojo, described by Wada as a double 
form of Yoshino, is classified as a varietal 
form of Taizan-fukun by Ingram in the 
R.H.S. Journal, 1935. 

Taizan-fukun, a hybrid supposed to be of 
similar origin to Yoshino, is very useful 
for avenue planting. Several specimens grow 
on the road to Mr. Butchard’s Gardens in 
Victoria. The young foliage emerges a brown 
shade and fall color is good. The tree as- 
sumes a vigorous upright habit with a head 
probably 12 feet wide. The following are 
condensed notes from various authorities: 
It is a magnificent ornamental, best described 
as a fragrant double form of the well-known 
Amanagawa but with more branches, giving 


Five 


it a fuller appearance. Ingram reports it to 
have a semi-fastigiate habit with clusters of 
very double, pale pink flowers with pubescent 
pedicels and foliage as in P. Sieboldi; foliage 
is rather narrow and small, golden bronze 
when young; the bark is somewhat rough, 
sometimes peeling on young trees. Clarke 
says it is particularly valuable where space 
is limited; the flowers are rather small, but 
freely produced. 

The Cut-leaved Types 

Fuji-zakura, Fuji or cut-leaved cherry, 
Prunus incisa. This tree is also known as the 
Pygmy cherry because it is a favorite among 
the Japanese for dwarfing purposes. It re- 
sembles P. subhirtella but has a bushy habit. 
It is said to develop fast, trees trained as 
standards growing 10 feet to 15 feet in five 
years. It may make a small, elegant tree 20 
to 30 feet high though more often it is a 
thickly branched bush 6 to 18 feet. It is 
extremely free flowering though the flowers 
are small, like those of subhirtella, and 
rather fleeting. The buds, calyx and flower 
stalks are red and the red calyx is extremely 
persistent giving a wine color to the center 
of old flowers. Little mention is made of the 
excellent autumn foliage in literature. Alto- 
gether we like this cherry very much. Ingram 
has this to say of it: “It has many virtues. 
It is completely hardy, very floriferous and 
has neat birch-like foliage with deeply cut, 
double serrations. Incisa is useful for hedges, 
tolerant of shade and will stand heavy prun- 
ing. A sturdy, stocky little tree, whether in 
sunshine or in shade, it is always happy and 
cheerful. Nothing seems to daunt its deter- 
mination to flower and each spring it com- 
pletely clothes itself in snowy blossoms. At 
a distance the flowers often appear pink due 
to the red cupula and calyx merging with 
the white petals creating a soft pink effect.” 

The variety viridi-calyx has a green calyx, 
hence the floral effect is snow white. Growth 
is vigorous and upright. Fall color very 
good. Rehder calls it Yamadei. Serrata is a 
variety with less deeply serrate leaves which 
Ingram says is so indistinguishable from the 
type as not to justify a varietal name. There 
are several hybrids of incisa produced by 
Ingram. Umineka (Seagull) A.M., R.H.S., 
1928, is crossed with P. speciosa. Extremely 
(Continued on Page Thirty) 


“Fate, Incorporated — Landscape 
Architect ” 

By Noble Hoggson 

A YE TANK ve get a bulldozer now,” 
said Oleson, as he scribbled on a 
board with a pencil stub. Our contractor had 
already cut our Tudor castle down to a sub- 
urban hillside cottage, but the thought of this 
snorting monster, trampling our treasured 
ferns at fortunes per hour, terrified us. No 
sooner said than done, however, for in a cou- 
ple of days our “view lot,” with its precious 
madrona, two dogwoods and scattered small 
firs, was a mass of devastation. A yawning 
hole, seeming far too large for our tiny 
house, occupied most of the lot including one 
of the dogwoods. A stupendous pile of gravel 
and chunks of clay covered the lower hill- 
side and dribbled rocks onto the street below. 
Our elderberries, wild spirea and hazel were 
pushed flat by the avalanche while our poor 
ferns, Oregon grape and groundcover lay 
forever buried. 

Finally our foundation was completed and 
quickly the house took shape. A load of 
lumber was dumped squarely on our lone 
huckleberry and the concrete truck took a 
lower branch and two square feet of tender 
bark off the madrona. However, the house 
continued to go up as did the piles of board 
ends, shingles, broken brick, plaster chunks 
and empty paint cans. One day without warn- 
ing the monster returned and, in less time 
than it takes to tell it, shoved all the trash 
(and what little topsoil we had fought to 
save) into the gaping canyon beside the foun- 
dations. Still it was a great relief to be able 
to again walk on fairly level ground even 
though a sea of mud, and we now had high 
hopes of getting settled before Christmas. 

That turned out to be a rosy dream indeed, 
but after “unavoidable” delays and inexcus- 
able extras we finally moved in. The painters 
weren’t quite through, and one morning while 
in my shower, I was shocked by someone 
starting to take off the bathroom door for a 
minor repair. But dust and wet paint or not, 
we were at last in our own home. Of course 
the mud tracked in by the children didn’t do 
our new rugs any good and our nice hard- 
wood floor began to show premature sand 
scratches near the doors. A lawn in the spring 
would fix that all right, but meanwhile the 


Six 


winter rains were cutting great canyons and 
ravines in our “game lawn” bank. We were 
afraid the city would complain of the growing 
dune of silt on the lower street, so we looked 
up a rock man. His price seemed staggering 
after our recent extras but something had to 
be done. The completed rockery wasn’t as 
artistic as we had expected, but those great 
empty spaces between the rocks (plant pock- 
ets he called them!) would look better when 
filled with a mass of bloom — we hoped. Due 
to the condition of the soil he had to use 
more “batter” than he had planned, but it 
wasn’t ’til the following summer that we 
discovered that the additional batter made 
our only level lawn just five feet too narrow 
for the badminton court we had always 
wanted. 

The winter rains settled the dirt around the 
foundations, pulling the drains loose from 
the downspout, flooding the cellar, and leav- 
ing a long depression across our front “lawn” 
where the water pipe trench had been. We 
discovered also that the rubbish in the back- 
fill is no fit soil in which to plant the cute 
little evergreens which we bought one Satur- 
day at a hardware store. Moreover a small 
piece of shingle is one awful thing to try to 
dig through, and there were lots of them. 
Years later we discovered another mistake 
when we had to cut a tunnel through those 
“cute little evergreens” to be able to reach, 
if not see, the front door. 

Next spring, just after we had put in our 
lawn — not too good a job, but fair for ama- 
teurs — a friend sent his sprinkler man over, 
and his arguments were so convincing that 
we allowed him to crisscross our tender new 
lawn with trenches. Now at last we could 
sip our drinks at ease while the lawns watered 
themselves. We could not have had this 
luxury if the job had been as expensive as 
the other sprinkler man had claimed. But 
later in the summer, when we showed our 
man the brown, dry triangles between the 
heads of the sprinklers which impudently 
protruded inches above each green oasis, he 
said it wasn’t his fault as we really didn’t 
have sufficient pressure! I suppose he was 
right. 

During a hot week in May I returned one 
evening to find our still rather barren “rock- 
ery” studded by tired little plants. “They are 


our State Flower” claimed my wife proudly. 
“A man drove up in a truck and offered the 
entire load at a terrific bargain. Of course 
they looked a lot smaller after they were 
unloaded, but he offered to plant them him- 
self, and he was such a nice man.” A surpris- 
ing number of them lived, but we never saw 
the man again. 

The madrona slowly died, not so much 
from the scar on its trunk, as we learned from 
a radio authority, as from the fact that our 
badminton — I mean our mumblety-peg lawn 
- — had been filled three feet over its roots. 
Anyway, the expense of taking out the stump 
seemed definitely worthwhile, as the house 
was originally placed so the madrona stood 
right in the way of our end living room win- 
dow, and our view had existed only from the 
upstairs bathroom. Other shrubs we put in 
didn’t do so well and the stores claimed they 
starved to death and refused to replace them. 

All in all, we saved quite a bit on our 
original house and grounds although we had 
hoped Mother Nature would do a bit more 
to heal our wounds, than the bracken and 
thistles she planted. We never did get a 
satisfactory place to dry clothes and we were 
a bit ashamed of our garbage cans when our 
privet got leggy. It seemed we had spent a 
great deal on fertilizer for the lawns as well 
as manure and peat moss for the flower beds. 
Sometimes I wondered if the place had been 
as cheap as we figured, and thought I would 
some day go over our gardening bills for the 
years since we moved in. I was afraid we 
would have rather a rude shock. 

The shock, however, came in an entirely 
different form. Last week-end we visited the 
Johnsons who built shortly after we did. They 
proudly displayed a most amazing colored 
plan, done by a man they called a landscape 
architect. It showed the lot and everything on 
it. A little screened service yard for the 
clothes line, garbage cans and kitchen herb 
garden was tucked around behind the kitchen 
porch. A game lawn (full size) was provided 
with a simple brick grill in the corner, and 
a tiny little flower garden with stepping stones 
and a rose arbor lay on the sunny side of the 
living room wing. Every tree and shrub was 
named and located exactly, so that no matter 
when it was planted, even years later, it 
( Continued on Page Thirty -Two ) 


Seven 


New Hibiscus 

By William H. Henderson 

T HE GENUS Hibiscus contains approxi- 
mately 150 species widely distributed 
throughout the world, in Africa, Asia and 
North America. It is allied to Gossypium 
(cotton), Abutilon (flowering maple) and 
Althaea (hollyhock) . The seed pods of Hi- 
biscus esculentum (okra) and the fleshy 
calyces of H. sabdariffa are valuable for food 
purposes. 

The genus offers great possibilities to the 
plant breeder mainly because it includes 
species that are so resistant to cold that they 
are grown with ease throughout most of the 
United States. They are affected by no serious 
diseases and are peculiarly free from insect 
attacks. 

Some 16 years ago the writer became in- 
terested in hybridizing various species with 
the thought in mind to increase the size of 
flowers, range of colors and general hardi- 
ness. Work was started with the following 
species: H. militaris, which grows to a height 
of six feet and produces three-inch flowers of 
white or pale rose; H. Moscheutos, growing 
to a height of five feet with four- to five-inch 
flowers of light rose; H. coccineus, five feet 
tall with large five- or six-inch flowers of 
bright rose red. These species are all her- 
baceous perennials. 

After a period of five years, during which 
time approximately eight thousand hybrid 
seedlings were grown and tested, eight named 
-varieties were introduced. These include Fres- 
no, a variety with eight-inch flowers of richest, 
satin pink set off with a burgundy-red center; 
Mammoth White, a variety producing ten- 
inch flowers of pure white, faintly striped 
with pale rose and having a dark red eye; 
Radiation, with nine-inch blooms, flesh pink 
in color with rose stripes and a dark red 
center; Crimson Wonder, with its ten-inch 
cerise-red bloom, self-colored; Giant White, 
with a deep red center setting off the broad, 
pure white, eight-inch flower; Raven, deep, 
rich maroon, self-colored flowers seven inches 
in diameter; Clown, which produces an eight- 
inch bloom with a deep red center and a 
white ground color and with each petal 
heavily blotched at the tip with cerise rose; 
and Satan, producing seven-inch flowers of 


rose red which most nearly approach the red 
of the tropical Hibiscus Rosa-sinensis. 

Several new varieties have since been in- 
troduced and the work of improvement is 
still being carried on. These new hybrids are 
among the most easily grown of all perennials 
and require only sufficient space in which to 
develop. For best results good drainage is 
essential as well as a location in full sun. It 
is not uncommon for a plant to produce sev- 
eral hundred flowers in the first season of 
its bloom. 

All the varieties are propagated by root 
division somewhat similar to the division of 
dahlias. They may be planted from November 
until the middle of March. First year plants 
usually start to bloom in early July and 
continue until October. The following sea- 
sons will produce blossoms three weeks 
earlier. 

The hibiscus varieties delight in a well- 
drained, rich soil and should have plenty of 
water after they have made about 18 inches 
of growth. Each fall after blooming they 
should be pruned to within three inches of 
the ground. The clumps increase in size each 
year and, unless they are being used for 
hedges, they should be spaced at least four 
feet apart. They are useful as flowering 
shrubs or for the rear of the perennial border 
where four- to six-foot, bushy plants are 
needed. 

One of the most interesting experiments 
recently made was the crossing of these large- 
flowered hybrids with the species H. mutabilis, 
a tree-like form which gets up to 15 feet and 
produces three-inch, white flowers from Sep- 
tember until frost. The leaves on this type 
are large and maple-like in outline. In the 
first generation resulting from these crosses 
the following results were noted: plants bear- 
ing large flowers of rich, carmine-red, six 
inches in diameter, with individual petals 
three inches wide; other types with large, 
cerise-pink flowers; specimens which produce 
pure white blooms; a lengthening of the 
blooming season by at least two months. 

Other experiments involving new species 
are under way. Some of these include crosses 
with Althaea, with the yellow-flowered Hibis- 
cus Manihot and with the beautiful, popular 
tropical form H. Rosa-sinensis. Tests are also 
(Continued on Page Thirty -One) 


Eight 


Camellias 

By Mrs. Donald G. Graham 

T HE subject of camellias — often times 
called the “Rose of Japan” — is a com- 
prehensive one, since there are many recog- 
nized and accepted species as well as hun- 
dreds of plant and bloom varieties. This 
aristocrat of horticulture, whose history ex- 
tends back almost two centuries, has within 
the last 12 or 15 years regained a lot of its 
old prestige here in the United States. Hun- 
dreds of large specimens, purchased from old 
gardens in the South, have been transplanted 
onto estates in other parts of our country, 
especially in the South. As much as $2,000 
has been paid for individual plants, while 
$500 to $1,000 is not an unusually high price 
for a large, well-shaped specimen of good 
variety. Another manifestation of renewed 
interest in these beautiful flowering plants is 
the number of camellia shows held in the 
South within the last few years and which 
thousands have attended. California, too, has 
had consecutive camellia shows, the attend- 
ance increasing from 300 the first year to 
well over 12,000 some eight years later. 

This renewal of interest can well be under- 
stood when we see the exquisite beauty of the 
flower. It is difficult to find any word other 
than “perfection” to describe it with its cer- 
tain stiffness — its frigid elegance. 

This plant was first made known to the 
Western world in 1682 by Kaempfer — one of 
the first great botanical explorers — after he 
saw them as great and lofty trees growing in 
the open mountain forests of Japan. In its 
native country, the single form of the com- 
mon camellia was abundant in the woods, 
thriving in the shade of other trees — growing 
slowly but often reaching 40 feet in height, 
with a trunk as thick as a man’s body clothed 
with a perfectly smooth, gray, thin bark. And 
though those trees were rarely without flow- 
ers, they were in full bloom in April. These 
wild flowers seldom opened flat but were 
more or less cup shaped and perhaps for 
this reason were less valued for their beauty 
than for their fruit, which was gathered in 
October and pressed for its oil, which was in 
great local demand. It is said that the oil 
obtained from the seeds of C. Japonica was 
used by the Japanese women for dressing 
their hair. The fruit is the size of a small, 


hard apple, a bright, shining, green color 
and ribbed like a tomato. When ripe the rind 
splits open, showing brown seeds which look 
like coffee beans. 

How long before 1682 these shrubs had 
been growing in the gardens of the wealthy 
natives we can only guess, but we do know 
that by the year 1739 they were being grown 
in the English gardens of Lord Petri. In its 
native land this plant was known by the name 
“Tsubakki.” It was in England that it was 
given the name camellia, named after George 
Joseph Kamel or Camellus, a Moravian Jesuit 
priest, who, upon his return home from his 
mission in the Philippine Islands, intro- 
duced several of these plants into Europe, 
having secured them at a Chinese port. Lord 
Petri was supposed to have bought two of 
these plants. Many years following this the 
sailing ships of the old East India Co. con- 
tinued to bring choice varieties from Oriental 
gardens to England. Gradually, they appeared 
in Belgium, France, Germany and Italy, where 
horticultural experts of each country pro- 
ceeded in course of time to produce from the 
original strains of white, red, pink, single 
flowered sorts, the hosts of marvelously beau- 
tiful doubles, semi-doubles, peony and rose- 
type flowers in all manner of rich reds, pinks, 
streaked and variegated colors through to 
the purest white. Very few double flowering 
camellias were brought from the Orient. 

After the first double flowered camellia 
was obtained, those with single flowers un- 
fortunately fell out of favor and came to be 
used mainly as stocks on which other varie- 
ties were grafted and it is only of recent years 
that a renewed taste for them has arisen. 
Many authorities felt it was a mistake to 
adopt the double flower to the exclusion of 
the single kind, as they doubted the double 
flower an improvement. In fact, the single 
camellias are more beautiful in their color- 
ing and their varied depth of flower surface. 

By 1860 there were more than 1,000 hor- 
ticultural varieties and many publications 
were being offered with beautiful colored 
prints of the flower. 

After the pioneer work in England, that of 
Italy comes next in importance. The first 
camellia tree there was planted at the Palace 
of Caserta. From this tree at Caserta seeds 
were sent to Florence to the garden of Count 


Nine 


Bourtoulin. From 1830 to 1860 many grow- 
ers were at work and together raised more 
new varieties than any other European coun- 
try. 

These varieties passed quickly into the 
hands of Belgian nurserymen. It was Belgium 
that imported a variety which was later 
named after Doncklaar, director of the Royal 
Gardens of Gand. This variety was called 
Doncklaarii and Doncklaarii Elegans. Bel- 
gium, owing to the skill of her propagators, 
will be remembered mainly as the principal 
distributor of the camellia. 

The leading enthusiast in France was Abbe 
Berlese, who in 1819 raised 100 plants from 
seed from the above mentioned famous tree 
at Caserta, Italy. It was in France the ca- 
mellia scored its greatest social success. The 
Beau Brummel of the day made all his public 
appearances with a camellia in his button- 
hole. 

The first record of a camellia planted in 
the United States is a single red variety which 
was planted at Charleston in 1804. 

At first camellias were treated as green- 
house plants. In Victorian days, they were 
grown in conservatories. One such house in 
Hatfield, England, no less than 300 feet long, 
was at one time entirely devoted to camellias. 
It was said by one writer that the greenhouse 
has done us few worse wrongs than by spread- 
ing the idea that the camellia is a tender 
shrub. Its culture was so common in pots 
that little thought was given to it out of doors 
— yet it is hardier than many of our common 
evergreen shrubs. They have the advantage 
of standing a great deal of shade and drought. 
They produce a succession of bloom, so if 
frost should kill one lot of flowers, another 
set replaces it. In their wild home in the 
forests of Japan, they are said to grow only 
where they are provided with perfect natural 
drainage and the overhead protection of large 
sheltering trees. 

Location 

Plant camellias on the north or east side 
of the house or near protecting trees where 
they will have a position of filtered sunshine 
and protection from short snaps of late frost 
and cold winds. When planted on the east 
side of the house, care must still be taken 
that the early morning sun following a night 
frost does not burn the buds and new growth. 


For ordinary gardens, places that are shel- 
tered by either walls, trees or tall shrubs, if 
possible, should be chosen for camellias. 
They must never be planted in an exposed 

^ aCC ‘ Soil and Drainage 

The most suitable soil for camellias shows 
no alkali but enough coarse sand to allow 
good drainage. Any soil in which rhododen- 
drons thrive will produce good camellias. 
Given this congenial soil, good drainage and 
shelter from winds and shade from excessive 
sunshine, the plants will not fail to thrive 
and give every satisfaction. These three fac- 
tors are important, but camellias also like a 
good diet and quickly respond to an animal 
top dressing of rich farmyard manure about 
February. Lime and bone meal should be 
avoided at all times. When planted in soil 
that has been undisturbed for a long time, 
the ground should be trenched to a depth of 
1 to 2 feet. If the soil is stiff or clayey, 
then put a sufficient layer of rocks or other 
porous material in the trench to assure good 
drainage. Waterins 

Although they do not require an excessive 
amount of water, they must always be pro- 
vided with an even and constant supply. Fail- 
ure to observe this precaution will result in 
their dropping buds and sometimes leaves. 
Best results are from careful and regular use 
of water in spring and early summer fol- 
lowed by a rest period throughout July and 
August with a gradual increase of water again 
in the fall. A great deal of water will be 
needed at blooming time. After hot, dry days 
the sprinkling of foliage in late afternoon or 
evening is a good practice. 

Pruning 

No systematic pruning is required beyond 
what may be necessary to correct an ill- 
formed or ill-balanced shape, and this prun- 
ing, if necessary, should be done immediately 
after the flowering time is over. Flowers 
should be cut sparingly when plants are 
small and then only with very short stems. 
Never break blossoms off the plant. Dead 
blooms should be picked off to keep the 
plant from going to seed. 

Insects 

Camellias are singularly free from serious 
attack by insect enemies, and they suffer from 


Ten 