1 



The Arboretum Bulletin 



Vol. III. No. 2 Seattle, Washington February, 1940 


PHOSPHOROUS FERTILIZERS 

T he following remarks are excerpts from a summary prepared 
by Dr. F. F. Weinard of the Department of Horticulture at 
the University of Illinois, and should serve to acquaint gardeners 
with certain features of importance when phosphate fertilizers are 
being considered: 

‘‘Phosphorus is no less important to plants than nitrogen, al- 
though the effects from its use are usually less evident. There 
is plenty of evidence that phosphorus is needed for the normal 
development of root systems, and that it stimulates flowering and 
early maturity of fruits. The beneficial effects of an abundant 
supply of available phosphorus on flower production has beer, 
noted, especially on roses and carnations. 

‘‘Regardless of the form in which phosphorus is applied to the 
soil, it becomes fixed in relatively insoluble compounds. Since it 
ordinarily does not move far through the soil, vertically or other- 
wise, it has been customary to advise that phosphorous fertilizer 
be mixed thoroughly with the soil at the beginning of the season. 
It is true that tests of phosphate-treated soils show that this 
element is retained for long periods in the soil. The test for 
acid-soluble phosphorus changes very little through the season, 
in contrast to nitrogen, which is subject to leaching and which 
often shows great fluctuations over a short period of time. Where 
phosphate is used liberally there is water-soluble phosphorus 
left in the soil which does not become fixed. As long as a soil 
test shows water-soluble phosphorus it is fair to assume that the 
plants are getting all they can use. 

“Superphosphate is from several standpoints the most important 
phosphate fertilizer. It is, for example, the chief constituent of 
most mixed fertilizers. In addition to phosphorus, it carries 
calcium and sulfur. The soluble portion of superphosphate which 
may become combined with calcium in the soil is still relatively 
available to plants. One good application of superphosphate at the 
beginning of the season will insure a supply of available phos- 
phorus for several months, perhaps through the season. We 
have had some results with roses, however, indicating that it may 
be preferable to divide the application into several doses through 
the season. 

“Steamed bone meal does not contain soluble phosphorus, and 
soil tests made following the use of bone meal do not show any 


considerable amounts of the element in a water-soluble form. 
Bone meal costs more than superphosphate. On the other hand, 
it contains some nitrogen which becomes slowly available, and for 
this or other reasons there are some growers who prefer to use 
steamed bone meal. Bone meal has a tendency to reduce soil 
acidity. 

“Ground rock phosphate and finely divided ‘colloidal’ phosphate 
are relatively insoluble under all conditions. There is no evi- 
dence that such phosphates are as suitable as superphosphate or 
steamed bone meal. Treble superphosphate consists principally 
of soluble calcium phosphate, used in high analysis mixed ferti- 
lizers, and in nutrient solutions. Ammonium phosphate is a com- 
bination fertilizer put to the same uses. The United States govern- 
ment is producing other forms of phosphates which are still in 
the experimental stage.” 

i i i 

WEEPING SPRUCE OF THE SISKIYOU MOUNTAINS 

By Walter J. Eyerdam 

HTiie weeping spruce, Picea Breweriana-S. Wats., is remarkable 
for its whip-like branches, which are spreading and hang in 
pendulous strings six feet in length. The tree reaches a height of 
120 feet in its native habitat. The leaves are radially spreading and 
somewhat flat with white bands above and dark green below. The 
cones are very pretty before maturity, when they eventually break 
all to pieces. They are three to six inches in length and light 
orange brown, becoming purplish before maturity. They stand 
erect on the branches of the spruce. 

This tree is a native of the Siskiyou Mountains of Josephine 
County, Oregon, and Del Norte and Siskiyou Counties of North- 
western California, where they grow in a few isolated patches as 
rare relies of a past age. 

In 1915, while prospecting in the Siskiyous, I visited the type 
locality at the head of Days Gulch, which is a few miles from 
the junction of Josephine Creek and Illinois River, about ten 
miles from Kerby, Josephine County. There were about a dozen 
trees of this species growing near the old Indian trail on the east 
side of the rocky ridge near the top. They grow in one of the 
old rock formations just above the serpentine belt. 


At the Arboretum we have started seedlings and hope to have 
success in growing them. It will he necessary to give them some 
special attention because the weeping spruce is hard to grow. 
They need to be planted in crushed rock with red decomposed 
iron (limonite) soil. They are quite rare in arboreta and gardens 
but I have seen them growing well in the cultivated forest at 
Saarbrucken, Germany. 


i i i 

A PROMISING ELM 

By J. H. Hanley 

Tf you want something in elms that is strikingly different, try 

Ulmus foliacea umbraculifera. Unfortunately it has been neither 
widely known nor widely used, although it has been offered by 
at least one American nurseryman for a number of years. It is 
remarkably versatile from the standpoint of landscape use, and 
is thoroughly capable of resisting extreme weather inclemencies. 
We have seen it endure several successive summers of intense heat 
and drought in the Middle West without the slightest impairment. 

As a landscape subject it has a variety of uses. From hardwood 
cuttings taken in the fall, young plants can be procured which 
will make an excellent hedge in three or four years, if planted 
12 to 15 inches apart. The leaves are quite small, so that the 
hedge does not look coarse, and the growth is very heavy and 
dense as the synonymous specific name (Ulmus densa) suggests. 
Such a planting can be left to grow in a natural form or shearing 
can be done for tbe more formal settings. 

Though perfectly adaptable for use as a hedge one sees it more 
frequently grown as a small specimen tree either on its own roots 
or grafted at various heights to give it a true trunk effect. The 
crown is oval and extremely dense; so dense, in fact, that cats find 
it almost impossible to penetrate the masses of ascending branches. 
It becomes, therefore, a true haven for many of the smaller, tree- 
nesting birds, and affords them ample protection. One specimen 
that is twelve years old is approximately fifteen feet tall. 

i i i 

ARBORETUM NOTES 

As we have indicated several times during the past months, the 
major work that confronts us at the moment is the planting of 
relatively large numbers of trees and shrubs. Azalea Way is 
occupying our attention now and, with favorable weather, the 
planting of this outstanding tract should be completed for this 
season in another five weeks. We have estimated that by the 
end of the first week in February approximately 305 flowering 
cherries, 200 eastern dogwods, and 1400 azaleas will have been 
placed in their permanent positions. Of course this will not 
complete the seven-acre area, but it will most certainly give us 
an excellent start to which we can make yearly additions until 
Azalea Way is finished. 

Through the generosity of the Seattle Garden Club we have 
received all of the flowering dogwoods and 175 of the Japanese 


cherries, with two additional shipments of cherries expected by 
January 15. The majority of the 1,400 azaleas which will be 
planted are of good size and should produce rather decent dis- 
plays of color this spring. 


i i i 

The Kenmore Garden Club has recently presented five excellent 
specimens of Chionanthus retusa to the Arboretum. The plants 
arrived during the last week of December and will be given a 
place in the area that has been set aside for members of the 
ash family. This is a very desirable contribution and we most 
certainly appreciate it. The same club has decided to sponsor 
a collection of sumacs, which, although lacking the brilliance 
of llower that characterizes other groups, have many attributes 
which make them very desirable from an ornamental standpoint. 
Fall coloration is one of the particular assets of the sumacs. 

1 1 i 

Under the sponsorship of the Washington State Conservation 
Society a lighted Christmas display was exhibited for a ten-day 
period during the holiday season. Following a plan which was 
prepared by Mr. Noble Hoggson, landscape architect, and with 
the lighting arrangements in charge of Mr. Lyman D. Morgan, 
illumination expert, a beautiful display was arranged. An esti- 
mated 40,000 people stopped to view the exhibit, which was placed 
immediately behind the Maple Pool, where brilliant reflection 
effects were to be had. 


i 1 i 

HEATHS AND HEATHERS 

By Arthur P. Dome 
( Continued from January Issue ) 

Ulrica carnea can be planted under deciduous trees when the 

' lowest branches are about 15 feet up. But in the autumn you 
must be careful to keep the fallen leaves raked off them if you 
want a good showing of bloom. 

In selecting plants for your garden it is, of course, necessary 
to take into consideration the amount of space you have for 
them and the amount of money you wish to spend. If your garden 
is large you can use some of the tree heaths and have a greater 
variety. If it is small, choose the smaller growing and rarer 
varieties. But don’t forget that a lot of the old stand-bys are 
still beautiful and much less expensive. 

Everyone seems interested in a list of heathers and heaths 
that will give a continuance of bloom the year around. The fol- 
lowing is, in my opinion, the best grouping to be obtained here 
in the Northwest. We will start with winter blooming varieties, 
for that is what most people seem to be interested in. 

The best is Erica carnea, and its varieties, because it can be 
used in so many places. It will even tolerate some lime if that 
is necessary. It has bright green foliage which turns a deeper 
color in the winter. The flowers are rosy red and bloom from 


December to April. It grows about six inches high and covers 
a space of about three feet. Springwood White is one of the 
best varieties. The flowers are quite large and appear in late 
winter on plants not more than three inches tall. It is fast 
becoming popular for its ability to cover ground. E. carnea 
King George is also a popular early winter bloomer. English 
catalogues list it as being dark red, but all I have seen here 
seem to have pale purple flowers. It is a slow grower, reaching 
a height of six inches, and is really a beautiful heath. Ruby 
Glow has bright carmine flowers with rather dark brown foliage. 
It is a choice variety and is fast becoming popular. It blooms 
in late winter and is very effective in mass planting. The variety 
Vivelli is another most unusual heath. It has dark ebony colored 
foliage which turns dull red in winter. Its carmine flowers, ap- 
pearing in late winter, seem to want to hide themselves under 
the stems. Erica mediterranea Brightness is a fairly new heath 
to us here, and is the only variety of mediterranea worth growing. 
Its bright red flowers in contrast to its dark foliage make it very 
colorful. It grows about two feet tall and blooms in late winter. 
There is one other, Erica mediterranea Darleyensis, sometimes 
called the E. M. Hybrid, which fills an important gap in the rota- 
tion of bloom. It blooms from early November to late April. Its 
foliage is much like the species (E. mediterranea) but its flowers 
are similar to E. carnea, only a few shades paler. It grows to a 
height of two feet. 

Now we come to the spring bloomers. Erica cinerea comes into 
flower late in the spring. It has varieties far more beautiful than 
the common reddish-purple type. The flowers are subglobose in 
shape and vary in size with the variety. The plant will grow to 
one and a half feet and will bloom from April to September. 
The variety alba bears its flowers in such profusion that it looks 
like a large patch of snow when seen from a distance. It grows 
about one foot high and I have had racemes of flowers more 

than six inches long. One of the darkest flowering heaths is the 

E. carnea atro-rubens with its dark velvety-red flowers, shining 
like satin when the dew is on them. This variety is quite new to 

the Northwest and is truly beautiful. Domino is a white variety 

that is quite different. It has a white corolla, but the sepals, 
pedicels and leaves are ebony colored, giving to it an outstand- 
ing distinctiveness. It grows about nine inches high and covers 
a great deal of ground, and is one of my favorites. 

When summer comes the heaths and heathers luxuriate. It 
may be the hot sun that they like, but, whatever it is, they cer- 
tainly bloom in profusion. Perhaps the best blooming summer 
heath is Erica vagans and its varieties. The type blooms in 
late summer and bears its reddish purple flowers on spikes that 
are from three to four inches long, but it must have an annual 
trimming every spring, otherwise the plants grow sprawly and 
ungainly. Lyonesse is the best white variety of E. vagans that 
is grown. The flowers are pure white and the protruding anthers 
a beautiful golden yellow instead of the usual reddish brown. 
It grows to a height of one and a half feet and is a profuse 
bloomer. But the vagans variety that is most strikingly beauti- 
ful is Mrs. D. F. Maxwell. The flowers are a deep cerise and 
the plants are certainly not stingy with their bloom. A mass 
planting of Maxwells in bloom is a breath-taking sight. If your 
garden is small, do have at least one plant. It will grow quite 


rapidly and will give that artistocratic feeling that a beautiful 
plant in your garden always does. Then near it plant an E. 
vagans St. Keverne. It is the only Erica to have pink flowers 
without a trace of purple. The flowers grow in fat spikes on erect 
stems. The black anthers which protrude through the corolla 
make a beautiful contrasting effect. But it is the soft pink color 
which makes it so unusual. 

Another good summer bloomer is Erica tetralix. This plant 
bears its subglobose flowers on umbels at the ends of its much 
branched stems. The oidy good variety of this species that we 
have here is alba mollis. Its flowers are a beautiful waxy white, 
but even when it is not in bloom the silvery gray foliage of the 
plant makes it popular. It grows about nine inches tall. 

T on may have noticed that in winter and spring the Ericas 
or heaths hold the center of the stage, but when summer comes 
they are hard put to hold that position, for Calluna vulgaris and 
its varieties offer plenty of competition. As a species Calluna 
vulgaris has nothing much to commend it in the way of beauty 
and should really be found only in the collector’s garden. But 
its new varieties are the plants that have revolutionized heather 
gardens. Consider C. v. J. H. Hamilton, out from England two 
years ago, but on the market here for the first time last spring. 
It is beautiful, delicately beautiful, with flow ms like tiny double 
roses, perfect in form, and of a soft true pii k. It is the only 
Calluna that is pink without a trace of purple. My plants were 
small this year, but I bad spikes ol flowers six inches long. The 
plant grows to nine inches and will bloom through August and 
September. Then there is the C. v. County Wicklow. It is very 
similar in habit to Hamilton, except that the foliage is much 
daintier and the flowers are a pale lavender with the same 
beautiful miniature rose form appearing on erect stems. Some 
people think the Wicklow is as beautiful as the Hamilton. That, 
however, is a matter of taste. Both will some day become popular 
corsage flowers. 

Then, of course, there is the variety H. E. Beale. I think any- 
one who saw my rows of this splendid sort in bloom last summer 
will not quickly forget the sight. The flowers are the same rose 
type as the Wicklow but instead of a single flower spike the 
plant is much branched and the flowers are a deeper lavender, 
softer in color and very dainty. The flower spikes on my plants 
measured from twelve to twenty inches long and when used as 
table decorations were truly beautiful. This plant is absolutely 
one of the musts if you plan a heather garden. 

Another Calluna that is being much disputed is the C. v. 
aurea or “Golden Heather”. To my mind the reason that most 
gardeners do not like it is because they do not grow it properly. 
Of all the heaths or heathers it needs the most attention. To 
keep it golden it must be kept growing, for only the new growth 
is yellow. This means that spring trimming is absolutely essen- 
tial and an occasional nip here and there, judiciously done any 
time of the year, is all to the good. It must also have full sunshine 
for the yellow of summer and the red of winter, although the 
colder the winter the redder the aurea. Don’t be afraid of it. 
It will repay you for its extra care. 


33IIV3S 

riii|[)[;tig OZVV ‘uoijBpunoj uiniaioqjy 



ai/7 A</ pdysijqnj 

| 'a^Td Z99 ’33S 

Mixanna Muaaoaav shjl 


