




Contents 


1 A Change in Arnoldia 

RICHARD A. HOWARD 

2 Problems of Horticultural 
and Botanical Libraries 

JOHN F. REED 

9 Report from Hong Kong 

SHIU-YING HU 

23 Weeds : A Link with the Past 
1. The Plantain 
HELEN ROCA-GARCIA 

25 Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 

ROBERT S. HEBB 

28 Makings Tilings Grow , by Thalassa Cruso. The Book 
of Spices , by Frederick Rosengarten, Jr. 

ARNOLDIA REVIEWS 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 02130 


Published six times a year: on the 15th of January, 
March, May, July, September, and November 
Subscriptions: $3.50 per year. Single copies, 60 cents 


the cover: A field of Sagittaria sagittifolia, cultivated for the edible 
corms. Lantau Island, Hong Kong. Photo: S. Y. Hu. 


A Change in Arnoldio 


In 1943 the one-word title Arnoldia was adopted for this publica- 
tion which for twenty-nine years had been called the Bulletin 
of Popular Information. This issue is the first since then with 
other changes. 

The first Bulletin is now a real collector’s item. It appeared 
on May 2, 1911, with a title that bothered librarians: “Arnold 
Arboretum, Harvard University, Bulletin of Popular Information 
— No. 1.” Charles Sargent, the Director, explained his intention 

. . to issue from time to time from the Arboretum bulletins of 
popular information in which attention will be called to the 
flowering of important plants and other matters connected with 
them.” Copies were mailed without charge to anyone who de- 
sired to receive them. The unsigned articles were written by 
Professor Sargent. 

The New Series, with numbered volumes and an annual in- 
dex, began in 1915. A note in 1916 stated: “Automobiles are 
not admitted to the Arboretum but visitors who desire carriages 
to meet them at the Forest Hills entrance can obtain them by 
telephoning . . The telephone number had but three digits. 

Series Three came out a month after Sargent’s death, in April 
1927, on coated paper permitting the first use of photographs. 
The articles were signed “E.H.W.” for Ernest Henry Wilson. A 
subscription rate was established. There is evidence of the 
tragedy that took the life of “Chinese” Wilson: an article dated 
September 15th, 1930, bears his initials for the last time. 

In 1933 Series Four introduced a new format. Donald Wyman 
joined the staff in 1935. The first of many articles by the Horti- 
culturist for the Arnold Arboretum was “Tree Troubles,” issued 
in March 1936. 

Inside our new 1970 cover, we plan to have contributions 
from several authors and a variety of articles for our readers. 
Notes on the plantings, notices of staff activities, and programs 
or classes will be listed; book reviews will be more frequent. 
Arnoldia will appear six times a year at regular intervals. To 
reduce the necessary subsidy we must increase the price to $3.50 
to subscribers, but Friends of the Arnold Arboretum will con- 
tinue to receive Arnoldia free of charge. 


Richard A. Howard 


Problems of Horticultural 
and Botanical Libraries 


The first conference on botanical and horticultural libraries was held in 
Horticultural Hall, Boston, on Thursday, November 13, 1969. Sponsored 
by the Massachusetts Horticultural Society and organized by the Society’s 
Library Committee, the Conference was conceived as an opportunity to 
discuss problems of interest to libraries in the field. Forty persons attended, 
representing more than twenty institutions. 

The first speaker was Mr. John F. Reed, Curator of the Library of the 
Neiv York Botanical Garden, who addressed himself to the “Problems of 
Horticidtural and Botanical Libraries.’’ Dr. George H. M. Lawrence, Direc- 
tor of the Hunt Botanical Library of the Carnegie-Mellon University, fol- 
lowed with a discussion entitled “Care and Preservation of Library Ma- 
terials.” The afternoon session began ivith an analysis of a library’s “Bib- 
liographic Responsibilities to the Plant Sciences” by Gordon P. DeWolf, Jr. 
In “Where Do We Go From Here 1” Mr. Gordon W. Dillon, Executive Secre- 
tary of the American Orchid Society, suggested several ways to continue 
the discussions with a series of conferences. Following a question and 
ansiver period the group, in an informal business session, accepted the 
invitation of the Hunt Botanical Library to hold a second conference, in 
Pittsburgh, on April 24-25, 1970. 

It is planned to reproduce the edited texts of the major presentations 
at the conference in this issue and in succeeding numbers of Arnoldia. 
— Ed. 

To preface my remarks, I would like first to define my concept 
of the primary roles of the major botanico-horticultural libraries. 
To me, they represent research-resource libraries of inestimable 
value which are deeply involved in collecting, preserving, and 
providing access to the bulk of the world’s literature dealing 
with the various aspects of plant science — pure and applied. 

Specifically, their responsibilities fall into three main cate- 
gories: (1) to preserve, conserve, and protect their collections; 
(2) to develop, complete, and expand their collections to meet 
the needs of both present and future users; (3) to provide ser- 
vice and accessibility to this literature and knowledge about this 
literature to their users. 


2 


Horticultural and Botanical Libraries 3 


The collections held in these libraries are, in truth, national 
resources. It is important that we who are concerned with these 
libraries recognize that our responsibilities exceed the bounds 
of our individual institutions. 

In my discussion I am forced to adopt a shotgun approach 
that will touch briefly upon scattered problems in these areas of 
responsibility before going on to what I consider to be the major 
problems facing our libraries today. I think I should also say at 
this point that these problems are not unique to botanico-horti- 
cultural libraries. Although they may be more urgent for us than 
for libraries in other scientific disciplines, they are very similar 
to the problems faced by most academic research libraries. 

When one speaks of a librarian’s custodial duties many people 
immediately conjure up an image of a stuffy, intransigent 
guardian who jealously watches over the library stacks, sus- 
picious of anyone who wants to read or, worse yet, borrow a 
book, and who is really happy only when every book is in its 
proper place on the library shelves. When I speak of custodial 
duties I am referring to the positive and constructive activities 
which are part of the maintenance of collections having in- 
trinsic archival and historical value. 

One of these major responsibilities is the ever-present task 
of physical maintenance, preservation, and conservation of the 
publications and other library materials in the library collection. 
The ravages of time — use and the chemical deterioration of 
paper and binding materials — are matters of constant and in- 
creasing concern, especially in libraries that attach archival 
importance to their collections. 

A closely related problem needing much greater recognition, 
attention, and action in library circles today concerns the pro- 
duction of modern publications at high standards of quality of 
materials and workmanship. Failure of librarians to concern 
themselves with present publication practices and to put forth 
the problems that poor production standards create for research 
libraries will compound the difficulties of preservation in the 
future. 

Technology has developed long-life — pH neutral — papers 
that can be manufactured and sold at costs approximating those 
of lesser quality, more rapidly deteriorating papers. We must 
urge publishers to adopt the use of these papers in their produc- 
tion of periodicals and monographs. It is disturbing to see how 
rapidly issues of some of the outstanding scientific journals pub- 
lished in this country, as well as abroad, begin to discolor and 
become brittle. It is hard to believe that those responsible for 


4 ARNOLDIA 

these publications consider their work to be of such ephemeral 
importance. 

Physical format and design of periodicals and other publica- 
tions is still another area of great concern to librarians today, 
particularly the tendency to reduce the width of inner margins. 
Inner margins of one inch or 3/4 inch usually allow adequate 
space for libraries to bind these items either by machine over- 
sewing or preferably, in archival collections, by smythe or bench 
sewing. When, usually in the name of economy, inner margins 
are reduced to one-half inch or less, as in the case of such 
substantial journals as Planta, Excerpta Botanica and the 
Gardener’s Chronicle to name only a few, the binding of the 
volume by libraries becomes much more difficult. If such vol- 
umes are machine oversewn, there is often no inner margin 
left at all; even with smythe sewing the text often runs into the 
groove of the binding making the volume difficult to read or 
photocopy. 

Librarians must be aware of the quality of both materials and 
workmanship that go into the publications they acquire for their 
libraries, for they make a great investment in purchasing and 
maintaining these materials. When publishing and production 
standards fall below those that will allow libraries to maintain 
usable archival collections, then those concerned with libraries 
must make their voices heard. 

Collection development presents many challenges to prac- 
ticing libraries today. Because of the increasing numbers of 
publications produced each year and the even more rapidly in- 
creasing costs of books and periodicals, library purchasing 
budgets must be substantially increased each year just to allow 
libraries to hold ground in their particular areas of specializa- 
tion. At the same time, librarians and others involved with the 
selection of books, journals, and other materials for their col- 
lections, must exercise increased selectivity in allocating their 
available resources. 

A similar problem is faced by libraries trying to fill gaps in 
their holdings or involved in large-scale development of collec- 
tions of older literature. In these areas, increasing costs are 
compounded by increasing competition for this literature, espe- 
cially from the developing small college and university libraries. 

The most economical answer to large-scale development of 
collections of older literature, at least on an individual institu- 
tion basis, is the purchase of this material in microforms — 
microfiche, microfilm or microcard. That such microforms are 
relatively inexpensive and require little storage space is very 


Horticultural and Botanical Libraries 5 

attractive. Unfortunately, there is one major drawback to the 
use of these materials: readers confronted with the prospect of 
having to use microforms will go out of their way, often to con- 
siderable personal expense, to avoid their use. The development 
of relatively inexpensive reading-printing equipment which pro- 
duces usable, inexpensive hard copy for consultation and refer- 
ence should be of great assistance in helping libraries overcome 
much of the resistance to the use of microforms. 

Aside from the archival value of microforms, the greatest 
value I see in them in research-resource libraries such as ours, 
is in the interlibrary loan and photocopying programs that we 
provide. By maintaining microform duplicates of rare, valuable, 
and fragile materials, explicitly for the production of photo- 
copies for interlibrary loan and in-house photocopy demands, 
libraries can save tremendously on the wear and tear on original 
materials while still providing access to them. 

The greatest problem facing any group of libraries today, be 
they related geographically or by their subject specialization, is 
their willingness to investigate, identify, and implement pro- 
grams that lead to standardization, cooperation, and shared util- 
ization of their resources and activities. 

One of the most obvious areas for this coordination is cur- 
rent acquisition and collection development. I am sure that this 
group willingly concedes the impossibility and impracticality 
of any library even to attempt to collect all of the world’s litera- 
ture dealing with the plant sciences. Instead, individually, our 
approach has been, and continues to be, one of maintaining 
more or less comprehensive collections in our particular areas 
of specialization and smaller representative collections in those 
areas of our secondary interests. Although there must be a high 
degree of overlap throughout our collections, we must look 
beyond the bounds of our own institutions and begin to think 
in terms of the total information needs of the plant scientist, and 
we must try to assure, on a collective basis, the comprehensive 
collection of the plant science literature. 

Coordination of general acquisition responsibilities must be 
accompanied by a general and freely functioning cooperation 
among libraries in sharing and distributing their unique hold- 
ings. Such a “network” approach to library resource development 
has been recognized and developed on a regional basis — par- 
ticularly in state library systems. I believe a similar approach 
can be taken on a subject basis, although difficulties arising 
from lack of geographical proximity are sure to be present. 

As I have already mentioned, in the libraries represented at 


6 ARNOLDIA 


this meeting there is a considerable overlap in our current 
acquisitions programs, probably collectively greater than 50% . 
Among selected libraries in this group, the overlap in purchases 
may exceed 90% . With such a high percentage of duplication 
in current acquisitions, we have an ideal opportunity to share in 
some way the production of cataloging data and thereby to 
reduce our individual cataloging costs. 

It has been my experience at The New York Botanical Garden 
that the cost of descriptive and subject cataloging to American 
Library Association and Library of Congress standards is often 
higher than the cost of acquiring the publication itself, partic- 
ularly when printed Library of Congress cards are unavailable 
within a reasonable period of time. We have learned through ex- 
perience that approximately 40% of our Library of Congress 
card orders for newly published monographs and serials are 
unfilled after six months. Most of this material consists of pub- 
lications in foreign languages and analytics of serials sets, the 
material for which original cataloging is most costly to prepare. 

Much costly duplicate original cataloging could be eliminated 
if we could agree to certain standards for descriptive and subject 
cataloging and devise a way in which to distribute cataloging 
copy to cooperating institutions for their individual production 
of catalog cards. Better yet, with further standardization of card 
format, we could possibly develop a centralized card reproduc- 
tion center that could supply cards to our individual libraries. 

Closely related to the cataloging of new published works is 
the production of cataloging data for our older literature collec- 
tions. Several libraries are contemplating or have begun the 
awesome task of recataloging their collections to modern stan- 
dards. The New York Botanical Garden is one of those institu- 
tions that has undertaken this massive task — one that we esti- 
mate will require 15 man-years of professional cataloging time. 
This indeed is a costly undertaking. 

To date, our experience indicates that we can obtain LC 
printed cards for slightly less than one-half of the items which 
we must process in this project. The load of original cataloging 
that our recataloging staff must perform is terrific. To me it is 
foolish and wasteful for other institutions to duplicate this work. 
I would like to see some method developed to pool and share 
such data with other libraries embarking on similar endeavors 
so that needless duplication and expense could be avoided. By 
pooling or exchanging such information we could, at the same 
time, develop a very useful bibliographic tool — a union catalog 
of our collective holdings. This would be particularly valuable 


Horticultural and Botanical Libraries \ 7 

as many of our libraries are poorly represented in The National 
Union Catalog. 

Another area where I would like to see a coordinated ap- 
proach is the preservation of archival sets of ephemeral and 
secondary publications. I am thinking specifically of seed cata- 
logs and popular gardening and horticultural magazines, many 
of which are printed on such low grade paper that they rapidly 
deteriorate even with little or no use. Two good examples 
of such publications are the journals Popular Gardening and 
Amateur Gardening, issues of which less than a decade old have 
so deteriorated that they can no longer be bound. Assuming that 
archival sets of such publications should be maintained, would 
it not be practical for one or two institutions to assume the re- 
sponsibility of conservation and preservation while the remain- 
ing libraries, interested in having ready access to these publica- 
tions, could depend upon microfilm copies? If such coordination 
is desirable, we could pool our collective sets of such publica- 
tions to make up complete sets with the best preserved copies of 
each issue. This sort of coordination of effort must come about 
if original documents are to be adequately preserved. Many 
publications of this nature have already reached an advanced 
state of decay, and their complete loss is imminent. 

A valuable bibliographic tool which could be developed 
through botanico-horticultural library cooperation is a union list 
of botanico-horticultural periodicals based on the exhaustive 
compilation B-P-H Botanico-Periodicum-Huntianum prepared at 
the Hunt Botanical Library last year. Such a list would have 
two major values: the first, to provide readily accessible and up- 
to-date knowledge of the periodical holdings of cooperating li- 
braries — information that is very incompletely available in the 
Union List of Serials ; the second, to supply us with a knowledge 
of the important gaps in our collective holdings — information 
that would be very valuable in a coordinated collection develop- 
ment program. 

There are two other areas of potential cooperative endeavor 
which I would like to mention briefly. One is the possible pooling 
of the various publication exchange activities presently carried 
out independently by a number of our libraries. At its simplest 
it could involve only the interchange of exchange lists and in- 
formation; but at a more highly organized level it could take 
the form of a centralized exchange office providing service to 
a group of libraries — sort of a Botanico-Horticultural Farming- 
ton Plan. The other proposal for coordination involves inter- 
library loan responsibilities which we all have to greater or 


8 ARNOLDIA 

lesser degrees, not just among ourselves, but with the larger li- 
brary community. Coordination of such activities might take 
the form of designating one or two of our institutions with the 
primary responsibility for meeting the bulk of interlibrary loan 
service, while the remaining institutions serve to supplement the 
resources of these primary lenders. 

One of the first questions that arises after such a spell of 
idealizing is very realistic — who will pay for such cooperative 
programs? The answer must be correspondingly realistic — we 
will! Not as additional expenses over and above those we already 
find difficult to bear but, hopefully, from the resources saved by 
not having to perform each of these tasks individually. With 
consolidation and specialization of effort in such functions as 
collection development, cataloging, and interlibrary loan, there 
should be corresponding economies. 

A less definite, but posssible, outcome of activities of coordina- 
tion and cooperation is that by working together we might 
better qualify for the grant dollar. A recent issue of College and 
Research Libraries News (no. 9, Oct. 1969) reported that the 
National Science Foundation's Office of Science Information 
Service has stated that its resources are “being concentrated 
on developing information systems in basic disciplines which 
take advantage of the available technology.” 

Coordinated and cooperative endeavors such as those I have 
outlined today are certainly a humble beginning, but they could 
eventually develop into much more sophisticated programs. 

John F. Reed 
Curator of the Library, 

New York Botanical Garden 


Report from Hong Kong 


Dr. Shiu-Ying Hu, Botanist at the Arnold Arboretum, has made three trips 
to Hong Kong since January 1968. Her first stay was from March through 
June 1968; after a summer in the United States, she returned there for 
the academic year 1968-69; she left Boston again this past September for 
her third visit. In return for financial support for her living expenses and 
field work, Dr. Hu has taught a class in Taxonomy of Angiosperms at 
Chung Chi College, a part of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The 
Chinese University is a federation of three colleges in which the principal 
language of instruction is Chinese. The Chung Chi campus is located near 
Sha Tin in the New Territories. Dr. Hu has also made extensive herbarium 
collections of native plants. This report summarizes her activities during 
her second trip, including her short stops in Korea and Japan where she 
investigated species of daylilies under the sponsorship of the American 
Hemerocallis Society — Ed. 

Field work and botanical collections. People who have read or 
heard about Hong Kong from reports of tourists who visited the 
congested shopping areas, or from missionaries who discussed 
the conditions of refugee life, have the impression that Hong 
Kong is a small piece of land overcrowded with buildings and 
people. This is an untrue picture. Actually, 95% of the land area 
controlled by the Hong Kong government is wilderness. It is 
true that certain historical collecting sites, such as Captain 
Champion’s Happy Valley, are crowded with apartment build- 
ings, but the vast area is still botanically unexplored. A map 
issued in 1968 by the Crown Lands & Survey Office of Hong 
Kong indicates that the built-up areas are limited to the north 
side of Hong Kong proper (Victoria Island), Kowloon Peninsula, 
and very small areas in the New Territories. The primary reason 
for the lack of development in Hong Kong is water supply. Now 
the Jubilee Reservoir, the Tai Lam Chung Reservoir, and the 
Kowloon Reservoir have been built in the New Territories, and 
Plover Cove has been converted into a fresh water lake. These 
will provide water for a population shift to the New Territories. 
The huge Shek Pik Reservoir is on Lantau Island, the largest 
island in the Hong Kong area. (See map, p. 16-17.) 

When I left Hong Kong in June 1968, my collecting record 
ended with number 5551. During the summer T. K. Woo col- 


9 


10 ARNOLDIA 

lected twenty sets of specimens. On my return to Chung Chi 
College in September, I began my collections with number 5572; 
when I left this June ( 1969), the last number was 7791. During 
this period I collected approximately 2250 sets of specimens. 

Field work in the tropics is strenuous but always exiciting. 
The combination of available water and good roads makes Hong 
Kong a plant collector’s paradise in southeast Asia. The most 
memorable of my trips were ( 1 ) the visit to the type tree of 
Camellia granthamiana Sealy behind the Jubilee Reservoir, on 
Tai Mo Shan, and (2) the rediscovery of Manglietia fordiana 
Oliver on Ma On Shan. 

When Sealy described Camellia granthamiana , he remarked, 
“It was ... a shock to find that a specimen collected in the 
New Territory ... in October 1955 . . . represented a new 
and very distinct species of Camellia — especially as it is a 
striking plant with white flowers 5V2 inches across and hand- 
some, shining bullate leaves. How such a plant can have re- 
mained undiscovered until now is a mystery, . . 1 * * * 5 To find 

the cause of the mystery, to see the plant, and to collect some 
specimens for our herbaria, I participated in a field trip with 
the Hong Kong Natural History Society on November 4th, 1968. 
The area is remote from any path. There was only one man in 
the group who knew the exact locality of the tree. It is no 
mystery that the species remained hidden so long in this wilder- 
ness! The interesting thing about the occurrence of the species 
is that, after extensive field work and a thorough survey of the 
adjoining area, no other C. granthamiana was found. So, up 

1 Sealy quoted from a letter from R. E. Dean, Superintendent of the 

Gardens Division, Hong Kong, as follows: 

“You will be interested to know that only one plant, a small tree about 

10 ft. high, has so far been found. It is growing in partial shade, on the 
edge of a wooded ravine, in company with Ilex rotunda (20 feet tall), 
Caesalpinia spp. (climbing), Adina spp. (5-6 feet tall), and grass about 

5 feet tall. It is a multibranched tree, with a base diameter of a little 
over 12 inches. There is strong reason to believe that it was cut to within 
a foot or so of the ground a long time ago. 

“Its age is difficult to determine, but it is probably between fifty and 
seventy years. No other similar plants have been found growing within 
a radius of a hundred yards of this particular specimen . . . 

“The area concerned is very remote, and is served only by a narrow 
track; it is a good one and a half hours’ hike from the road. In the ordinary 
course of events it is certain that the spot is hardly ever visited, except 
by an occasional forester or villager; the forester who told us about it had 
no particular business in the area and came upon it quite by chance. It 
is quite likely that it has hitherto been passed off as a Gordonia.” ( Journal 
of the Royal Horticultural Society, LXXXI: 181—182, April 1956.) 



Fig. 1 

Camellia granthamiana Sealy 


12 ARNOLDIA 


to the present, the species is known only from the type plant. 
The species was described on the basis of two herbarium speci- 
mens; they are both in the herbarium of the Royal Botanic 
Gardens at Kew. The specimens which I collected are from the 
type plant and have both flowers and fruit. (Fig. 1, p. 11) 
Mcinglietia fordiana Oliver was described from a specimen 
collected on Victoria Island and it was known from the type tree 
only. Our herbarium has no specimen of this species. Oliver re- 
marked that M. fordiana was the first record of the genus from 
China. In the 1930's Dandy described over a dozen species of 
the genus from China, Thailand, and Indochina. Later H. H. 
Hu and his associates described another half dozen species from 
the Chinese provinces of Yunnan and Szechuan. However, M. 
fordiana has only been recorded from Hong Kong. During the 
Japanese occupation of Hong Kong the area was very short of 
fuel, and M. fordiana , together with other plants, was cut for 
firewood. On the afternoon of May 11, 1969, when my assistant 
T. K. Woo and I were looking for a shortcut to return to Chung 
Chi College from the top of Ma On Shan, I suddenly spotted a 
tree with deep green leaves and large white flowers on the other 
side of a deep gorge. Ting Kwok suggested that we wait until 
another trip to collect it, but I insisted on seeing if I had found 
another tree of Camellia granthamiayia. When we saw the tree 
up close, I thought it was a Magnolia because the luster of its 
leaves and the size of the flowers remind one of Magnolia 
grandiflora; but it is more beautiful because the anthers are a 
brilliant red. Returning to the laboratory, I keyed the specimen 
out to be Manglietia fordiana. Mr. H. C. Tang told me that M. 
fordiana had not been found anywhere except at Victoria Peak, 
and that the tree was lost in the war. Consequently, I con- 
vinced the horticulturist and landscape designer of the Chinese 
University of the importance and beauty of this species, and he 
sent three of his men to air-layer thirty plants for planting in 
the new University campus and for distribution. 

In November 1968 and February 1969 I made two collecting 
trips to Lantau, the largest island in the area; it is about one 
and two-thirds larger than Victoria Island. It has a very com- 
plicated geological formation, with granite, porphyry, marine 
silt, syenite, alluvial deposits, and sandstone all occurring in an 
area of less than fifty square miles. Until recently, the people of 
the island lived only on small alluvial plains where agriculture 
was possible. Not long ago, however, roads were built, and a 
very large reservoir was constructed at Shek Pik. Comfortable 
modern buildings with very reasonable rates have been built by 
the Methodist Mission and the YMCA. Buses and vans transport 