

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

OF THE 


GRAY HERBARIUM 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
BHL-SIL-FEDLINK 


https://archive.org/details/arnoldia60arno 




f • 


“ i: 


1 



(I 

I 




The Magazine df th§^noh 


GRAY 





Delicatissimum (1891) 



Purpureum Grandiflorum (1886) 



Rhododendron catawbiense 



US 


AUG 0 9 2000 


OHAY 


amoidia 


Volume 60 Number 1 2000 

Arnoldia (ISSN 004-2633; USPS 866-100) is 
published quarterly by the Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University. Second-class postage paid at 
Boston, Massachusetts. 

Subscriptions are $20.00 per calendar year domestic, 
$25.00 foreign, payable in advance. Single copies of 
most issues are $5.00; the exceptions are 58/4-59/1 
(Metasequoia After Fifty Years) and 54/4 (A Source- 
book of Cultivar Names), which are $10.00. Remit- 
tances may be made in U.S. dollars, by check drawn 
on a U.S. bank; by international money order,- or 
by Visa or Mastercard. Send orders, remittances, 
change-of-address notices, and all other subscription- 
related communications to; Circulation Manager, 
Arnoldia, The Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130-3500. 

Telephone 617/524-1718; facsimile 617/524-1418; 
e-mail arnoldia@arnarb.harvard.edu. 

Postmaster: Send address changes to 
Arnoldia Circulation Manager 
The Arnold Arboretum 
125 Arborway 

Jamaica Plain, MA 02130-3500 

Karen Madsen, Editor 
Andy Winther, Designer 

Editorial Committee 
Phyllis Andersen 
Ellen S. Bennett 
Robert E. Cook 
Peter Del Tredici 
Gary Roller 
Stephen A. Spongberg 
Kim E. Tripp 

Copyright © 2000. The President and Fellows of 
Harvard College 


Page 

2 Mary Gibson Henry, Plantswoman 
Extraordinaire 
Mary Harrison 

13 Flowering Plants and Their Pollinators at 
the Arnold Arboretum 
David Giblin 

20 A Fresh Look at a Traditional Favorite: 
Rhododendrons 
Richard Brooks 

27 Rhododendrons, from The Bulletin of 
Popular Information, 1934 
Edgar Anderson 

19 In Pursuit of Ironclads 
Karen Madsen 

Front cover: Rhododendron 'Big Deal' photographed 
by Dick Brooks. 

Inside covers: Watercolor drawings of petals from 
"ironclad" hybrid rhododendrons and their common 
parent. Rhododendron catawbiense. The hybrids are 
among the oldest rhododendrons in the Arboretum 
(year planted is in parenthesis), all were imported 
from England. Painted by C. H. L. Gebfert as a guide 
to identification by color, 1931. Archives of the 
Arnold Arboretum. 

Back cover: Hand-colored photograph of rhododen- 
drons at 'Wellesley', where H. H. Hunnewell 
conducted many of the early hardiness trials. 
Archives of the Arnold Arboretum. 



Mary Gibson Henry, 
Plantswoman Extraordinaire 

Mary Harrison 


I n the eighteenth century the amateur was a 
familiar breed of botanist, especially in Colonial 
America. lohn Bartram, who was to become the 
king's botanist in 1765, learned his art through expe- 
rience in the field and by corresponding with horti- 
culturists and botanists on both sides of the Atlantic, 
lane Golden, sometimes referred to as America's first 
woman botanist, learned from her father and the 
hooks he procured for her, and through correspon- 
dence with botanists who admired her ability to rec- 
ognize unusual species around her home in New 
York State. In the twentieth century the tradition 
continued and was represented especially well by 
Mary Gibson Henry. 

Mary Henry was born in 1884 at her grandparents' 
house near Jenkinstown, Pennsylvania, to Susan 
Worrell Pepper and lohn Howard Gibson. Her 
mother's family were Quakers who had come from 
England with William Penn and taken part in the 
founding of Philadelphia. Horticulture was a tradi- 
tional pursuit on both sides of the family. George 
Pepper, a great-grandfather, had been a member of 
the first Council of the Pennsylvania Horticultural 
Society in 1828, and her Gibson grandfather, a keen 
plantsman, had his own greenhouse. Her father 
enjoyed hunting and camping, and contributed to her 
interest in the natural world. 

The home of Mary's family was in the center of 
Philadelphia and had no garden, but before her 
father's death in 1894, the family often visited 
Moosehead Lake in Maine. There, under her father's 
influence, her familiarity with the countryside devel- 
oped. She became especially interested in native 
plants, and her first acquaintanceship with twin- 


Mary Gibson Henry (second from left) photographed in 
the ballroont of her grandparents’ house, ‘Maybrook’. in 
Wynnewood, Pennsylvania. To her left is her daughter 
fosephine deNemours Henry, and at her right is her aunt 
Mary Klett Gibson. At the far right is her daughter Mary 

Gibson Henry Davis. 


i 


Mary Gibson Henry 3 



ALL PHOTOS, COURTESY OF THE HENRY FOUNDATION FOR BOTANICAL RESEARCH 


4 Arnoldia 60/1 


flower (Linnaea borealis), a dwarf evergreen 
shrub, awakened in her "not only a love for and 
appreciation of the absolute perfection of the 
flower itself, hut also for the dark, silent forest 
that shelters such treasures." Many years later 
(1932) she came upon this plant again, in north- 
ern British Columbia, growing "in damp, shady 
woods, in lower altitudes and on hare, bleak, 
stony mountain tops up to 6000 feet." 

Mary attended the Agnes Irwin School in 
Philadelphia for six years,- when she left in 1902, 
her formal education ended. In the years follow- 
ing school she visited the Grand Canyon and 
the Colorado Rockies, and on a trip to Europe 
she climbed Mont Blanc with her brother and 
several guides. 

In 1909 she married John Norman Henry, a 
physician who later became Philadelphia's 
director of public health as well as president of 
the General Alumni Society of the University of 
Pennsylvania. The couple first lived in Philadel- 
phia where Mrs. Henry had "a nice backyard . . . 
and a tiny greenhouse." In 1915 they acquired a 
large farm in Maryland with a view to building 
a home there. The plan was abandoned when 
World War I interfered and Dr. Henry volun- 
teered for duty overseas. Nevertheless, long 
summers spent in existing bungalows on the 
property allowed Mrs. Henry to develop a large 
kitchen garden, acquire some exotic ornamen- 
tals, and experiment with native rock plants. 
In addition to gardening in Maryland, she 
cultivated orchids in the Philadelphia green- 
house, and in 1924 she published an essay on 
the subiect in Garden Magazine. She read 
widely in horticulture and botany, and it was 
her reading during this period that first devel- 
oped her interest in wild plants of the southeast- 
ern United States. Two books were of special 
significance to her, Manual of the Southeastern 
Flora by 1. K. Small and The Travels of William 
Bartram, which she found an "unending source 
of inspiration." 

Time to indulge horticultural interests was 
limited, however, for Mrs. Henry quickly 
became the mother of five children, the young- 
est of whom died at the age of six. Although 
basically confined to home during the twenties, 
she continued to expand her knowledge about 
plants by studying nursery catalogs, often from 


distant places — Trees and Shrubs from a nursery 
in Tunbridge Wells, England; Coolidge Rare 
Plant Gardens (1923) from a California nursery; 
Himalayan and Indigenous Plants, Bulbs, 
Seeds (1927) from a nursery in Bengal, India. 
Seed lists came from the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture's Office of Foreign Plant Introduc- 
tions, and from the Royal Botanic Garden, 
Edinburgh, which she had visited in 1923. (Fol- 
lowing that visit Mrs. Henry initiated a corre- 
spondence with the R.B.G.'s Regius Keeper, 
William Wright-Smith, that lasted until he died 
in 1956. Indeed, Wright-Smith was among the 
earliest of several mentors to whom she looked 
for professional advice.) 

In 1926 the Henrys bought Gladwyne, a run- 
down farm of ninety hilly acres twelve miles 
from the center of Philadelphia, where they 
hoped to combine the functions of their Phila- 
delphia and Maryland homes. As the Henrys' 
architect described it, a greenhouse was built 
with a house attached. Planting must have 
begun immediately, for a 1928 inventory of 
the Gladwyne garden records over 200 shrubs 
and plants, with multiple varieties of several 
species — seven Cornus florida and three Hama- 
melis vernalis, for example. Mrs. Henry's inter- 
est in diversity within a single species was 
later reflected in her passion for collecting 
and hybridizing and an unflagging pursuit 
of particular colors and dimensions. By 1931 
there were some 850 trees and shrubs in her gar- 
den, some of them new Asiatic finds acquired 
from the collectors Forrest, Wilson, Rock, 
Farrer, and Ward. 

Another of Mrs. Henry's early mentors was 
Francis Pennell, curator of botany at the Acad- 
emy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia, from 
whom she sought help with identification. 
When she expressed an interest in collecting 
wild plants for her garden, it was he who urged 
her to collect herbarium specimens along with 
the plants and schooled her in how to document 
her finds. 

In part, Mrs. Henry attributed her desire to 
collect to William Bartram. His glowing descrip- 
tion of Rhododendron speciosum flammeum 
(now R. speciosum] had fired her desire to 
acquire a specimen, and when her search in 
commercial outlets and botanical gardens 


JOSEPHINE HENRY COUR I ESY OF THE HENRY FOUNDA ' ION FOR BOTANICAL RESEARCH 


Mary Gibson Henry 5 



One of the showiest of native American azaleas. Rhododendron 
speciosum (now R. flammeum), the Oconee azalea. Mrs. Henry's 
repeated journeys in search of this plant resulted in seven color 
variants. Its range is confined to USDA zones 6 and 7. 


proved unsuccessful, she decided to seek it in 
the wild. This was the impetus for a long life of 
annual and sometime biannual collecting trips 
that continued until her death in 1967. 

Her sympathetic husband encouraged her to 
fulfill her ambitions and was able to equip her 
handsomely with the tools and transport needed 
for her expeditions. A car (specifically, a Lincoln 
Continental), "outfitted with an 'attic,' an elec- 
trically lit desk and a bookcase" was designed. 
"The rear compartment is insulated and venti- 
lated so that newly collected plants can travel 
comfortably. Three plant presses, numerous 
buckets, spades etc. are part of the equipment." 
This unusual vehicle was driven by a chauffeur, 
Ernest Perks, who remained with the Henrys for 
sixty-five years. On some of her journeys Mrs. 


Henry was also accompanied by her 
daughter Josephine, a skilled photog- 
rapher who took color photographs 
of plants later used by Mrs. Henry in 
her lectures. 

On her first trip to the Southeast she 
covered 2,000 miles and on that and 
later trips collected seven color varia- 
tions of Rhododendron speciosum. 
Later expeditions were made along 
the Atlantic Coastal Plain, on the 
Piedmont Plateau, in Appalachia, and 
in the mountains of east Tennessee 
and Alabama. Mrs. Henry planted her 
finds at Gladwyne and sent herbarium 
specimens to the Academy of Natural 
History in Philadelphia and the Royal 
Botanic Garden, Edinburgh. 

Experience quickly taught her that 
"rare and beautiful plants can be found 
in places that are difficult of access. . . . 
Often one has to shove one's self 
through or wriggle under briars, with 
awkward results to clothing . . . Wad- 
ing usually bare legged through count- 
less rattlesnake infested swamps adds 
immensely to the interest of the day's 
work . . . On several occasions I have 
been so deeply mired I had to be pulled 
out." She also learned that the habi- 
tats of many of the plants she sought 
were in urgent need of protection. In 
the Southeast she found the swamp 
habitats of wild lilies being used as waterholes 
for cattle or as dumps. To encourage the growth 
of grass for grazing, farmers often burned brush, 
destroying wild azaleas at the same time. These 
threats reinforced her determination to collect 
and cultivate American natives and to eventu- 
ally introduce them to American gardens. 

During a family holiday to Canada's Jasper 
National Park in 1930, the Henry family learned 
of a "tropical valley" in northern British 
Columbia that was reportedly frost-free in spite 
of the extreme winter temperatures surrounding 
it. Their curiosity aroused, the family decided to 
explore the area; for Mrs. Henry the opportunity 
to collect in completely new territory in terrain 
ranging from 2,550 to 9,000 feet was an irresist- 
ible challenge. 



6 A mold id 60/ 1 



Maiy Gibson Henry and members of her family at the outset of their expedition to British Columbia in 1930. 


The Canadian Department of the Interior had 
little information on the area. Mrs. Henry sum- 
marized it later, "Waterfalls and rapids in the 
rivers make traveling hy water impossible, 
while the distance by land is great over wide 
stretches of hog and mountainous country still 
in Its virgin roughness, and much of it yet 
unmapped." However, an old schoolfriend of 
Dr. Henry, then head of the Canadian National 
Railways, gave them helpful advice, and the 
Canadian government sent along a topographer, 
K. F. McCusker, to map the territory as they 
explored. Since the Henry family included two 
sons and two daughters ranging in age from 14 
to 21 and their travels would take them to 
remote areas, they also arranged for a physician 
to accompany them. 

The party left Philadelphia hy train on lime 
25, 1931, arriving at Pouce Coupe, m northern 
British Columhia, on lune 30. From there they 
motored to Fort St. lohn, where they joined the 
9 men, 58 horses, and all the supplies that 


would accompany them. For the next eighty 
days, they traveled fifteen to twenty miles a day 
on horseback with occasional stops to collect 
plants, seeds, and herbarium specimens. The 
journey led them alongside rivers and through 
meadows filled with Jacob's ladder iPole- 
monium), larkspur (Delphinium!, and penste- 
mons. In the higher country bellflower 
(Campanula) and forget-me-not iMyosotis) 
were abundant. "Collecting plants while riding 
with a pack is not always a simple matter. A 
trowel goes in a leather sheath on one side of my 
belt and a knife on the other side. A strong pair 
of saddle bags is fastened to the pommel on my 
saddle, in which each morning are placed sev- 
eral empty jam cans. Each evening all full cans 
are aired and watered, and in the morning are all 
carefully packed in wooden packing cases on the 
horses. Quite frequently the cans were frozen 
solid to the ground and I had to use my ax to 
chop them loose." Mrs. Henry's collecting 
methods proved reasonably successful, and 


Maiy Gibson Henry 7 


Tropical Valleys in the Far Northwest 

Reports such as those heard by the Henrys of 
"tropical" valleys in Canada's far northwest 
were frequent at the time. The heating agent 
was the many sulphur springs in those val- 
leys. In the 1920s their warmth enabled a 
trapper working out of Fort Laird, within 
seven degrees of the Arctic Circle, to grow 
winter crops of potatoes, onions, and tobacco. 

The area the Henrys were interested in 
exploring lies between the Peace and Liard 
rivers, roughly 56° north latitude ik 121° 
west longtitude and 58° north latitude 
123° west longitude. The first Europeans had 
made their way through the northern Rocky 
Mountains by way of the Peace River some 
150 years previously, but few botanical 
collectors had been there. In 1872, the Cana- 
dian botanist John Macoun, working for the 
Canadian Pacific Railway, collected in the 
vicinity of Fort St. lohn (established about 
1805) and Hudson Hope (established in 
1808). He also collected for the Canadian 
Geological Survey, which carried out a sci- 
entific investigation of the Peace River in 
1875. Further surveys by others had been 
made in 1887 and 1891, resulting in some 
knowledge of the distribution of certain 
trees and shrubs. 

In response to the Henrys' discussions 
with the Canadian Department of the 
Interior, one of their topographers, K. F. 
McCusker, was assigned to accompany the 
group and to map the territory. The expedi- 
tion began on 25 June 1931, covered a thou- 
sand miles on foot and horseback, and lasted 
eighty days. Near sulphur springs, Mary 


Henry noted "rank growth of delphinium 
often over eight feet tall and raspberries, 
roses and vetches growing in the thickest, 
most luxuriant tangle." A pool nine feet 
in diameter with crystal clear water and 
temperatures estimated at about ninety 
degrees Fahrenheit provided an "Arctic Tub" 
enjoyed by the group. 

McCusker gave Henry family names to 
many of the rivers, lakes, and mountains 
they encountered. One mountain at 9,000 
feet "stands forth pre-eminently, its snow- 
covered summit towering above the others, 
the highest mountain we saw all summer." 
This McCusker named for Mary Henry and 
subsequently British Columbia's Depart- 
ment of Lands made the name official. 

In the following year Flugh Raup, then an 
associate researcher at the Arnold Arbore- 
tum, made an Arboretum-sponsored collect- 
ing trip to the same territory. He described 
his experience and catalogued his and Mary 
Henry's collections in Phytogeographic 
Studies in the Peace and Upper Liard River 
Regions, Canada. He included a brief 
account of the Henry expedition and noted 
that Mrs. Henry "collected 350 numbers of 
flowering plants and ferns, making notable 
additions to the known flora of the region." 

On a lecture tour of England and Scotland 
in 1948, Mrs. Henry presented an account 
of her travels to the Royal Horticultural 
Society and to the Royal Scottish Geographi- 
cal Society, which awarded her the Mungo 
Park Medal for Exploration in Northern 
British Columbia. 


many of the plants survived the journey back 
to Philadelphia. Opuntia frigida, Monarda 
mollis var. menthaefolia, Artemesia frigida, 
Amelanchier florida, and Cornus stolonifera 
survived at Gladwyne for some years, but many 
of the northerners were unable to adjust to the 
local climate. 

Mrs. Henry considered the most interesting 
find of the expedition to be Lapland rosebay 


(Rhododendron lapponicum), collected near 
St. Paul's lake in northern British Columbia. She 
sent a specimen for identification to Alfred 
Rehder, the curator of the herbarium at the 
Arnold Arboretum, who reported that it was pre- 
viously known in North America only in the 
East northward of the higher mountains of north- 
ern New York and New England. He declared it 
"an extremely interesting discovery ... its occur- 


8 Arnoldia 60/1 


rence in Western North America is of great 
phytogeographical interest ... I have placed a 
small twig of it on record in our herbarium ... for 
neither we nor the Gray herbarium had any 
specimens of this species from the West." 

Herbarium specimens were also distributed 
to the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadel- 
phia and the Royal Botanical Garden, 
Edinburgh, and a few woody plants came to 
the Arnold Arboretum. The Royal Botanical 
Garden, Edinburgh, also received seventy pack- 
ages of seed, and fifty cans of living plants went 
to Gladwyne. 

Mrs. Henry traveled back to the Peace River 
area in 1932, 1933, and 1935 with her daughter, 
Josephine, and K. F. McCusker, the topographer. 
They communicated with Philadelphia via 
twelve carrier pigeons they brought with them 
and received messages from Dr. Henry by radio 
receiver. 

Following these trips to British Columbia 
Mrs. Henry continued collecting in the south- 
eastern part of the United States. Nothing could 
surpass her delight in the northlands, but com- 
paratively few plants from there were able to 
survive the hot summers in Philadelphia, 
whereas plants from the Southeast flourished 
there. "As a field botanist," she wrote, "duty 
calls me to those fertile fields of our southern 
states where so many treasures lurk in out of 
the way corners." 

From 1931 to 1935 Mrs. Henry wrote six parts 
of her account of the Peace River expedition. 
Collecting Plants Beyond the Frontier, pub- 
lished by National Horticulture Magazine; two 
final segments appeared in the same journal in 
1949. During this period she also wrote twenty- 
three other articles, most of them published 
in Horticulture or in National Horticulture 
Magazine. Her topics included uncommon oaks 
and rare rhododendrons, little known violets 
and unusual honeysuckles, hybrid jasmines and 
Indian begonias. Based on her own personal 
experience, she evaluated plants for cold hardi- 
ness and recommended soil mixtures, trans- 
planting methods, and greenhouse techniques. 

Following her husband's death in 1938, Mrs. 
Henry turned her attention to expanding her 
garden. At the summit of the land at Gladwyne 
was a huge deposit of Baltimore gneiss around 


which she developed a naturalistic rock garden. 
The plantings included native American alpine 
plants, some of them collected in northern Brit- 
ish Columbia; many varieties of phlox, silene, 
and artemesia; hymenocallis from Georgia and 
Florida; tradescantia from the Gulf of Mexico; 
gentiana from New Jersey; and yuccas from 
eighteen different locations; calycanthus and 
low-growing magnolias from Georgia; and many 
varieties of dwarf rhododendrons. A trillium 
garden was planted in a woody area near a small 
stream, and collections from Texas, New 
Mexico, and Arizona were established in a 
desert rock garden. Each plant was provided 
with a soil mixture and habitat as similar as 



Hymenocallis henryae. Mrs. Henry found this new species 
in western Florida; botanist Hamilton Traub described and 
named it. Mrs. Henry collected species of Hymenocallis 
from eleven southern states. Some were planted out- 
side and lifted for the winter. At one time she had 125 
varieties of lily, "distinct, beautiful variants of eastern 
American lilies . " As she herself noted, lilies "engaged 
much of my time. " 


Mary Gibson Henry 9 



"As for my rock garden, the largest of the existing pile of rocks were too big to move and all I did was to 
rearrange the smaller ones and to make paths and steps that are scarcely distinguishable. Soils were changed 
into suitable mixtures” (1943). Mrs. Henry gives scale. 


possible to its original growing conditions; the 
change in latitude often resulted in plants 
remaining desirably small and compact. 

Visitors to Gladwyne often commented on 
the range of plants growing there. E. H. Wilson, 
in identifying Queicus pumila, which Mrs. 
Henry had sent him, expressed surprise that this 
southeastern plant should prove hardy in Phila- 
delphia,- and William fudd, Arnold Arboretum 
propagator and one of Mrs. Henry's advisors, 
was impressed by the many rare and unusual 
plants that could not be found elsewhere so 
far north. 

At the end of the 1930s Mrs. Henry began to 
receive recognition for her achievements. She 
became a director of the American Horticultural 
Society and a council member of the Pennsylva- 


nia Horticultural Society. When the Rock 
Garden Society inaugurated their bulletin in 
1943, she was appointed associate editor and 
wrote the first article in volume one, number 
one, "A Rock Garden of Natives." In 1941 she 
hecame a research associate in the department 
of botany at the Academy of Natural Sciences, 
Philadelphia. That same year the Pennsylvania 
Horticultural Society awarded her their 
Schaeffer Gold Medal for her "notable contribu- 
tion to horticulture. Her keen eye has detected 
many species and varieties of horticultural 
value. These have been transplanted to or propa- 
gated in her garden at Gladwyne and her skill in 
their culture has made possible the demonstra- 
tion that many highly attractive native plants 
can be grown far from their native haunts ... As 
a result of her untiring efforts we are now more 


10 Arnuldia 60/1 



Phlox X henryac, a cross of P. nivalis and P. bifida, originated at 
Gladwyne, "a chance seedling in my trial garden. ” P x henryae, a pale 
pink with deeply notched lobes, is in the foreground with P. bifida 
in the rear. 


than ever aware of the tremendous potentiali- 
ties of the native American flora for supplying 
plants worthy of cultivation." 

It was at this time that Mrs. Henry began 
to make her plants available to nurseries. The 
Upper Banks Nursery, operated by Fairman 
Furness, was a fifty-acre garden and rare plant 
nursery along Ridley Creek in Media, Pennsyl- 
vania. In 1940 Mrs Henry gave Furness permis- 
sion to gather cuttings of many of the plants in 
her garden. When the plants were ready for 
distribution in 1942, he published a catalog. 
Rare and Native Shrubs Collected by Mary 
Henry, that included varieties of Rhododen- 
dron, Calycanthus, Halesia, Philadelphus, and 
Syringa that she had developed. The Mayfair 
Nurseries, rock garden specialists in Hillsdale, 
New lersey, also offered plants from Gladwyne, 


including many varieties of Mrs. 
Henry's phlox and penstemon. 

Over the years her interest in collect- 
ing and breeding lilies had grown. 
In 1946 she was awarded the silver 
medal at a lily show organized by the 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society. 
"The most outstanding exhibit of lilies 
from the American wilds was the eight 
selections of Lilium philadelphicum 
now being cultured by Mrs. Henry 
at Gladwyne, Pennsylvania," wrote the 
judges. 

Perhaps the most satisfying achieve- 
ment in her work with lilies was the 
discovery of a fragrant, yellow specimen 
in a cattle pasture in southern Alabama, 
near the Gulf of Mexico. "1 had long 
hoped," she confessed, "that 1 might 
chance upon some species which had 
remained unknown to science." In addi- 
tion to herbarium specimens she col- 
lected seeds, which were successfully 
propagated at Gladwyne and bloomed 
after five years. The species did prove to 
be a new discovery; Mrs. Henry named 
it Lilium iridollae, for it represented 
to her "the pot of gold at the foot of 
my rainbow." 

In 1949 Mrs. Henry's garden was 
threatened with destruction when the 
State of Pennsylvania and the U.S. 
Army Engineers decided to use Gladwyne "as a 
dump for the silt, sewage and refuse to be 
pumped from the bottom of the Schuykill 
River." She called upon her many botanist 
friends and colleagues around the United States 
and in Great Britain to support her appeal to the 
governor of Pennsylvania to spare the property. 
Not only was the appeal successful, but the let- 
ters her supporters wrote provide clear evidence 
of Mrs. Henry's status in the horticultural 
world. All spoke of the importance of her collec- 
tion of native and rare American plants and 
of its great scientific and horticultural value. 
Some put the garden in the same class as the 
Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew and the Arnold 
Arboretum. Mrs. Henry was described as a 
highly competent botanist and an extremely 
skilled horticulturist. The president of the 



Mary Gibson Henry 1 1 


Royal Horticultural Society pointed out that 
her fine American flora, "much superior to 
the ordinary run," were being distributed to 
gardens in England. Hugh Ratip, professor of 
botany at the Harvard Forest, wrote, "She has 
been an indefatigable student of horticultural 
values in the native American flora, in the 
finest tradition." 

To safeguard the garden's future, Mrs. Henry 
established the Henry Foundation for Botanical 
Research, dedicated "to the collection and pres- 
ervation of choice, rare and endangered New 
World Plants." 

A year or so before her death Mrs. Henry was 
advised by her physician to reduce the strenu- 
ous level of her activities. She nevertheless con- 
tinued to lead a full life as outlined in the 1966 
publication Accomplishments of the Founda- 
tion, which recounts her activities during the 


last full year of her life. Between May and 
August she spent 42 days in the field, traveling 
in Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, 
Kentucky, North Carolina, and Florida, and col- 
lecting some 75 plants, including another 
Lillhnn iridollae and a Styrax americanum that 
still grows at Gladwyne. That same year she 
filled orders from retail nurseries all over the 
United States and from individuals from Peru to 
Israel. She distributed Gladwyne material to the 
Morris Arboretum, the University of Arkansas, 
the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, Hilliers 
Nursery in England, and the Agricultural 
Experimental Station in Puerto Rico. Visitors to 
her garden included members of the American 
Rhododendron Society, the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, the New York Botanical Garden, 
the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, and the 
department of botany at Princeton University. 



Mrs. Henry wrote in her autobiography. “Winters have found me enmeshed deeply in the routine work of my 
tiny greenhouse and six coldframes . . . about 600 pots and flats to be repotted and taken care of and that duty 
devolves entirely on me. Most of the pots contain Amaryllids and what began as ‘winter fun has turned into 
a serious breeding program. ” 


12 Arnoldia 60/1 



Lilium iridollae (the pot-of-gold lily) was perhaps the most 
cherished of Mrs. Henry’s many finds. She collected the 
original specimen and seeds in southern Alabama, 1940. A 
single-flowering plant of three to five feet in height, her 
seedlings first flowered in 1945. 


On a collecting trip in North Carolina in 
April 1967, Mary Gibson Henry died at the age 
of eighty-two. Her years of devotion to horticul- 
ture had produced many solid achievements: 
over a hundred articles had been published 
in iournals such as Herhertia, Bartonia, and 
National Horticultural Magazine; herbaria in 
Scotland and North America had received thou- 
sands of specimen sheets from her collections; 
the hardiness of plants previously thought too 
tender for Philadelphia had been demonstrated; 
new species and varieties had been introduced 
to arboreta and nurseries,- interest in American 
flora for American gardens had been stimulated; 
the garden at Gladwyne had been preserved for 
future generations. 

Following her mother's death in 1967, 
Josephine deN. Henry became director of the 
Foundation, a position she held until 1996, 
when she was succeeded by Mrs. Henry's grand- 
daughter Susan Treadway. These successors 
have continued to expand the collection of 
native American plants and to maintain the 
natural qualities of the garden. Through lec- 
tures, plant sales, and garden tours, new genera- 
tions are introduced to the work and ideals of 
the garden's founder. 


References 

Archives of the Henry Foundation for Botanical 
Research, Gladwyne, Pennsylvania 

25 September 1943. William Henry Judd to 
Mary Gibson Henry. 

13 November 1931. Alfred Rehder to Mary 
Gibson Henry. 

27 November 1931. Ibid. 

19 December 1935. Ibid. 

29 November 1929. E.H. Wilson to Mary 
Gibson Henry. 

Henry, Josephine deN. 1980. Not All Plantsmen Are 
Men. Bulletin of the American Rock Garden 
Society 3,0[1]: 68-73 & 30(3): 115-122. 

Henry, Mary Gibson. 1950. An Autobiography. 
Herhertia 6: 1 1-30. 

1933. Exploring and Plant Collecting in Northern 

British Columbia. Year Book of the Pennsyl- 
vania Horticultural Society. 68-75. 

1946. A New Lily from Southern Alabama and 

Northern Florida. Bartonia: Journal of the 
Philadelphia Botanical Club 24: 1-4. 

Raup, Hugh M. 1934. Phytogeographic Studies in the 
Peace and Upper Liard River Regions, Canada. 
Contributions from the Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University VI. 

Stout, C. Frederick C. 1942. Report of the President. 

Year Book of the Pennsylvania Horticultural 
Society, 1 1 . 

Acknowledgments 

The author thanks members of the Henry Foundation 
Miss Josephine deN. Henry, Susan Treadway, and Betsey 
Davis for their generous hospitality and help in the 
preparation of this essay. Particularly appreciated is their 
willingness to grant access to their vast collection of 
correspondence and photographs. 

Note 

To visit the Henry Foundation for Botanical Research, 
call 610-525-2037 or write to the Foundation at Box 7, 
Gladwyne, PA 19035, for reservations and information 
about membership, educational programs, plant sale, 
hours, fees, directions, and parking. 


Mary Harrison is a volunteer in the Arboretum's 
herbarium and library. She has annotated the letters and 
diaries of William Judd, the letters of Oakes Ames, and 
indexed the minutes of the Horticultural Club of Boston. 
Her next undertaking will be the annotation of the 
diaries of plant explorer Joseph Rock.