

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 


LIBRARY 

OK THE 

GRAY HERBARIUM 


Received 

OcAobef AS.WSH 













Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
BHL-SIL-FEDLINK 


https://archive.org/details/arnoldiaarno_5 



ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 


ARNOLDIA 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 


VOLUME VII 

x 947 


PUBLISHED BY THE 

ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

JAMAICA PLAIN, MASSACHUSETTS 







ILLUSTRATIONS 


Routes between the Arnold Arboretum and the Case Estates, Map, Plate I, op- 
posite p. 4. 

No. 8240 Arnold Cherry — This photograph taken in 1944, shows the flowering 
and growth habit of the hybrid cherry at the age of four years. Plate II, op- 
posite p. 10. 

All these elms on Boydon Road, Columbus, Ohio, were killed by the Phloem 
necrosis disease of elms. Plate III, opposite p. 18. 

Azalea Path as it will appear on Bussey Hill about mid-May. Plate IV, opposite 

p. 26. 

Tilia cordata , Plate V, opposite p. 80. 

Picea Engelmanni , as it grows in the Arnold Arboretum. Plate VI, opposite p. 34. 

Pyrus ussuriensis , Plate VII, opposite p. 39. 

The Meadow Road in the Arnold Arboretum. Plate VIII, opposite p. 58. 

This beautiful bronze plaque in honor of Professor Charles S. Sargent was pre- 
pared at the expense of the Visiting Committee who were all personal friends 
of Professor Sargent. Plate IX, p. 60. 

Ulmus parvlfolia: the true Chinese elm (left); Stewartia koreana: Korean stewartia 
(right). Plate X, opposite p. 62. 

Acer griseum: the paper bark maple with lustrous brown exfoliating bark (left) ; 
Pinus Bungeana: the lace bark pine, the best of all the pines for ornamental 
bark (right). Plate XI, opposite p. 67. 


[Hi] 













! 








i 
















ARNOLDIA 


( MAR 20 1947 ) 

^*18 a*. n ^ 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 MARCH 21, 1947 Number 1 

THE PAST YEAR AT THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

M ANY changes have been made at the Arnold Arboretum during the past 
year, especially in some of the living collections. The many friends of the 
Arboretum will be interested in understanding some of the past events which 
have made it possible to undertake these changes, and in our plans for the future. 
This issue of Arnoldia will be devoted to an explanation of the situation so that 
3ur friends can better understand and appreciate the alterations when they visit 
the Arboretum this spring. 

Everyone familiar with the late Professor Charles Sprague Sargent knows of 
his great love for the Arboretum and the plants grown there. Since his death in 
1927, no one has seen fit to materially modify the plantings for which he was 
personally responsible. Undoubtedly he would have been the first to recommend 
the removal of many plants and even entire plantings, once they had served their 
purpose; Mrs. Beatrix Farrand also recognized this fact (Arnoldia, Vol. 6, No. 
10). Since Professor Sargent’s death, however, plants have continued to be sent 
to the Arboretum, new plants and some sent for ‘ ‘trial” to the extent of approx- 
imately 600 a year. Since the area (265 acres) has not been enlarged, and trial 
growing space had to be given for new and untried plants, the general plantings 
became more and more crowded, with the result that individual specimens re- 
ceived less care. 

Labor and Staff 

In the interim since 1927, with an ever-increasing plant population, labor in 
general has been demanding (and receiving) increased wages for fewer working 
hours. For various economic reasons there has been a gradual reduction of the 
50-hour week to the 40-hour week with an accompanying increase in labor costs. 
As a result of this situation and the difficulty of obtaining labor during the war 
years, only half the time was being spent on the maintenance of the living col- 
lections in 1944 as was spent in 1931, and possibly considerably less than half 


the time that was spent on the collections when Professor Sargent was living. 
By the end of World War II it became evident to even the casual observer that 
this situation could not continue. 

During the past year we have had 12 full time and 5 part time men working 
on the grounds for a total of 3905 man days of labor (figured on an 8 hour day 
basis) at a cost of $30,500. In 1931, when a total of 5400 man days was spent 
in the collections, it cost $24,232. The hourly wages of our permanent labor staff 
has more than doubled during the past ten years. Labor efficiency has been in- 
creased by greater use of mechanized equipment, but this, too, is expensive. 

At the end of the war the Arboretum found itself with a greatly depleted labor 
force. Some of the men had been taken on to fill vacancies only temporarily, and 
were obviously not interested in their work. The lack of care due to labor deple- 
tion during the war years was all too evident in many collections. The Arbore- 
tum suffered a tremendous loss when the Superintendent, Victor Schmitt, and the 
Propagator, William H. Judd, both of whom spent almost their entire lives work- 
ing in the Arboretum and both of whom were carefully trained by Professor Sar- 
gent, died within a year and a half of each other. Valued nursery land adjacent 
to the greenhouses was taken by the state as essential for the erection of an ad- 
dition to the State Antitoxin Laboratory. 

Contrasted with this, the bright side of the picture gradually became evident 
late in 1945 when some of our young men came home from the armed services 
and we were once more able to hire additional competent workers. Heman 
Howard, for 14 years in charge of labelling and mapping at the Arboretum, re- 
turned from the army in 1945 and was made Assistant Horticulturist. Alfred 
Fordham, for 14 years Assistant Propagator at the Arboretum, returned from 
the Army in 1946 and was made Assistant Superintendent January 1 , 1947. 
Mr. Robert Williams, who came to the Arboretum in 1945 as Superintendent to 
fill the vacancy left by the death of Mr. Victor Schmitt continues in his ener- 
getic efforts to keep the collections properly maintained. 

Mr. Richard H. Fillmore has been appointed Propagator starting March 1, to 
carry on the work formerly done by Mr. Judd. Mr. Fillmore comes from a hor- 
' ticultural family, and has worked in his father’s nursery in Nova Scotia. He 
graduated from Acadia University, Nova Scotia, in 1945 (majoring in botany) 
and since then has taken graduate work at Massachusetts State College (major- 
ing in landscape architecture), transferring to Cornell University in 1946; he 
hopes to receive his M.S. degree in Ornamental Horticulture from that institution 
this June. 

In early 1946 a full time tree pruner was employed, a young man trained in 
the skills of modern arboriculture. He and his immediate successors have proved 
many times over that they are worth their extra compensation, especially in an 
arboretum such as ours where all the men we had during the war were unable 
to do pruning work off the ground. 


[ 2 ] 


Mechanized equipment such as tractors, specialized tractor-drawn lawn mowers, 
etc., have been purchased during the past five years to reduce the amount of 
hand labor necessary. One of the most recent acquisitions has been a Disston 
chain saw, purchased last fall. This alone has resulted in a tremendous saving in 
labor. This morning, for instance, three men using the machine, felled and cut 
up (in less than 48" lengths) a 30" oak in less than an hour, a job which would 
formerly have taken three men at least a full day. 

Several substantial bequests have made it possible for the Arboretum to increase 
the budget for labor and equipment although increased costs still keep our labor 
force much smaller than in Sargent’s time. 

The Case Bequests 

The generous gifts of Miss Louisa W. Case and her sister Miss Marian Roby 
Case, both of Weston, occurring over a period of several years, have come at a 
most opportune time. In the fall of 1945, as a memorial to her father, James B. 
Case, Miss Louisa W. Case of Weston gave the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard 
University an outright gift of $50,000.00 together with her residence, green- 
houses, barns and fifty-nine acres of land to be utilized for the purposes of the 
Arnold Arboretum. In July, 1944, her sister, Miss Marian Roby Case, left the 
Arboretum some ninety acres of land, various buildings and what has amounted 
to a capital endowment of $420,000.00. In the fall of 1946, Miss Louisa Case 
left an additional forty acres of land and a residuary amount of money from her 
estate as yet undetermined. 

M iss Marian Roby Case had been interested in horticulture ever since she 
started her summer school for boys in Weston in 1909. Since that time her 
Weston estate had been carefully planted with many kinds of fruit trees and or- 
namental specimens so that her gardens were of great interest to the community. 
Miss Louisa W. Case, too, had been interested in the Arnold Arboretum for many 
years and served on its Visiting Committee. Because of their interest in horticul- 
ture in general and in the Arnold Arboretum in particular, the Arboretum is now 
in a much better position to carry on its horticultural work than it has been for 
many years. 

As a result of these excellent gifts from people who were deeply interested in 
the work of the Arnold Arboretum, land is now available for nurseries and ex- 
perimental plots. Much preliminary work has been done during the past two years 
to make it possible to set up a most interesting series of horticultural experiments 
on these properties this spring. Many of the experiments have to do with cul- 
tural practices governing the color of the foliage, flower, fruit and autumn colora- 
tion of many ornamental woody plants. A sufficient endowment was given with 
these Case estates so that they can be operated without reducing the funds avail- 
able for maintenance work in the Arboretum at Jamaica Plain. 


[ 3 ] 


The Balch Bequest 


The Arnold Arboretum has also received this past year $150,000.00 from the 
estate of Katherine T. Balch, wife of the late John Balch of Milton. Mr. Balch 
was a friend of the Arboretum for many years, frequently visiting- the collections 
and coming for advice in order to help him solve his many problems as tree warden 
for the town of Milton. By the terms of the will the money was left “to be used 
so far as possible for practical horticulture and for such uses as may reasonably 
add to the interest and enjoyment of the average visitor and the general beauty 
of the Arboretum.” 

Reorganization 

Finally, the reorganization of botanical activities at Harvard and the passage 
of time have resulted in certain administrative changes in the Arnold Arboretum. 
In order to coordinate the various botanical institutions of the University the 
botanical activities have been divided into two administrative areas. The first in- 
cludes the taxonomic and morphological activities of the Arnold Arboretum, the 
Gray Herbarium, the Botanical Museum and the Farlow Herbarium. The other 
includes the experimental and field work of the Arnold Arboretum, the Bussey 
Institution, the Harvard Forest, the Cabot Foundation and the Atkins Garden in 
Cuba. It is hoped that such coordination of the outlying botanical agencies with 
the Department of Botany will save duplication of certain activities and person- 
nel. Such a plan was proposed by Dr. E. D. Merrill when he first came to Har- 
vard as the Director of the Arnold Arboretum. When Dr. Merrill retired as Di- 
rector at the age of 70 last fall, the administration of the Arnold Arboretum came 
under the direction of the chairmen of the two botanical areas, with Dr. Karl 
Sax, Professor of Botany, serving as Acting Director. 

New Policies 

A combination of all these circumstances since the war has resulted in an in- 
creased emphasis on the horticultural activities of the Arboretum. Two policies 
have gradually evolved which may greatly affect the future of the general main- 
tenance work in the Arboretum. In the first place, a greater part of the nursery 
space for the initial trial of new plants and replacement plants will be on the 
Case estates in Weston. The breeding and most of the propagation will be con- 
tinued at the Arnold Arboretum. In Weston sufficient land is available so that 
plants can be grown to flowering size before they are moved to permanent plant- 
ings. If it is found that a ‘‘new” variety differs only slightly from another long 
established in the collections, differs shall we say by an additional pubescence of 
the leaf or a slightly more entire leaf margin than another variety already estab- 
lished, it may not be kept. Full notes will be taken for the permanent records 
and then the plant may be discarded merely because it differs so slightly. 

The second policy is perhaps more important. Certain varieties which have not 
proved themselves to be among the best of their group for ornamental purposes 

[ 4 ] 




may be removed from the general collections at Jamaica Plain and grown on the 
Case estates in Weston. Here such varieties, important for scientific reasons, would 
be lined out in rows and cultivated by machine at comparatively little expense. 
More room for better growth and display would again be given to the remaining 
plants in that particular group at the Arnold Arboretum. At Jamaica Plain, then, 
one would be able to see the most important plants and the best ornamental vari- 
eties in certain groups normally having a large number of varieties. If one wanted 
first-hand information of the others in the group, he could easily see these at the 
Case estates in Weston. In other words, as Mrs. Farrand has very rightly pointed 
out, it is impossible to continue to grow all the woody plants that are hardy in 
this climate on the 265 acres, especially if certain wooded areas and other impor- 
tant landscape features are to be maintained, as they should. 

All parties concerned having agreed in general to these two policies, certain 
things have been done last year and this, which will, we hope, make the Arbo- 
retum a much more interesting and instructive place to visit. 


Work Accomplished The Past Year 

1. Many duplicate shrubs and trees have been removed. Often when a number of 
plants are set out all grown from the same seed lot, interesting and valuable vari- 
ations will occur among the plants. It is always advisable to grow species from 
seed collected near the extremes of their known habitat and this can greatly in- 
crease the number of plants of a certain species. An intelligent understanding 
of this situation has to be made with each species to limit the number of plants 
grown. This winter, for instance, we were able to remove over 900 plants of 25 
genera without eliminating any species or variety of importance. 


2. Vistas are being opened. Because of the elimination of some 150 elm and ash 
trees, several splendid vistas have been opened, one showing Bussey Hill from 
the Forest Hills Gate, another showing the Customs House Tower from Bussey 
Hill, and another through the elms. Vistas have been opened also in the oaks 
and in the lindens with the elimination of some 80 linden and horse-chestnut 
duplicates. The trees remaining in all these collections are bound to benefit by 
having more room for proper development and by our ability, under the circum- 
stances, to give them much more of the proper care that they need. It should be 
emphasized that not a single species or variety has been entirely eliminated by 
this thinning process. There are the following species and varieties of these plants 
represented in our collections at present : 



No. ofsp. and var. 

No. of i 

Aesculus 

36 

102 

Fraxinus 

48 

109 

Tilia 

40 

103 

Ulmus 

65 

158 


3. A greater part of the barberry collection has been removed to the Case estates. 
This was done because the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture is placing more and more 
restrictions on the growing and shipping of barberries carrying the dread black 
stem rust of wheat. Only about 25 species and varieties of barberries are immune. 
These are remaining in the Arboretum. The remainder (some 96 species and va- 
rieties) have already been planted on the Case estates. 

4. The greater part of the Ribes collection has been removed to the Case estates. 
These are known to be be alternate hosts of the white pine blister rust, and rigid 
restrictions are placed against growing them in areas where five needled pines are 
grown. Hence the general public has difficulties in growing them. Over 40 spe- 
cies and varieties of these have been planted on the Case estates, with only a 
few of the ornamental ones left in the Arboretum. 

5. Spent hops are being used as a mulch in many collections. It has been demon- 
strated that, on soils similar to those in the Arboretum, woody plants benefit from 
mulches. The difficulty comes in finding the proper mulch. Hay is excellent in 
areas removed from the public where fire is not a hazard. Peat moss, too, makes 
a splendid mulch, but in areas where this has to be applied in the Arboretum 
there is no available water, and it has been proved time and time again, right in 
the Arboretum, that, under our conditions, where weeks of summer drought are 
common, the surface of peat moss will dry out to such an extent that it consti- 
tutes a serious fire hazard. A carelessly flipped cigarette or a small fire actually 
started by boys, is an ever-present hazard, and once dry peat moss starts to 
smoulder and is whipped into a blaze by a strong wind, it is one of the most dif- 
ficult types of fire to put out. 

As a consequence, we are experimenting with spent hops, hauled from one of 
the local breweries. It is too early to say much about them except that they do 
not burn so readily as peat moss and that their water retentive value is higher. 
Visitors to the Arboretum this spring will see a gr^at deal of hops around the 
plants, and if they have just been applied the odor will be all too evident. How- 
ever, we hope it is all for the better growth of the plants, and the objectionable 
odor of hops does disappear after a week or so. 

6. The lilac collection in the Arboretum will probably not be further enlarged. The 
Arnold Arboretum has more varieties of lilacs than any other institution in this 
country if not in the world. It is a valued collection. Few other arboreta or 
botanic gardens are willing to grow some 450 named varieties of lilac; yet at the 
moment the feeling seems to be that this is a valuable reference collection and 
all these varieties should continue to be grown at the one place in this country 
where students of this diversified group of ornamental plants can see how similar 
many varieties are. There is not enough room in the lilac collection for all these 

[ 6 ] 


varieties. Consequently, nearly 100 of the less important varieties will be lined 
out on the Case estates, where they can be studied by those who wish to do so, 
but where the general public will not be confused by an additional number of 
varieties (many of them unavailable from nurseries). 

7. Weigela , Philadelphus , Deutzia and Spiraea collections, it is hoped, will be 
similarly treated this spring. 

8. The lilac collection wax thoroughly pruned for the first time since 19J/.1. It is 
difficult to understand the tremendous amount of work done here last spring 
(well over 75 man days of 8 hours each) and the great amount of material it was 
necessary to remove. The lilacs may not produce a heavy display of bloom this 
spring, but they are in better physical condition than they have been in many 
years and should definitely show it by producing a bumper crop of blossoms in 
1948. 

9. The Euonymus collection formerly by the Aesculus collection was moved early 
last spring to its permanent place at the foot of Bussey Hill. At the same time 
some thirty different Phellodendron duplicates were removed and the work com- 
pleted before early spring visitors arrived. It was of great interest that of the 
very few visitors who did note the change, all agreed it was a decided improvement. 

10. Weed plants in all collections are continually being pulled out with tractors. In 
no place is this more evident than along the meadow side of Meadow Road where 
several weeks were spent in eliminating a greater part of the overgrown shrub- 
bery. Now, because of the great interest in ground covers it is proposed to plant 
demonstration areas of some of the better types here. Only a few will be planted 
this spring, since much of the ground will have to be weeded carefully for a full 
year in preparation for other demonstration beds. The right kind of ground covers, 
properly grown, are far easier to maintain than grass. Even the highway depart- 
ments are coming to realize this. The increased cost of adequate maintenance labor 
is forcing the planting of ground covers where they have not been used before. 

1 1. All the roads in the Arboretum were resurfaced last spring by the Park Depart- 
ment of the City of Boston. This makes the walking much more pleasant and 
removes some of the bad holes which have occurred over a number of years. The 
work was completed before Lilac Sunday last year. Mr. William P. Long, Chair- 
man of the Boston Park Commission, is to be thanked for his foresight in com- 
pleting this work at such an opportune time. 

12. A few additional plants will be added to the plantings around the Administration 
Building. Mrs. Farrand has suggested that some of the better introductions of the 
Arnold Arboretum be selected for permanent display in this prominent area. 

[ 7 ] 


Current Plans 




It is hoped that the general weeding out of undesirable plants can be continued 
this year. It is also hoped that some of the duplicates among the conifers can be 
removed to give those remaining more room in which to grow. A program for I 
the proper fertilization of certain collections will be again undertaken. In the 
past, stable manure has been purchased from time to time and put on the col- 
lections most in need of it. This is most beneficial but it is a time-consuming 
operation, and we hope to be able to cover more areas more quickly and econo- I 
mically by the use of a combination of commercial fertilizer and mulches. 

We are also planning to rearrange the general planting in the Chinese collec- j 
tion on Bussey Hill. Some of the unsightly specimens have been and will be re- - 
moved to other places in the Arboretum and it is hoped that a general planting j 
of azaleas cap be featured in this likely spot. There are over 125 different kinds 
of azaleas growing in the Arborfetum now, but they are distributed in many places, j 
It is hoped that this general location can be so planned and landscaped that this 
will be the azalea collection where some can always be seen in flower during the 
two full months that they bloom. Such a planting when observed from the top 
of Bussey Hill would be a sight worth remembering. 

In order to make such an outstanding planting feasible it is necessary to lay a 
water line to this area so that the plants can be properly watered during droughts, t 
Mr. William P. Long, Chairman of the Boston Park Commission, has promised 
that he will include in his 1947 budget, a request for the money for a water sys- ■ 
tern throughout the entire Arboretum, for he realizes, as we do, the tremendous 
advantages which would accrue therefrom. Not only would it be possible to water 
plants when they needed it most, but also our own men could undoubtedly con- 
trol many small fires without calling out the city fire trucks. As an example of 
our difficulties in this respect, on one particularly dry day in February this year 
our men put out eight set fires in one afternoon and called for assistance from the f 
fire department only once. This was during the week of school vacation. It is 1 
hoped that the Park Department can see its way clear shortly to erecting proper 
fences around a few unfenced areas in the Arboretum. 

This then is a general discussion of what has been happening at the Arnold 
Arboretum since the war. With an increasing interest in ornamental plantings 
clearly evidenced over the entire country it is only logical that this great collec- 
tion of plants — America’s greatest garden — should once more be put in excel- 
lent condition so that the thousands of visitors each year can fully appreciate the 
many plant treasures it has on display. 

Donald Wyman 


[ 8 ] 


ARNOLDIA 


f MAR 26 1947 

V Ll 8 





A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 MARCH 26, 1947 Number 2 


PLANT BREEDING AT THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

F OR nearly 60 years the Arnold Arboretum has introduced plants of horticul- 
tural interest from all parts of the world. This has been done by cooperation 
with other botanic gardens and horticultural institutions and by field collections 
made by our own staff members or agents in North America, Europe and Asia. 
During this time nearly a thousand species and varieties have been introduced 
into cultivation in the United States by the Arnold Arboretum. Many of them 
have proved to be of great horticultural value. Among the outstanding introduc- 
tions are the Sargent Cherry, the Dove tree, a hardy form of the Cedar of Leba- 
. non, the Regal lily, Mains hupehensis, Malus toringoides, Rhododendron obtusum 
kaempferi , and Kolkwitzia amabilis. 

It is possible that a few more new hardy ornamental trees and shrubs will be 
found in the fields and forests of the Orient, but plant collectors have explored 
- most of the north temperate zone. New species or varieties must now be obtained 
largely by the selection of occasional “sports” or mutations, or by producing 
hybrids of various species and varieties. These methods have long been used with 
the more common species of ornamental plants, and the great array of horticul- 
tural varieties of roses, rhododendrons, lilacs, and other ornamentals are the re- 
sults of the plant breeders art. 

The Arnold Arboretum provides an unusual opportunity for the plant breeder, 
i Here we have trees and shrubs from all parts of the world and crosses can be 
made between some of these species which in nature would never hybridize be- 
cause of geographic isolation. Some of our most important ornamental trees and 
shrubs have been produced in the past by crosses between American and European 
or Asiatic species. For example, the London Plane tree which is so often used 
for street planting in Europe and the United States originated in England from 
a cross between our Platanus occidentalis and the Mediterranean P/atanus orient alls. 
The hybrid is more vigorous and hardy than either parent. Some of our hardiest 

[ 9 ] 


Rhododendrons have resulted from crosses between the American Rhododendron 
catawhiense and the European Rhododendron ponticum and other species. At the 
Arnold Arboretum we have crossed our native white pine, Pinus strohus , with the 
Himalayan white pine, Pinus Griffithii, and with the Japanese white pine, Pinus 
parviflora, to produce new types of possible economic and ornamental value. 

Plant breeding work was started at the Arnold Arboretum nearly 20 years ago. 
The early work was confined largely to problems of species origins and relation- 
ships as a foundation for the breeding program. The breeding of trees and shrubs 
is a time consuming and expensive project. Many species can be crossed only 
with difficulty, if at all, so that large numbers of pollinations must be made. Any 
hybrids obtained must be grown to flowering size and the plants must have room 
to develop naturally, so that the growth habits can be observed. Often a second 
generation is necessary to obtain the proper combinations of parental characters. 
Promising hybrids should then be grown for another generation as cuttings or on 
standard root stocks in order to study their behavior following the usual methods 
of propagation. In some cases test plantings should be made in various locations 
to test the adaptability of a new variety. Thus the time required to develop a 
new variety by hybridization will vary from six or seven years in the case of for- 
sythias to nearly 10 years for apples and much longer for maples and pines. 

After the hybrids are selected and tested they are still not available for gen- j 
eral distribution. Since the Arnold Arboretum can not engage in a general 
nursery business, the new varieties must be propagated and distributed to coop- 
erating nurserymen. They in turn will need several more years in which to 
propagate the nursery stock for release to the public. 

A number of hybrid plants have now been selected and include several varieties 
of forsythia, a long-flowering cherry, and many new ornamental apples. The two 
forsythia varieties have been named, and cuttings have been sent to cooperating 
nurserymen. ‘‘Arnold Dwarf” is a segregate from a cross between Forsythia in- 
termedia and F. japonica. The original plant in our nursery is about 2 feet tall, 
and has a spread of about 8 feet at the age of six years. The drooping branches 
root readily and produce a creeping mass of foliage. The leaves are small, about 
an inch long. Unfortunately this forsythia has not produced flowers and may 
never do so, but its vegetative habit is so attractive that it should be of value as 
a ground cover or border plant. 

“Arnold Giant” is a tetraploid forsythia induced by treating a seedling of 
Forsythia intermedia with colchicine. This was done by one of our student assist- 
ants, George Skirm. Like most plants with a double chromosome number, the 
leaves are thicker and greener, and the flowers are larger and darker than the 
parental form. The leaves are ovate, three to four inches long, and with serrated 
margins. The plant is somewhat stiff when young, but forms a compact spreading 
bush when mature. This variety has flowered every year for the past four seasons, j 
and is hardier than most species and varieties of forsythia although probably not j 
as hardy as F. ovata. 


[io] 