Wo 




r< g 








CO «r <i 


PT5T" 


Jir.-ccr^ 




'xcTCc <4 




<WL CiC ^ 









SB403 

^ .M451b 

V . 1 6 







pl'-sC - 

1 I 












Ex J.IBRIS 

The Pennsylvania 
Horticultural Society 

From the library of 
i4ARY HELSIi VliiGATE LLOYD 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2016 



https://archive.org/details/auctariumofbotanOOmaun 










y/yyy//,/ 



% 



SIMPKIN* AXl) MAUSHALI-.STATIOXKRS IL.VLI. COrRT, 



SIIKIIWUOI) A>M) €• PATERXOSTKK UOW 






THE AUCTARIUM 



OF THE 

BOTANIC GARDEN; 



CONTAINING 



MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION, 

CONNECTED WITH THE 



CULTIVATION OF A GARDEN, 

AND 



A. T TLT IR ^ IL IHE I § TT O JR o 



PART I. 



Tbe First Part of the Auctarium has appeared, in small portions, in 
Maund’s Botanic Garden, 

Prior to No. 193 ; and the Second Part is continued in the subsequent 
monthly numbers of the same work, commencing with 193. 



LONDON: 

SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO., STATIONERS* HALL COURT ; SHERWOOD AND 
00., PATERNOSTER ROW ; J. ROBERTSON, DUBLIN; W. WHYTE AND CO., 
EDINBURGH ; AND JACKSON, NEW YORK, 



. -s 



"H I.?} 



AUCTARIUM 



OF 



S’!!!!! ©AIEIDIlIKr. 



1 Cabbages from Sups. The young sprouts, which first grow 
from the stalks, after the Cabbage has been cut, should be 
slipped off, when they are from one to two inches long, and the 
wound rubbed over with wood ashes. The more fully to con- 
stringe and close the mouths of the vessels, where they have been 
separated from the parent plant, they should be exposed to the 
air, about twenty-four hours in summer, and at least double that 
time in winter. They are then to be planted out in the same 
manner as seedling plants; and they will produce cabbages 
equally fine, and, of course, sprouts for further increase. Peter 
Kendall, Esq. of Higham Lodge, Suffolk, saw this method prac- 
tised in the Brazils. He has since practised it himself ; and 
from Ills information, it has also been pursued in the London 
Horticultural Society’s Garden with success. He informs us 
that the first sprouts only, after the cabbage has been cut, are 
applicable to this method; as tlie second crop always runs to 
seed. This new method of propagation is important for several 
reasons; perpetuating a valuable sort, without deterioration, not 
being amongst the least of them. 

2 Scotch Pine. Pinus sylvestris. This species of tree, commonly 
known, as the Scotch fir, yields the red deal, so abundantly im- 
ported from Norway and Russia, and used in house carpentry. 
The living tree, by incision, in summer, affords common turpen- 
tine. This, by distillation, yields spirits of turpentine; and the 
residuum of the operation is resin, either black or yellow, accord- 
ing as the distillation has been conducted, with or without water. 
Its roots being submitted to heat, in an appropriate oven, pro- 
duce tar; and this, again, by exsiccation, becomes pitch. 

102 



2 



3 Mignionette. Reseda odorata. Sow mignionette at the end of 
July, in the open ground; pot in September, and leave exposed 
till frost is expected. Take into the house, and it will flower 
during winter. Sow, a month later, and protect through winter, 
for early spring flowering. If potted singly, and trained to sin- 
gle stems, nipping off, all the early flowers as they appear, 
handsome frutescent plants will be produced. This has been 
practised, and the plants sold as a new variety, called Tree Mig- 
nionette. A correspondent of the Gardener’s Magazine No. 43, 
says he has a plant of common mignionette, in a conservatory', 
ten feet high. 

4 Transplanting Trees. The annular layers of wood, shown in 
the trunk of a tree, on cutting it through, horizontally, are 
widest on the side growing towards the south. The central 
circle will be found nearest the northern side of the tree's cir- 
cumference. The sap vessels of trees being thus naturally 
adapted to aspect, they should be placed to their respective 
cardinal points when transplanted; that is, the side which has 
been growing towards the south, should again be planted to- 
wards the south. Evelyn, in 1660, asserted, from much experi- 
ence, that one tree in an hundred would not miscarry were this 
duly observed. We can bear testimony to its importance. 
Indeed, the constricted vessels of the north, or those of more 
difiuse growth towards the south, would seem ill adapted to the 
economy of an opposite aspect. 

5 Alpine Strawberries. By picking off their first and second 
show of flower-stems, their bearing season will be delayed till 
August, and continue through the two following months. 

6 Progressive Potting. Plants which make root freely, such 
as Balsams, Coxcombs, Lobelias, Chrysanthemums, are greatly- 
encouraged in their grow th, by progressive potting ; that is, by 
planting them, whilst they are young, in very small pots; and 
when their roots begin to spread freely round the inside of the 
pot, to remove them into others, a little larger. At each re- 
moval, the ball of earth, about the roots, should be continued 
unbroken; and be increased, in the fresh pot, by a stratum of 
suitable compost, of about half an inch in thickness all round. 
Thus, the whole pot will be regularly filled with a reticulated 
mass of fibrous roots, instead of such accumulation of root be- 
ing found only against the inside surface of the pot. 



3 



7 Seeds of Stocks. Mathiola annua, &c. It is an erroneous 
opinion that double flowering plants have any influence on the 
seeds of single ones growing near them. Seed should be saved 
from those flowers which have more than four petals ; and such 
plants as produce flowers having only four petals, should be 
pulled up as soon as their quality is discovered. The farina of 
ordinary flowers may deteriorate the seed of good ones; but 
double flowers are void of farina. 




8 Plant Supporters. The durability, the neatness, and the 
present very low price, of iron, combine to occasion its general 
introduction to our gardens for ornamental and useful purposes. 
Above, we have given sketches of plant supporters. Figure 1, 
a wrought iron rod, let into a cast iron socket. Those of 2 feet 
in height cost 5s. per dozen. 3 feet, 6s. 4 feet, 7s. 5 feet, 

8s. 6d. 6| leet, 10s. 6d. per dozen. Fig. 3, one of larger 

dimensions, and wholly of cast-metal. Those of 4 feet high, 
weigh 401bs. per dozen, and cost 10s. 6d. 6 feet, Ifcwt. 18s. 6d. 

7 feet, 2jcwt. 25s. These are the ]>rices charged by Messrs. 
Cottam and Hallen, of London. Fig. 2, a wrought iron sup- 
port, used by 3Ir. C. Lawrence, for standard Roses. The height 
must be adapted to the stock. A few of the strongest shoots 
should be confined to the ring of the support, and all the others 
cut back as usual. Fig. 4, is a stand which we have had 



103 



4 



made by Mr. J. Jones, of Binningham, for the Calampelis, Mau- 
randia, or other free-growing climbers. Its height, when fixed 
in the soil, is 6| feet; the small rings, through the uprights, are 
11 inches diameter; the largest ring in the lower extender is 30 
inches diameter. The uprights are of ^ round iron ; and the 
rings f. Fig. 5, represents one upright only, more clearly 
to show its formation. Fig. 6, a support for Dahlias, made by 
Mr. Murphy, of Dublin, which stands 4 feet above the surface; 
7 of which cost 20s. Fig. 7, shows how it may be placed 
when out of use. Fig. 4, may be closed up in a similar man- 
ner. Mr. Jones unites his rings by a nut; each end of the iron 
of w hich the ring is formed, being a screw. 

9 Draining Flower Pots. Of all circumstances connected with 

the culture of flowering plants in pots, none is more important, 
and less regarded, than di aining. By draining we mean put- 
ting a stratum of broken pots, broken tiles or bricks of a soft 
(juality, or, which is an imperfect substitute, gravel, in the bottom 
of the pots, underneath the soil and roots of the plant. Pots- 
herds should be broken dow n till the largest does not exceed 
the size of a French bean. This operation will produce much 
of smaller size, even powder, w hich should occupy the top of 
the stratum. Asa general rule, we recommend that every pot 
have one fourth of its depth occupied by this material. 

10 American Blight. Aphis lanigera. The simplest mode that 
we know, of exterpating this enemy of fruit trees, is to brush 
over the affected parts w ith spirits of turpentine. This distilled 
limpid fluid, well applied with a painter’s brush, penetrates the 
most minute interstices of the bark, which is of the utmost im- 
portance. Mr. Turner, (Gardener’s Magazine, v. 3) used three 
parts of soap-makers’ lees, and one of turpentine, with success, 
which is more economical. Soot, soot and salt, soft soap, to- 
bacco w ater, and stale urine ; also, heterogeneous mixtures of 
acids, alkalies, sulphur, nux vomica, mercurial and arsenical 
preparations, have been used with various degrees of success, 
and recommended ; but as no peculiar efficacy has been disco- 
vered in the latter poisonous ingredients which the more sim- 
ple ones do not possess, we w ould not recommend their use. 
It freijuently is serviceable to pare away the rough bark of 
trees, but they should subsequently have due attention, or the 
evil may be increased. 



5 



11 Culture of Pelargoniums. Cut down the plants, pretty 
closely in August. When they have produced new buds, a quar- 
ter of an inch long, clear the soil from them, shorten their roots, 
and replant them in small pots of fresh compost; afterwards 
water, and enclose them in a cold frame. When they have fully 
recovered transplanting, give them full exposure, continue it 
till frost is expected, and then take them, for winter protection, 
into a green-house or airy sitting room. In spring, they should 
be repotted as frequently as the roots are found to have run 
freely round the inside of the pot. Pelargoniums (Geraniums) 
thus annually treated, will prove bushy and vigorous; and will 
flower longer, and more abundantly, than is usual. 




12 Heating by Hot Water. Wishing to diffuse the heat, in a 
sitting room, more regularly than is effected by the common 
grate, we had, in the building of it, a recess left in the wall, 
extending all along one side, to the right and left of the fire- 
place. This rece.ss opens 12 inches to the room; is 4^ inches 
deep in the wall; and one foot from the floor. The cavity 
thus made, receives the pipes, which pass behind the chimney- 
jiiece, from the boiler, at the back of the grate. They extend in 
the form here represented, and the space they occupy in the wall 
is fronted with a frame of wire lattice. The little l)oiler, a, is 
fixed behind, and close against, the cast-metal back of the grate; 
which metal back does not reach, as is usual, to the bottom of 
the grate, but w ithin 2 inches of it. The boiler is also fixed at 
a corresponding height, so that its bottom is equal with the bot- 
tom of the sloping back-plate alluded to; and thus a cavity of 
2 inches is left, which forms a flue, from the bottom of the fire, 
that is continued under and round the back of the boiler, and 
ultimately communicates with the chimney. To prevent a cur- 
rent of air into this flue, through the bottom of the grate, a solid 
iron plate is laid on it. The boiler is 14 inches long; 4 inches 
deep; and 6 inches wide, from back to front. Each pipe, which 
is 3 inches diameter, is horizontal from its union with the sujiply 
pipe at b, to its returning point at c; thence to the boiler, at d, 
an inch fall is allowed. The supply pijie, b, may be carried to 

IM 



6 



any part required. The whole is of copper. It is so simple in 
detail, that no minor directions are required. The hot water 
circulates freely through the pipes, in the direction shown by the 
little arrows, and diffuses a general warmth in those j)arts of the 
room, which must, otherwise, inevitably be coldest. It may be 
fixed to any grate. N othing is seen in the room but the lattice 
work before the pipes, which admits the escape of the hot air. 
Of course, it is only required to carry the pipes on the other 
side of the wall, either to heat another room, a hall, or a green 
house, as circumstances may require. 

13 Propagation by Layers. A method of layering, mentioned 
by Mr. Main, in his Vegetable Physiology, is found particu- 
larly successful in the propagation of some flowering shrubs, 
viz. the shoot, to be layered, has circular incisions made above 
and below each bud, along its whole length ; it is then pegged 
down on the surface of the ground, and lightly covered with a 
sandy compost. Each bud will produce a shoot rising erectly 
in the air, and root fibres being at the same time ejected from 
the incisions, independent plants, separable in the autumn, are 
soon formed. The long sucker-like shoots of rose trees are well 
calculated for this mode of propagation; and as some sorts of 
these eject roots sooner from young than from old wood, jirac- 
titioners omit ringing the bark, and wait till the young shoots 
produced from the layers are five or six inches long: a tongue 
incision is then made at the bottom of each, and embedded in 
sand, they readily make roots; the old layer remaining to pro- 
duce other shoots, which may be struck in like manner. 

14 Raspberries in succession. The young stems of raspberries, 
which shoot up in the summer of one year, produce their fruit 
in the following year. If such young stems be cut down, in 
February, to within three or four inches of the ground, in lieu 
of leaving them nearly their full height, it will so retard their 
flowering, that their fruit will not be ripened till autumn. They 
should not be subjected to this tieatment two years together. 

15 Annuals rendered Perennial. Many annuals may be pre- 
served through winter, in a green-house, by striking cuttings of 
them, in August or September. The Chrysanthemum corona- 
rium, Clarkia, Collinsia, Stocks, and many others, may be men- 
tioned. The advantage obtained, is their early flowering, and 
the jireservation of superior varieties. 



7 



16 Colours of Flowers. The fugitive property of some colours 
is well known; and in no way better exemplified than as they 
naturally exist in Flowers. The fume arising from a common 
sulphur match, which is, in fact, sulpluiric acid, will change pur- 
ple and crimson colours to pink. The blue, in combination 
with red, is readily discharged; indeed, a pink or purple flower 
might be completely bleached by holding it in the fumes of 
sulphur. Thus, roses and dahlias have been made to assume a 
variegated and very novel appearance. The blue of Conime- 
lina tuberosa is more permanent, as are yellows and greens. 
Bright pink stripes and veins may be produced on the dark 
purple petals of panseys, dahlias, and other dark-coloured flow- 
ers, with a camel hair pencil and oil of vitriol, to yield a rather 
pleasing effect. Such lines should not be drawn to the edge of 
the petal, or a little injur}' will soon be evident; nor should they 
be strong, nor near together, as they quickly spread. These 
])layful deceptions may yield occasional amusement, but it would 
be neither good taste, nor good feeling, to permit a friend to quit 
our society under any false impression occasioned by such arts. 
Knowledge of this sort is ])rincipally valuable by exhibiting the 
visible chemical action of one ingredient on another, and by 
awakening the mind to what is, and may be, done. Various silk 
and cotton articles, having a coloured ground, and white pat- 
tern, are first dyed of one uniform colour; and their white pat- 
terns given by the application of a liquid, to discharge part of 
their ground colour. The liquid so employed is, not unffe- 
(piently, injurious to the fabric of these articles, which will ac- 
count for the j)remature decay, particularly of some sorts, of 
printed cottons. 

17 Onions of Large Size. When the beds are formed, by the 
usual method, trample them heavily, and roll them finnly. On 
this compact surface sow the seed, and cover it the usual depth, 
with a rich compost. The bulbs, instead of sinking, will spread 
superficially to a good size, and ripen earlier. 

18 Preserving Apples. A method of preserving apples, which 
will be useful to many persons, independently of the superior 
freshness of the fruit so kept, appears in the London Horticul- 
tural Transactions, and also in the Gardener’s IVIagazine. It 
is by burying them, nearly as potatoes. Dig a pit of two feet 
deep, in a dry situation, of sufficient extent to contain the 

1U5 



8 



apples intended to be preserved. Put in a layer of straw, at 
the bottom, and also round the sides, which may be kept up by 
temporary means, or it may be placed in as the apples are 
added. Then fill the pit carefully with fruit, and continue the 
layer of straw entirely over the bed. On this spread the earth 
that was taken out, raising it highest in the middle, and extend- 
ing it at least eighteen inches beyond the sides of the pit. 

19 Pruning Currants. Martin Doyle, in his useful little work, 
“ Practical Gardening,” says that the most productive trees and 
the largest branches of currants, he ever saw, were ‘produced 
by cutting the shoots of every year to within three eyes of the 
former year’s wood; and by cutting short spurs of but an inch 
or two in length, for fruiting also, whenever opportunity per- 
mitted, upon the chief limbs, which should always be limited to 
about half a dozen, and kept clear of shoots, except those spurs.’ 

20 Oenothera c.®spitosa and anisoloba, to Propagate. In 
October, make cuttings of the roots, an inch and a half, or two 
inches long. Plant these, either singly, in small pots, or several 
of them, an inch or two apart, in a large pot. Use a light and 
rather dry soil; place them in a cold frame, where they should 
remain, without watering, till March. Afterwards, the roots 
should be gradually stimulated by occasional waterings, and, if 
it be convenient, the warmth of a gentle hot bed. The root 
cuttings will soon afford healthy plants, for transferring to beds 
or the mixed flower border. 

21 Holly Hedges. Holly should be transplanted whilst the 
plants are young; that is, when a foot or eighteen inches high, 
or they are less likely to succeed. It has been obseiTed in the 
Horticultural Register, that the whole secret of success in the 
removal of Holly, consists in performing it at Midsummer, in 
lieu of Winter, as is the general practice. The soil should, 
occasionally, be forked up, about the plants; and the young 
lower shoots hooked down, beneath the soil as layers. They 
will readily strike root, and the bottom of a fence may thus be 
rendered exceedingly compact. 

22 To Destroy Worms. Put a bushel of quick lime into a tub, 
with twenty gallons of water, let it remain two or three days, 
occasionally stirring it. With a watering pan apply the clear 
lime water, copiously, over garden walks or turlj three or four 
successive evenings. 



9 



23 Pink; Culture of. Raise a frame, a foot above the patli; 
put therein an incli thick of fresh lime, to stop out worms; on 
this, put four indies tliick of strong stable manure, and tread 
it firmly down. Fill up the frame with the following compost: 
Fresh loam, four parts; old hotbed, three parts; finely broken 
oil-cake, one part. In this, the young plants should be put out; 
eighteen inches apart, each way, as soon as they have struck 
root from the pipings. In February give a top dressing of 
finely sifted sandy earth, in [ireference to loose compost or 
manure, which encourage insects. Side buds, and all above 
four jirincipal ones, for flowering, should be taken oft', as soon 
as they appear. Shade from sun and rain, whilst in flower, and 
water freely between the plants. 

24 Raised Borders. It is well knoiin that the pink, carnation, 
and some other plants, require to be kept diy; consequently, 
careful growers generally raise their beds above the level of the 
garden paths. This is, sometimes, done with boards, but a much 
more tasteful border, for the support of the earth, may be raised 
with lumps of gypsum, spar, tufa, or even rough, over-burnt, 
and deformed bricks, or any of these materials conjointly. In 
the joints of such border some of the saxifrages and sedums 
may be planted, so as to render it a permanent ornament in lieu 
of a deformity. It is true that this species of fence is, in some 
degree liable to harbour insects, but if florists’ flowers be the 
objects of cultivation, it would not be difficult to protect the 
plants, from such insects as crawl only, by a very nanow trough 
of oil or tar. 

25 Skeletons of Fish. As branches of natural history, the 
skeletons of animals, and of vegetables also, become interesting. 
Those of small fish are readily obtained, in the spring, when 
tadpoles are to be met with. A few of them should be put into 
a wide mouthed bottle or jar, full of brook water, or of that 
taken from the place where these animals are found; which 
should be frequently changed. Remove the scales from a small 
fish, and by threads, suspend it in the bottle, in a horizontal 
position, and the tadpoles will consume the soft part of the fish, 
leaving a perfect skeleton of clean bones. Should any of the 
tadpoles die in the bottle they should be immediately removed, 
or the survivors will consume them, and thereby neglect the 

business you have set them, 
loe 



10 



26 Fuchsias, in the Open Borders. Put out Fuchsias into the 
open borders in May. At Midsummer strike cuttings of the 
young shoots, under a hand-glass. When rooted, put them into 
small pots of light soil, remembering the injunction, as to drain- 
ing, under paragraph 9. These plants should be fully exposed, 
till frosts commence; when it will be proper to place them in 
the windows of an airy room without fire, till very severe wea- 
ther requires their removal to the warmer atmosphere of an 
inhabited room. In fair weather give them air in the day time, 
but they will require very little water, never so much as to keep 
(he soil in what may be considered a moist state. Expose them 
to warm showers, and the sun, early in the spring; and they 
will be strong and healthy for turning out of the pots, into the 
open garden, in May, as first mentioned. In autumn, when the 
young plants, in pots, are taken into the house, cut off the old 
ones, which grow in the borders, close to the ground. Cover 
them to the depth of six inches, with moss, undecayed tan, leaf 
mould, or saw-dust, taking care to extend this protection a foot 
each way from the plant, or more, if not inconvenient. In April 
uncover them, and they will very soon make strong shoots, 
and flower luxuriantly in autumn. The fleshy roots of Fuchsia 
thymifolia, from which it readily makes young shoots, render it 
well suited to this sort of protection. The Fuchsia virgata we 
consider the hardiest, and under all circumstances, the best 
species for the borders. 

27 CovENT Garden Measures. In order that quotations of 
London prices of garden produce may be understood, we have 
arranged the following table from the Philosophical Magazine. 

The Sieve is equal to ^ a Bushel. 

Half Sieve, 1 Peck. 

Quarter Sieve, 1 Gallon. 

Laro^e Punnet, (nearly) Quarts. 

Second Punnet, 1 Pottle. 

Pottle, 2 Quarts. 

Third Punnet, 1 Quart. 

Least Punnet, Ig Pint. 

Carrots, turnips, leeks, and sweet herbs, are sold by the bunch, 
a completely indefinite quantity. The punnet is nearly as 
vague. Honest tradesmen must anxiously desire a revision of 
such a system of measures. 