no. % 

FLORA OF PERU 





BOTANICAL SERIES 

FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 

VOLUME XIII, PART IV, NUMBER 2 

NOVEMBER 28, 1958 



PUBLICATION 861 



THE LIBRARY OF. THE 

DEC 1 9 1953 
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 



To renew call Telephone Center, 333-840O 




FLORA OF PERU 



BY 

ROGERS MCVAUGH 

CURATOR OP VASCULAR PLANTS, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 




BOTANICAL SERIES 

FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY 

VOLUME XIII, PART IV, NUMBER 2 

NOVEMBER 28, 1958 

PUBLICATION 861 



Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 36-10426 



PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BY CHICAGO NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM PRESS 



FLORA OF PERU 



ROGERS MCVAUGH 

MYRTACEAE. Myrtle Family 

Shrubs or trees or rarely subherbaceous. Leaves simple, oppo- 
site (except in some introduced genera), exstipulate, entire or rarely 
crenate, punctate with resinous or pellucid glands, usually pinnately 
veined. Mid vein usually elevated and prominent on the lower sur- 
face. Principal lateral veins usually uniting distally into a "marginal 
vein" which extends nearly the length of the blade and more or less 
parallel to the margin but somewhat separated from it. Flowers 
borne on axillary (or rarely terminal) branches, solitary or in spe- 
cialized bracteate inflorescences with opposite branching, these mod- 
ified in various ways, e.g., by elongation of the axis and reduction of 
the lateral axes to one flower each ("racemes"); by suppression of 
the axis and reduction of the lateral axes to one flower each (flowers 
in "glomerules" or "umbelliform clusters"); by reduction of the 
lateral axes to one pair, these arising just below the flower which 
terminates the central axis ("dichasium") ; by potentially indefinite 
elongation of both central and lateral axes, this resulting in a "pan- 
icle" with proximal branches elongate and a transition from these 
to short simple branches and terminal triads of flowers. Flowers 
regular or essentially so, hermaphrodite or rarely by abortion uni- 
sexual. Ovary inferior, the hypanthium adnate to the ovary its 
whole length or prolonged beyond it so that the stamens, petals and 
calyx-lobes appear to arise from the distal margin of a short tube 
surrounding the summit of the ovary. Calyx-lobes usually 4 or 5, 
distinct and imbricate, or the calyx calyptrate and circumscissile, or 
rupturing irregularly in anthesis. Petals usually 4 or 5 (sometimes 
reduced in number or size, or wanting). Stamens usually indefi- 
nitely many, in one-many series about the margin of the usually 
thickened calycine disk, usually inflexed in the bud. Filaments 
usually filiform and distinct in Peruvian species. Anthers usually 
short, versatile or basifixed, bilocular, opening (at least in Peruvian 
genera) by longitudinal slits. Style simple, elongate, with small 
capitate or peltate stigma. Ovary 2- to many-locular, the placentae 
affixed to the axis or parietal and coalesced into a central axis, the 
ovules 2 or more. Fruit fleshy or capsular. Embryo various. 

569 



570 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

The genera now referred to Myrtaceae were divided by DeCan- 
dolle among three tribes, namely, Chamaelaucieae (with dry uni- 
locular and usually indehiscent fruit), Leptospermeae (with dry 
multilocular and usually dehiscent fruit), and Myrteae (with fleshy 
multilocular fruit). This system was set forth in detail in the 
Prodromus 3: 207-288. 1828. Essentially the same arrangement 
was followed by Bentham, in Benth. & Hook. f. Gen. PI. 1: 690- 
720. 1865. Niedenzu, in Engler & Prantl, Nattirl. Pflanzenfam. Ill 
(7): 57-105. 1893, erected two subfamilies; the first, Myrtoideae, 
comprised the one tribe Myrteae, and the second, Leptospermoi- 
deae, included the two tribes Leptospermeae and Chamaelaucieae. 

The subfamily Leptospermoideae is especially developed in the 
Australian region and to a lesser extent elsewhere in the southwest 
Pacific. The total number of species approaches 1000, including 
according to some authors nearly 500 species of the vast Australian 
genus Eucalyptus. The only American member of the subfamily is 
the endemic Chilean species Tepualia stipularis (Barn.) Griseb. All 
the native Peruvian Myrtaceae are members of the tribe Myrteae, 
but several species of Eucalyptus have been introduced for shade and 
for ornament, and at least one has become widespread. 

Key to the Tribes (Peruvian representatives only) 

Fruit dry, capsular, consisting of the capsule immersed in the hard- 
ened hypanthium, the valves sometimes projecting beyond the 
rim of the hypanthium; petals and calyx-lobes united into an 
operculum which is dehiscent at anthesis; flowers usually in 
pedunculate axillary umbels; adult leaves glabrous, lanceolate 
and long-petiolate, and mostly alternate, the juvenile ones often 
broad, subsessile and more or less opposite. 

Tribe I. Leptospermeae 

Fruit fleshy (a few- or many-seeded "berry") ; petals and calyx-lobes 
free, or in a few genera united into an operculum; flowers vari- 
ously arranged, never in pedunculate axillary umbels; leaves 
opposite, rarely markedly long-petiolate .... Tribe II. Myrteae 



Tribe I. LEPTOSPERMEAE DC. 
1. EUCALYPTUS L'Her. 

Glabrous trees or shrubs, the leaves alternate, leathery, usually 
elongate, lanceolate and 8-12 cm. long or more, markedly petiolate 
and often hanging vertically; juvenile foliage (of seedlings or shoots 



FLORA OF PERU 571 

from felled trees) often broad, subsessile and more or less opposite, 
rarely hairy; flowers usually in pedunculate axillary umbels, some- 
times forming panicles; bracts and bracteoles deciduous so early as 
to be seldom seen; ovary usually 3- to 4-locular, immersed in and 
surrounded by the fleshy hypanthium which hardens in fruit and is 
prolonged beyond the summit of the ovary into a rim which bears 
the numerous stamens; petals and calyx-lobes united into an oper- 
culum which is continuous with the rim of the hypanthium in bud 
and circumscissile at anthesis; stamens widely spreading in anthesis 
and forming the showy part of the flower; style about as long as the 
operculum; ovules and seeds numerous, but only a few in each locule 
fertile. 

A large and almost exclusively Australian genus at one time sup- 
posed to include nearly 500 species; some recent authors have sug- 
gested that the actual number is somewhat smaller. A recent account 
of the Northern Australian species, by S. T. Blake in Austral. Jour. 
Bot. 1: 185-352, pi. 1-36. 1953, includes 50 species in this part of the 
continent; J. M. Black, in Fl. South Austral, ed. 2, 612-632. 1952, 
lists 52 species. 

Numerous species have been introduced into the tropical and 
warm-temperate regions of America for ornament, for purposes of 
reforestation, for wood and for lumber; only the following seems to 
have been entirely successful. 

Eucalyptus globulus Labill. Voy. 1: 153, t. 13. 1799. 

A large tree, said to reach a height of 75-90 meters, with pale 
deciduous bark and yellowish green angled branchlets; adult leaves 
alternate, lanceolate and often falcate to narrowly ovate, 2-3 (-6) 
cm. wide at base, 12-25 cm. long, (3-) 5-8 times as long as wide, 
attenuate from base to the slenderly pointed apex, the base often 
obliquely unequal-sided, abruptly rounded to the flexuous petiole 
2-4 cm. long; mid vein pale, flat or concave above, convex beneath; 
leaf-margins bordered by heavy cartilaginous veins about equal to 
the midvein but compressed at right angles to the plane of the leaf 
and often standing somewhat above and below it; lateral veins deli- 
cate and inconspicuous, joining an equally slender and nearly straight 
submarginal vein just within the cartilaginous border; foliage with 
numerous small dark glands on both surfaces; juvenile shoots and 
leaves conspicuously whitened and waxy-glaucous, their leaves oppo- 
site, sessile, ovate to oblong, cordate, abruptly short-acuminate at 
tip, 4-5 cm. wide, 7-15 cm. long; flowers large, subsessile, solitary or 



572 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

rarely 3 in an axil, on a massive, broadly 2-angled peduncle up to 
5 mm. long; buds 1.7-2.5 cm. long, conspicuously whitened by a 
heavy waxy-farinose coating; hypanthium about 1 cm. long, trun- 
cate at base, strongly 4-angled, obpyramidal, irregularly and coarsely 
warty-roughened especially on the angles and the thickened margin; 
calyptra dome-like, roughened like the hypanthium, usually with a 
broad knoblike or acute central beak; stamens 1.5 cm. long (the 
flower when expanded 3-4 cm. across), borne on the inner edge of 
the disk which projects about 3 mm. beyond the thickened margin 
of the hypanthium; style 8-10 mm. long; fruit 2-2.5 cm. broad and 
high, flat-topped or the surface convex, the 4-5 valves not exserted 
but nearly plane with the surface; seeds 1-3 mm. long, very numer- 
ous, prismatic, irregularly several-angled. 

A native originally of Victoria, New South Wales, and Tasmania, 
this species is now extensively planted and naturalized from Cali- 
fornia to Argentina and Chile, especially in high semi-arid regions; 
it is a valuable timber tree of rapid growth, and now forms a charac- 
teristic feature of the landscape in many parts of Latin America. 
According to Acosta Solis, "El eucalipto en el Ecuador," in Flora 
(Quito) 15-16: 149-194. 1945, E. globulus was introduced into Ecua- 
dor in 1865 and has become a valuable resource in the inter-Andine 
region of that country. It has likewise become abundant in Peru, 
as in Cuzco, where, according to Herrera in Contr. Fl. Depto. Cuzco, 
ed. 2, 148-149. 1921, it was introduced about 1880 and subsequently 
became general in all the provinces of that Department. 

Amazonas: Chachapoyas, 2,700 meters, Williams 7562. Junin: 
Tarma, 3,000-3,200 meters, Killip & Smith 21870. "Eucalipto." 

Another species, Eucalyptus camaldulensis Dehnh., Cat. PI. Hort. 
Camald. ed. 2: 20. 1832 (E. rostrata Schlecht., 1847, non Cav., 1797), 
has been collected near Yucay, Cuzco, by Soukup (no. 840). The 
inflorescence is a 6- to 10-flowered axillary umbel, on a peduncle 1-2 
(-3) cm. long, the pedicels 3-8 mm. long; buds ovoid, 5-10 mm. long, 
the calyptra longer than the base (up to 3 times as long), abruptly 
narrowed to a stout straight beak 1-6 mm. long; fruit nearly hemi- 
spheric, 4-6 mm. high, 5-8 mm. broad, the 3-4 deltoid or narrowly 
pointed valves projecting 1.5-3 mm. beyond the equator. 

Tribe II. MYRTEAE DC. 

Classification of the subtribes of the Myrteae has been based 
principally upon characters of the mature embryo. Such a classifi- 






FLORA OF PERU 573 

cation appears to be in the main a natural one, but practically it 
presents many difficulties. Members of this family are usually col- 
lected when in flower, at a time when it is impossible to ascertain the 
structure of the embryo. Flowers and fruits are rarely found on the 
same plant at the same time, so that any usable system of classifi- 
cation must utilize characters of flower and inflorescence in addition 
to those which may be found in the mature fruit. The subtribes 
accepted in the present treatment are those proposed by Berg, and 
the arrangement of genera follows in the main that of his "Revisio 
Myrtacearum Americae," in Linnaea 27: 1-472. 1855-56. The sub- 
tribes are characterized as follows: 

1. Subtribe Myrciinae Berg. Cotyledons foliaceous, contortu- 
plicate. Radicle elongate. 

2. Subtribe Eugeniinae Berg. Cotyledons fleshy, distinct, or 
somewhat or completely fused, or conferruminate; radicle very short. 

3. Subtribe Pimentinae Berg. Embryo spiral, subspiral or un- 
cinate-curved. Radicle elongate; cotyledons very short. 

Key to Flowering Material 

Inflorescence compound, usually many-flowered (flowers often 30- 
200 or more), with branches compound and opposite near the 
base of the panicle, becoming irregularly ternate or solitary near 
tips; calyx-lobes, if developed, usually 5; bracts and bracteoles 
usually deciduous at anthesis or before. 

Calyx-lobes evident in bud and in anthesis, usually with thin dis- 
tal and lateral margins which are imbricate or at least con- 
tiguous at base; central axis of the inflorescence well developed 
and about as long as the primary lateral branches .... Myrcia 

Calyx closed in bud or merely the tips of the lobes free, either cir- 
cumscissile or splitting irregularly between the lobes; central 
axis of the inflorescence often aborted at the node where the 
lowest lateral branches emerge, and the panicle as a whole 
seeming to consist of two nearly equal parts. 

Calyx closed in bud, calyptrate, circumscissile; petals minute or 
often wanting; malpighiaceous hairs often present and con- 
spicuous; bracts mostly deciduous Calyptranthes 

Calyx closed in bud or the tips of the lobes free, the buds open- 
ing by irregular longitudinal splitting between the calyx- 
lobes nearly or quite to the summit of the ovary; petals 



574 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

small, usually present; malpighiaceous hairs usually not 

apparent; bracts sometimes persistent Marlierea 

Inflorescence not as above, 1- to several-flowered (flowers rarely as 
many as 30), racemose, regularly dichotomous or the flowers 
solitary, sub-umbellate or glomerate; calyx various, the lobes 
usually 4 and distinct if the flowers are more than 7; bracteoles 
often persistent. 

Cymes lateral on old wood, thrice dichotomous, 2-3 cm. long, with 
persistent paired bracts and a central sessile flower in each 
fork; calyx-lobes 4; flowers red; stamens 4-8, 1.5-2 cm. long. 

Myrrhinium 

Inflorescence racemose or dichasially branched, or the flowers 
glomerate or solitary; cymes, if occasionally twice or thrice 
dichotomous, irregularly branched and in leaf-axils near the 
tips of twigs; flowers mostly white or cream-color, rarely pink 
or red; stamens usually shorter and far more numerous. 

Calyx closed or essentially so in the bud, opening at anthesis by 
irregular longitudinal slits. 

Flowers about 4, nearly sessile, glomerate (in a much abbrevi- 
ated raceme), the clusters appearing involucrate because 
of the relatively large persistent bracts; calyx-lobes 4; 
ovary bilocular, the locules 2-ovulate Plinia 

Flowers 1, or 3-7 in a dichasium, pedicellate or the dichasia 
pedunculate, not involucrate; calyx-segments usually 5; 
ovary 2- to 7-locular, the locules many-ovulate . . Psidium 

Calyx-lobes normally developed even in the bud, the calyx at 
anthesis not or scarcely splitting beyond the bases of the 
lobes. 

Calyx-lobes 5. 

Small or prostrate shrubs or subshrubs with coriaceous vac- 
cinioid leaves 1-2 cm. long or less; flowers solitary; 
bracteoles foliaceous and persistent; Andean paramos. 

Anthers sagittate, the connective dilated Ugni 

Anthers oblong or subrotund, not sagittate, the filaments 

filiform Myrteola 

Shrubs or trees with larger leaves; flowers solitary or in 
small dichasia; bracteoles deciduous; middle and low 
elevations. 



FLORA OF PERU 575 

Leaves coriaceous, subsessile, suborbicular, 1.5-7.5 cm. 
long and wide; dichasium stout, 3- to 7-flowered; 
Lima, on Pacific slopes .... Myrcianthes. quinqueloba 

Leaves membranaceous or chartaceous, petiolate or elon- 
gate or both, 1.5-3.5 times as long as wide; flowers 
solitary or in slender 3 (-7) -flowered dichasia; culti- 
vated and escaped, otherwise mostly Amazonian 
lowland. 

Flowers usually 4, in two decussate pairs at the lowest 
nodes of an axillary branch; calyx-lobes broadly 
rounded, 3-6 mm. long, spreading after anthesis; 
mature petioles 10-15 mm. long; 3-4 lowest pairs 
of veins in the leaf closely grouped, the succeeding 
ones increasingly distant Campomanesia 

Flowers 1-7 in an axil; calyx-lobes, if developed, 3 mm. 
long or less (in one species with narrow terminal 
appendages 6-14 mm. long); mature petioles 10 
mm. long or usually less; veins of leaf uniformly 
spaced, the lower ones not markedly aggregated. 

Psidium 
Calyx-lobes 4. 

Stamens 25-50, the filaments 15-22 mm. long, red; style 
15-22 mm. long, about three times as long as the 

petals; plants heavily villose or tomentose Acca 

Stamens much more numerous, or much shorter, or white; 
style rarely more than 15 mm. long (usually much 
less), usually less than twice as long as the petals; 
plants various. 

Inflorescence a raceme, the flowers in opposite decussate 
bracteate pairs; central axis of raceme abortive at 
tip (the terminal flower wanting) and the axis often 
so much abbreviated that the flowers appear glom- 
erate or umbellate. 

Calyx-tube much prolonged above the ovary, circum- 
scissile at base after anthesis; flowers usually 4, 
small (buds in our species 5 mm. long or less) and 
nearly sessile, with conspicuous paired persistent 
involucre-like bracteoles; ovules 2 or 4 in each 
locule Myrciaria 



576 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Calyx-tube little or not at all prolonged, not circum- 
scissile, persistent with the lobes in flower and 
fruit; inflorescence various; ovules 2 or many. 
Flowers glomerate (in clusters of about 4-6), mostly 
pubescent, medium-sized (buds in ours 5-12 
mm. long), the clusters appearing involucrate 
because of the relatively large persistent bracts; 
calyx in the bud very shortly 4-lobed at sum- 
mit, and later splitting irregularly; ovules 2. 

Plinia 

Flowers glomerate to racemose, not involucrate; 
calyx-lobes free their whole length, or loosely 
coherent at base; ovules mostly numerous. 

Eugenia 

Flowers solitary or in simple or compound dichasia, the 
primary axis of the inflorescence if once-forked with 
a sessile or nearly sessile flower in the fork. 
Small or prostrate shrubs or subshrubs with coriaceous 
vaccinioid leaves 1 cm. long or less; flower soli- 
tary; bracteoles foliaceous, persistent; paramos in 

the Andes Myrteola 

Shrubs or trees with larger leaves; flowers various; 

middle and low elevations. 

Flowers 3-7, in a dichasium; calyx-lobes 1.5 mm. 
long, ciliate, deciduous at anthesis with the 
bracts and bracteoles; southern Ecuador. 

Blepharocalyx salicifolius 
Inflorescence various; calyx-lobes not ciliate and 

deciduous. 

[Stigma peltate?; placentation parietal, the pla- 
centae introrse, bilamellate?] ; flowers 1 or 3, 
large, long-pedunculate, the calyx-lobes 7-9 
mm. long; Amazonian lowlands. .Psidium sp. 
Stigma small and simple, hardly broader than the 
style; placentae simple, axillary; flowers and 
inflorescence various. 

Flowers, if more than one, in simple or com- 
pound dichasia; if solitary only, then oc- 
curring in many or most of the mature leaf- 
axils, not confined to the basal nodes of a 
new branch Myrcianthes 



FLORA OF PERU 577 

Flowers, if more than one, in elongate or 
much abbreviated racemes; if solitary only, 
then mostly confined to the 1-2 lowest 
nodes of a new branch, and often in the 
axils of much reduced bracts Eugenia 

Key to Fruiting Material 

Cotyledons foliaceous, contortuplicate; radicle elongate; testa mostly 
membranaceous, fragile; calyx-lobes, if present, usually 5; in- 
florescence compound, usually many-flowered, with branches 
opposite near base and irregularly ternate or solitary near tips; 
bracts and bracteoles rarely present (i.e., deciduous about the 
time of anthesis). 

Calyx-lobes normally developed and present on the fruit, their 
basal margins contiguous; central axis of the inflorescence 
well developed and about as long as the primary lateral 
branches Myrcia 

Calyx wanting (the tip of the fruit umbilicate) or represented by 
a shrunken calyptra attached at one side, or the calyx longi- 
tudinally ruptured below the base of the lobes and the latter 
irregularly margined proximally in fruit; central axis of the 
inflorescence often aborted at the node where the lowest lat- 
eral branches emerge. 

Calyx closed in bud, calyptrate, circumscissile, the calyptra 
sometimes persistent in fruit or, if deciduous, the fruit um- 
bilicate; [malpighiaceous hairs often present and conspic- 
uous; bracts mostly deciduous] Calyptranthes 

Calyx closed in bud or the tips of the lobes free; lobes at ma- 
turity separated by irregular longitudinal ruptures extend- 
ing nearly or quite to the summit of the ovary; fruit 
crowned by the unevenly margined (usually 5) often re- 
flexed lobes, or these irregularly deciduous; [malpighiaceous 
hairs usually not apparent; bracts of the inflorescence often 
persistent on the branches after the flowers fall] . . Marlierea 
Cotyledons not as above, but small and fleshy, or large and plano- 
convex, or the embryo undivided; inflorescence 1- to several- 
flowered (flowers rarely more than 30), not branched as above; 
calyx-lobes usually 4 and distinct if the flowers are more than 7; 
bracteoles often persistent. 



578 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Cymes lateral on old wood, thrice dichotomous, 2-3 cm. long, with 
persistent paired bracts and a central sessile flower in each 
fork; calyx-lobes 4; embryo arcuate, the cotyledons hardly 
distinct, the testa hard, bony Myrrhinium 

Inflorescence racemose or apparently the flowers glomerate, or 
dichasially branched, or the flowers solitary; cymes, if occa- 
sionally twice or thrice dichotomous, terminal and irregular. 

Inflorescence a raceme, the flowers in opposite decussate brac- 
teate pairs; central axis of raceme abortive at tip (the 
terminal flower wanting) and the axis itself often so much 
abbreviated that the flowers appear glomerate or umbel- 
late in the axils; calyx-lobes usually 4. 

Seeds small, numerous, with curved embryo, long radicle and 
short cotyledons of Subtribe Pimentinae Acca 

Seeds few, one or two filling the entire fruit; embryo undi- 
vided or the cotyledons large, free, plano-convex. 

Cotyledons free, plano-convex; flowers glomerate, mostly 
pubescent, the clusters appearing involucrate because 
of the relatively large persistent bracts; calyx splitting 
irregularly longitudinally, the lobes persistent . . Plinia 

Embryo undivided or the cotyledons partly separated; 
flowers, if glomerate, not involucrate; calyx various, 
if closed in bud then not splitting irregularly. 

Calyx-tube prolonged above the ovary, circumscissile at 
base after anthesis and leaving a circular scar on the 
fruit; flowers small and nearly sessile, usually 4. 

Myrciaria 

Calyx-tube not circumscissile, scarcely or not at all pro- 
longed, the lobes persistent; flowers glomerate or in 
racemes Eugenia 

Flowers solitary or in simple or compound dichasia, the primary 
axis of the inflorescence if once-forked with a sessile or 
nearly sessile flower in the fork; calyx-lobes 4 or 5, or the 
calyx irregularly longitudinally dehiscent. 

Seeds one or two; embryo undivided or the cotyledons plano- 
convex and distinct, longer than the radicle; testa thin; 
calyx-lobes 4, usually distinct and persistent. 
Embryo undivided; flowers solitary, or racemose in some 
axils Eugenia 



FLORA OF PERU 579 

Cotyledons fleshy, distinct, plano-convex; flowers in dicha- 

sia, or partly or all solitary Myrcianthes 

Seeds several or many; embryo arcuate, uncinate or spiral, 

with long radicle, very short cotyledons and usually bony 

testa; calyx-lobes 4 or 5, or the calyx splitting irregularly. 

Calyx-lobes 5, subequal, spreading; flowers solitary at leafy 

or leafless nodes. 

Shrubs with stiff vaccinioid leaves mostly 2 cm. long or 

less; flowers borne at leafy nodes; bracteoles folia- 

ceous, persistent; fruit 1 cm. in diameter or less; 

seeds with arcuate embryo and bony testa. 

Leaves less than 1 cm. long, narrowly sagittate with 

inrolled margins and then apparently 1.5 mm. 

wide; peduncle 4-5 mm. long; filaments filiform, 

the anthers not sagittate Myrteola acerosa 

Leaves 1-2 cm. long, elliptic, 3-8 mm. wide; peduncle 
9-12 mm. long; filaments dilated and flattened, 

the anthers sagittate Ugni 

Tree with thin leaves often 10 cm. long or more; flowers 
often at leafless nodes; bracteoles deciduous at an- 
thesis; fruit 4-5 cm. in diameter; seeds with spirally 
involute embryo, tough membranaceous and gland- 
ular- verrucose testa Campomanesia 

Calyx splitting irregularly from summit to base or the lobes 
4 and distinct (if the lobes 5, the flowers 3-7 or the 
embryo merely curved or the testa bony). 
Calyx-lobes 4 and distinct (if, rarely, 5, the leaves 2 cm. 
long or less and the bracteoles foliaceous and per- 
sistent) . 

Fruit about 5 mm. long and wide; flowers solitary; 
small or prostrate shrubs or subshrubs with coria- 
ceous vaccinioid leaves 1 cm. long or less . Myrteola 
Fruit (when known) larger; upright shrubs or trees 

with larger leaves. 

Leaves membranaceous, glabrous; flowers 3 to 7, in 
a dichasium; calyx-lobes 1.5 mm. long, ciliate 
and deciduous with the bracts and bracteoles 

at an thesis; Ecuador Blepharocalyx 

Leaves coriaceous, heavily pubescent to tomentose; 
flowers solitary or in 3's or short axillary ra- 



580 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

cemes; calyx-lobes 2.5-9 mm. long, persistent; 

fruit ellipsoid, 8-15 mm. long Acca 

Calyx splitting irregularly or with 5 lobes Psidium 

Subtribe MYRCIINAE Berg 

Trees or shrubs, with the inflorescence in Peruvian species cy- 
mose-paniculate, the peduncles rarely few-flowered. Calyx-lobes if 
distinct usually 5. Cotyledons foliaceous, contortuplicate, the rad- 
icle elongate. Ovary 2-3 (rarely -4) -locular, the ovules 2 in each 
locule, collateral, affixed to the central axis. 

1. MARLIEREA Camb. 

Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 12-18. 1855; and in Mart. Fl. Bras. 
14, pt. 1:31-38. 1857. 

Calyx closed in the bud (or the tips of the lobes free), splitting 
irregularly in anthesis into 5 (-4) longitudinal lobes which are de- 
ciduous from, or subpersistent on, the fruit. Petals 5 (-4), small and 
inconspicuous, or none. Inflorescence-axis usually abortive above 
the first node, and the panicles consequently appearing paired. 
Bracts of the inflorescence sometimes persistent through anthesis. 

A genus of more than 60 described species, mostly confined to 
tropical South America east of the Andes. The distinction between 
Myrcia and Marlierea is not a clear one, and it is probable that the 
latter represents a phylogenetically diverse group of species which 
have been somewhat arbitrarily assigned to the genus because of the 
irregularly splitting calyx. 

Branchlets prominently 2-winged, the wings 0.5-3 mm. high, extend- 
ing from just between the axillary buds at a node to the keeled 
or angled base of the petiole at the node above; mid vein im- 
pressed above; buds glabrous, turbinate, 2 mm. long, nearly 
closed; calyx-lobes in fruit 4, persistent, 1.3 mm. long and wide, 

somewhat separated at base M. bipennis 

Branchlets terete or compressed, not winged; midvein, buds and 

calyx various. 

Midvein flat or convex on the upper surface of the leaf, up to 
1-1.5 mm. broad at base, if sulcate this at base of blade only. 
Inflorescence, including the hypanthium, strongly velutinous or 
at least with numerous loosely ascending reddish or reddish- 
yellow silky hairs up to 1 mm. long. 



FLORA OF PERU 581 

Inflorescence strongly velutinous; flowers large, the buds 
7 mm. long; calyx- tips free; leaves acute or acuminate, 
13-18 cm. long M. velutina 

Inflorescence loosely silky-hairy; flowers small, the buds 2.5 
mm. long, closed, apiculate; leaves caudate-acuminate, 
4.5-7 cm. long M. caudata 

Inflorescence glabrous or essentially so; at least the tips of the 
calyx-lobes evident in the bud. 

Leaves 9-14 cm. long, 2-3.5 times as long as wide; lateral 
veins 12-15 pairs, the transverse veins obscurely retic- 
ulate; leaves finely and obscurely dark dotted; calyx- 
lobes in bud minute, ciliate M. scytophylla 

Leaves 7.5 cm. long or less, 1.7-2.2 times as long as wide; 
lateral veins 6-8, the transverse veins prominently and 
coarsely reticulate; leaves with 1-3 large translucent dots 
per square mm.; calyx-lobes in bud distinct, the inner 
broadly scarious-margined, 2.5 mm. wide. . . . M. areolata 

Midvein sharply and narrowly impressed on the upper surface, or 
in one species broad but concave or broadly sulcate. 

Inflorescence, including buds, with numerous ascending lustrous 
yellowish-white hairs up to 1 mm. long; buds 4-5 mm. long, 
mostly concealed by the hairs; midvein concave or sulcate; 
receptacle tomentose within M. spruceana 

Inflorescence pubescent, often sparsely so, with short, pale or 
reddish hairs 0.5 mm. long or less; buds glabrous or essen- 
tially so, 1.5-3.5 mm. long; midvein sharply and narrowly 
impressed; receptacle glabrous within. 

Leaves cordate-auriculate, nearly sessile, the petioles 3-4 mm. 
long; inflorescence finely hispidulous with minute stiff 
erect hairs; buds closed with a prominent narrow apic- 
ulum; staminal ring short-hairy M. subulata 

Leaves acute to cuneate or somewhat rounded at base, on 
petioles 4-10 mm. long; inflorescence pubescent with ap- 
pressed or ascending hairs; buds closed or the calyx-lobes 
distinct; staminal ring glabrous. 

Petioles transversely rimose, the reddish-brown or whitish 
outer papery layers separating but persistent; calyx in 
bud with 4 very small deltoid separate tips; lower 
branches of the panicle straight and much elon- 



582 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

gated, spikelike with numerous sessile flowers and 

short squarrose bracts M. umbraticola 

Petioles smooth and with unbroken surface, usually dark; 
buds closed or with distinct calyx-lobes; inflorescence 
various. 

Inflorescence thinly pubescent with pale hairs; bracts 
and bracteoles deciduous before an thesis; lateral 
veins of the leaves not impressed above; buds 3- 

3.5 mm. long, closed at apex M. imperfecta 

Inflorescence pubescent with lustrous rufous hairs; bracts 
and bracteoles persistent, squarrose; lateral veins 
impressed above; buds 1.5-2 mm. long with 5 dis- 
tinct calyx-lobes M. squarrosa 

Marlierea areolata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 175. 1956. 

A shrub or tree, glabrous except the vegetative buds thinly stri- 
gose, the inflorescence with a few appressed hairs near base, the 
calyx-segments strigose on both surfaces near tips; leaves broadly 
elliptic, (2-) 3-4.5 cm. wide, (4.5-) 6-7.5 cm. long, mostly 1.7-2.2 
times as long as wide, bluntly acuminate, rounded or acute at base, 
the margins decurrent on the petiole 1 mm. thick, 6-7 mm. long; 
midvein plane or convex above (the whole somewhat impressed), 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-8 pairs, somewhat elevated 
above, prominent beneath, the small transverse veins prominently 
reticulate and forming irregularly angular areoles on the order of 
1 mm. across; marginal vein scarcely distinct, 2-4 mm. from margin, 
formed of the looped and somewhat diminished tips of the laterals, 
with a second, smaller and irregular submarginal vein, and numer- 
ous areoles beyond it; blades lustrous on both sides, darker and 
smoother above, the veins more prominent beneath; leaves with 
large translucent glandular dots, these 1-3 per square mm., con- 
spicuous on both surfaces or obscure in mature leaves; inflorescence 
a many-flowered broad panicle, 5-7 cm. long and wide, probably 
always axillary but often appearing terminal, 3 times compound, 
usually branching 5 mm. from base or less, the axis terete or com- 
pressed, 1.5-3 mm. thick; flowers mostly solitary or in 3's on very 
short lateral branchlets from the secondary branches; bracts and 
bracteoles deciduous before anthesis; buds 3 mm. long and almost 
as wide, gland-dotted, darkening in drying, the body subglobose, 
the hypanthium narrowed at base into an ill-defined pseudostalk 
0.5 mm. long; calyx-lobes 4, in bud distinct, strongly imbricated, 



FLORA OF PERU 583 

the outer pair rounded or bluntly triangular, 1.5 mm. long, 2 mm. 
wide, somewhat inclosing the much larger inner pair, which are 
broadly scarious-margined and irregularly erose, truncate at apex, 
about 1.7 mm. long, 2.5 mm. wide; calyx at anthesis explanate, the 
disk becoming shallowly bowl-shaped, 2.5 mm. wide, the calyx split- 
ting slightly between the lobes or the inner lobes tearing free at base; 
style about 4 mm. long; stamens 75-100, about as long as the style, 
the anthers about 0.4 mm. long; petals 4, unequal, the larger broad 
and short, 2.5 mm. wide. A distinctive species of uncertain generic 
position, suggesting its affinity to Myrcia (Aulomyrcia) in the large 
and distinct calyx-lobes, and the deciduous bracts and bracteoles. 
It is better referred to Marlierea because of the tendency of the re- 
ceptacular disk to flatten after anthesis, and the accompanying dis- 
tortion and splitting of the calyx, which even though slight is unlike 
any species of Aulomyrcia known to me. As a minor character may 
be mentioned the terminal or falsely terminal inflorescence in this 
species; this character recurs often throughout the genera Calyp- 
tranthes and Marlierea, whereas in Myrcia the panicles are more often 
from the lower axils. F. M. Neg. 23474. 

Loreto: Stromgebiet des Ucayali von 10 S. bis zur Miindung, 
G. Tessmann 3264, anno 1923 (G, type). 

Marlierea bipennis (Berg) McVaugh, Mem. N. Y. Bot. Card. 
10: 79. 1958. Myrciaria bipennis Berg, Linnaea 31: 259. 71862. 
Myrcia bipennis (Berg) McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 189. 1956. 

A shrub or small tree to at least 2.5-3 meters high, with promi- 
nently 2-winged branchlets, the wings 0.5-3 mm. high, running from 
just above each axil and between the leaf-bases to the base of the 
petiole of the next node; plants nearly glabrous, closely strigose on 
the vegetative buds (densely) and the inflorescence and youngest 
shoots (thinly) with appressed lustrous rufous, narrowly fusiform, 
sessile and partly dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; scattered 
pale appressed fusiform hairs persistent on the lower leaf-surface; 
leaves elliptic to lanceolate or ovate, 3-5 cm. wide, 7-15 cm. long, 
(2-) 2.5-3.5 times as long as wide, narrowed from the middle or 
below to the shortly and often obscurely acuminate or merely acute 
tip, the base rounded or acute, the margins cuneately decurrent on 
the petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 3-4 mm. long; midvein impressed above, 
prominent beneath, keeled near base and the keel passing gradually 
into the wing of the branchlet; lateral veins very slender, close and 
parallel, about 20-25 pairs, somewhat larger than the nearly equal 
intermediate veins, all obscure and seen as fine lines on both surfaces; 



584 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

marginal vein about equaling the laterals, nearly straight, 1 (-2) mm. 
from margin; blades dull olive green, very smooth but impressed - 
puncticulate above, markedly paler and finely dark-dotted beneath; 
inflorescence axillary, very short and slender, the axis less than 1 mm. 
long, apparently abortive, the flowering branches paired (from the 
lowest nodes) or with an additional pair from the next and approxi- 
mate node, each branch up to 3 cm. long; rachis half as long as the 
branch or more, 1 mm. thick or less, gland-dotted, terete or nearly so; 
flowers 5-9, solitary or in 3's at the tips of the short branches up to 
5 mm. long; bracteoles linear, 0.6 mm. long, deciduous before anthe- 
sis; buds (immature) narrowly obconic, 2 mm. long; flowers not seen; 
hypanthium (in fruit) 2.5 mm. across, glabrous within, with well- 
marked rim and depressed center with straight sides; stamens prob- 
ably 75-100; calyx-lobes (in fruit) rounded, scarcely separated at 
base, about 1.3 mm. long and wide; fruit globose, 8-10 mm. in diam- 
eter, dark purple or black, very finely verruculose. U. of Mich. 
Neg. 482. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil (Rio Negro) and Venezuela 
(Rio Casiquiare). This is the type-species of Sect. Myrciopsis 
McVaugh, a well-marked subgeneric taxon which is here referred 
to Marlierea rather than to Myrcia because of the nearly closed 
buds which split longitudinally between the calyx-lobes at an- 
thesis; the presence of dibrachiate hairs; the tendency of the in- 
florescence to abort at the lowest node with the production of 
paired lateral panicles. The fruiting calyx is strongly suggestive of 
species of Myrcia. The species is readily recognized by the charac- 
teristic winged branchlets. 

Marlierea caudata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 176. 1956. 

A tree to 7 meters high, the compressed branchlets, vegetative 
buds, and inflorescence shaggy with numerous loosely ascending red- 
dish or reddish-yellow silky hairs up to 1 mm. long on the buds and 
hypanthium; hairs on branchlets often intermixed with many short 
erect reddish hairs; mature leaves with a few hairs beneath, ovate or 
elliptic, 1.7-2.5 cm. wide, 4.5-7 cm. long, 2-3 times as long (includ- 
ing the acumen) as wide, about equally narrowed to both ends, the 
apex then prolonged into a prominent narrow acumen 3 mm. wide 
at base, 1-2 cm. long, the base acute to rounded, the margins de- 
current on the stout petiole 1 mm. thick, 2-4 mm. long; mid vein 
smooth and convex above, prominent but nearly flat beneath; lat- 
eral veins 12-15 pairs with numerous intermediate ones, all very 
slender, obscure on both surfaces; marginal vein about equaling the 



FLORA OF PERU 585 

laterals, less than 1 mm. from margin; both surfaces dull, obscurely 
and sparingly gland-dotted, the upper surface darker, and somewhat 
impressed-puncticulate at least when young; inflorescence axillary 
or terminal, the axis either abortive and 1-2 mm. long or elongate 
and leafy, the 1-4 flowering branches 3-5 cm. long, the slender axis 
somewhat compressed, about 1 mm. wide below the first node; 
flowers few, sessile, the flowering nodes 1 or 2 below the terminal 
triad, the flowers 1 or 3 on each short lateral branch; bracteoles 
linear, glabrous on the backs, 1.5 mm. long, appressed to the bud, 
deciduous after anthesis; buds about 2.5 mm. long, prominently and 
abruptly apiculate, obconic with long hirsute narrow base, glabrous 
on the hemispheric distal half, opening to the level of the stamens 
or a little below in 4 irregularly oblong lobes; hypanthium deeply 
cup-shaped, glabrous within, sparingly hairy among the bases of the 
stamens; style glabrous, 4.5 mm. long; stamens about 100, white, 
the longest 4-5 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. long; petals small, 
obovate, white, about 0.7 mm. wide, 1.3 mm. long; fruit subglobose, 
8-11 mm. in diameter; seeds reniform, 7-9 mm. long. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, alt. 100 meters, forest, G. Klug 
235, Oct.-Nov., 1929 (F, type); forest between [lower] Rio Nanay 
and Rio Napo, June 6, 1929, L. Williams 718. 

Marlierea imperfecta McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 176. 1956. 

Tree 6 meters high, the inflorescence thinly pubescent with pale 
or reddish-based appressed or ascending hairs 0.2 mm. long, or longer 
on the vegetative buds; leaves elliptic, 4.5-7 cm. wide and 12 cm. 
long, or up to 9.5 cm. wide, 25 cm. long, about 2.5 times as long as 
wide, acuminate (often narrowly so), rounded to acute at base, the 
margins decurrent on the dark channeled petiole 1.5-3 mm. thick, 
5-8 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral 
veins 10-15 pairs and some intermediate ones, somewhat raised on 
both sides, more prominent (as also the reticulum formed by the 
small transverse veins) beneath; marginal vein about equaling the 
laterals and arched between them, 2-5 mm. from margin, with a 
faint submarginal vein beyond it; blade dark, smooth and obscurely 
impressed-puncticulate above, the lower surface dull, coppery brown, 
finely dark-dotted; inflorescence falsely terminal, the several branches 
apparently arising from the lowest nodes of an abortive terminal 
axis, each branch forming a broad panicle 8-14 cm. long and almost 
as broad, 3 times compound, the peduncle 2.5-4 cm. long, flattened, 
1.5-2 mm. wide below the first node; branches about 5 pairs, mostly 
opposite; flowers sessile or nearly so, solitary or in 3's near the tips 



586 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

of the branches; bracts not seen, apparently deciduous before an- 
thesis; buds 3-3.5 mm. long, glabrous except a small apical tuft, 
obovate, closed and rounded or scarcely apiculate at tip, the base 
rather broadly obconic; calyx rupturing at anthesis and splitting 
into 4 irregular lobes about 1.5 mm. long and up to 2.5 mm. wide; 
disk glabrous, concave, about 3 mm. across; style 4-4.5 mm. long; 
stamens about 100, about equaling the style; petals 3-4, suborbic- 
ular, ciliate, often very broad at base but the attachment narrow, 
about 2.5 mm. long and broad. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, alt. 100 meters, forest, Jan. 
1930, G. King 787 (US, type). 

Marlierea scytophylla Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 
187. 1907. 

A shrub or tree up to 8 meters high, glabrous except that the 
vegetative buds are finely strigose, the divisions of the calyx are cili- 
ate and strigose within, and a few hairs sometimes persist about the 
base of the inflorescence; leaves elliptic, 3-5.5 cm. wide, 9-14 cm. 
long, 2-3.5 times as long as wide, the tips acuminate, the base cune- 
ate, acute, or somewhat rounded above the very base where the 
margins are cuneately decurrent on the stout petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 
5-10 mm. long; midvein convex above, 1-1.5 mm. wide at base, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 12-15 pairs with some interme- 
diate ones nearly the same size, inconspicuous above, slightly ele- 
vated beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched 
between them, 1.5-2.5 mm. from the margin; blades smooth and 
rather dull green above, with numerous but often obscure glandular 
dots, the lower surface yellow-green, finely and sparingly dark-dot- 
ted; inflorescence a many-flowered axillary or falsely terminal pan- 
icle 5-8 cm. long, mostly twice-compound, the central axis longer 
than the lateral branches, or abortive and the lateral panicles paired; 
flowers mostly sessile along the spikelike branches, the longest of 
which are 3 cm. long and about 10-flowered; bracts broad-based, 
acute, 1-2.5 mm. long, at least in part persistent through anthesis 
and evident along the spikes as abortive flowers fall; buds 2-2.5 mm. 
long, obconic, open at the apex, the lobes small and ciliate; calyx 
opening by four irregular splits; disk glabrous, about 2.3 mm. wide; 
style 5-5.5 mm. long; stamens probably 75-100, 5 mm. long (Diels) ; 
fruit globose to oblate, finely glandular- verruculose, 1-1.5 cm. in 
diameter. A little-known species of the Amazon Basin, readily dis- 
tinguished even in fruit from similar species of Calyptranthes by the 
convex rather than impressed midvein. 



FLORA OF PERU 587 

An imperfect specimen with immature fruit, which was col- 
lected on the Rio Nanay, Loreto (Williams 767), appears to be a 
Marlierea and may be the present species, but the leaves tend toward 
ovate rather than elliptic and the inflorescence is somewhat strigose. 
F. M. Neg. 23411. According to Diels' original description of M. 
scytophylla the leaves are deeply sulcate above, but, as plainly shown 
in the photograph, the midveins are convex rather than impressed 
in Ule's no. 6044, the type specimen. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil and Venezuela. 

Marlierea spruceana Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 34. 
1857. M. spruceana a latifolia Berg, I.e. 515. 1859. M. spruceana 
/3 angustifolia Berg, I.e. 

A tree up to 9 meters high, strigose on the branchlets, inflores- 
cence and the lower surfaces of at least the young leaves with lus- 
trous yellowish-white hairs, these up to 1 mm. long (on the buds) or 
often shorter, those on the leaves short, often with a few dibrachiate 
hairs, up to 0.5 mm. long, interspersed; leaves ovate-elliptic, often 
broadest a little below the middle, 6-7 cm. wide, 15-18 cm. long (or 
those subtending the inflorescence smaller, 2.5-4 cm. wide, 8-13 cm. 
long), 2-3 times as long as wide, gradually narrowed to an acuminate 
tip, rounded or subcuneate at base, the margins decurrent on the 
very stout petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 6-12 mm. long; midvein on the 
upper surface concave, sulcate at least near the base, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins 15-20 pairs, slender, slightly raised on both 
surfaces; marginal veins about equaling the laterals, slightly arched 
between them, 1.5-3 mm. from margin and often with a weak sec- 
ondary marginal vein; leaves sometimes blackening above in drying, 
both surfaces dull, the glands obscure, somewhat apparent above; 
inflorescence terminal, forming a broad panicle with up to 200 flow- 
ers, 10-12 cm. long, 4 to 5 times compound, or the central axis 
abortive and the lower branches 5-8 cm. long; principal branches 
usually with 3-4 nodes, the peduncle 2-4 cm. long below the lowest 
node, compressed and 2-2.5 mm. wide below that node; flowers ses- 
sile, mostly in terminal clusters of 3; bracts and bracteoles ovate, 
acute, 1-3 mm. long, deciduous before anthesis; buds closed, obo- 
void, 4-5 mm. long, with some dark glands partly concealed among 
the hairs, opening irregularly into about 4 lobes which are glabrous 
on the inner surface; style glabrous, 7 mm. long; stamens 100-125, 
about 5 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. long; petals 4, ovate, trun- 
cate at base, ciliate, 3 mm. wide, 4 mm. long; disk 5 mm. across in 
anthesis, the hypanthium deeply concave, tomentose within; fruit 



588 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

globose, 1-1.5 cm. in diameter, tomentose. Probably conspecific is 
M. uaupensis Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 516. 1859, of Co- 
lombia, which has the leaves broader (the terminal 6 cm. wide, 12.5 
cm. long), short-petiolate and subcordate, the buds broadly ovoid, 
and the pubescence of longer and whiter hairs. F. M. Neg. 19879. 
Loreto: Mishuyacu, Klug H.11. Amazonian Brazil and Colombia. 

Marlierea squarrosa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 177. 1956. 

A shrub 2 meters high, densely pubescent on vegetative buds and 
sparingly on young branchlets, petioles, and inflorescence, with ap- 
pressed or ascending flexuous lustrous rufous hairs up to 0.5 mm. 
long; leaves broadly elliptic or somewhat ovate, 3.5-6 cm. wide, 9- 
13 cm. long, about 2.5 times as long as wide, rather abruptly nar- 
rowed to a slenderly acuminate tip, rounded at base, the margins 
decurrent on the petiole 1 mm. thick, 5-7 mm. long; mid vein and 
10-15 pairs of lateral veins impressed above, prominent and raised 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched be- 
tween them, not impressed above, 2-3 mm. from margin; small veins 
not elevated nor prominently reticulate above; leaves drying brown, 
dull, the upper surface darker and nearly eglandular, the lower cop- 
pery and very sparingly dotted; inflorescence a broad many-flowered 
axillary panicle 7-10 cm. long, 3 to 4 times compound, with up to 
10 pairs of branches, the lowest up to 4 cm. long, the peduncle 2 cm. 
long, compressed and up to 1.5 mm. wide below the lowest node; 
flowers subspicate, mostly toward the tips of the branches, often sub- 
opposite, sessile, solitary or in short-peduncled clusters of 3; bracts 
ovate, divaricate, hairy, acute, 1-1.5 mm. long, broad-based and 
rounded on the backs, persistent through an thesis; buds glabrous, 
drying black, broadly obovoid, 1.5-2 mm. long, with numerous 
raised glandular dots, contracted at base to a very short pseudo- 
stalk; calyx-lobes 5, rounded, red-ciliate and appressed-pubescent 
within, strongly unequal, the two outer much smaller, about 0.7 mm. 
long and wide, the three inner up to 2 mm. wide and 1 mm. long, 
the calyx as a whole splitting irregularly from the bases of the lobes 
to the summit of the ovary; disk 1.7-2 mm. wide, glabrous, flat after 
anthesis; style 3.5 mm. long; stamens about 50, 3 mm. long; anthers 
0.6 mm. long; petals 3, suborbicular, about 2.5 mm. long; fruit not 
seen. This species, like M. areolata, seems to cross the supposed 
generic lines between Marlierea and Myrcia (Aulomyrcia) . It has 
the irregularly splitting calyx, persistent bracts and explanate disk 
of Marlierea, but the coppery color and free calyx-lobes of some 
species of "Aulomyrcia." It might conceivably be a hybrid involv- 



FLORA OF PERU 589 

ing Marlierea umbraticola, which also has impressed veins in the 
leaves. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, Klug 169 (US, type). 

Marlierea subulata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 177. 1956. 

Tree 5 meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence and petioles 
finely hispidulous with yellowish erect hairs about 0.2 mm. long, or 
those on the vegetative buds, base of inflorescence and base of hy- 
panthium slightly longer and appressed; leaves ovate or lanceolate, 
nearly sessile, 4.5-7 cm. wide, 13-18 cm. long, 2.5-3.5 times as long 
as wide, narrowed toward the apex from the middle or below, and 
gradually acuminate, rounded and cordate-auriculate at base, the 
margins passing abruptly into the ventral angles of the nearly flat, 
hispidulous and somewhat expanded summit of the petiole 1.5-2 mm. 
thick, 3-4 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins about 10 pairs, impressed above, prominent and scalari- 
form beneath, the intermediate ones weak; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals and markedly arched between them, 2.5-7 mm. 
from margin, with an indistinct submarginal vein beyond it; blades 
smooth, dark and lustrous above, with no glands apparent, the lower 
surface paler, dull, with occasional dark glands; inflorescence a rather 
few-flowered narrow panicle, 2 to 3 times compound, 7-15 cm. long, 
and up to 6 cm. wide at base; peduncle less than half as long as the 
whole panicle, distally flattened, 2-2.5 mm. wide; flowering nodes 
5-6, the branches opposite or subopposite, the flowers solitary or in 
3's on pedicels up to 5 mm. long; bracts divaricate, glabrous, subu- 
late, up to about 3 mm. long, more or less persistent through an thesis; 
bracteoles similar, about 1 mm. long, somewhat appressed to the 
pseudostalk 0.5-1 mm. long; buds obovate, about 3 mm. long in- 
cluding the prominent narrow apiculum, glabrous except near base 
and sometimes for a tuft of small hairs crowning the apiculum, the 
hypanthium gradually narrowed toward the base and then abruptly 
rounded to the pseudostalk; calyx in bud completely closed, in an- 
thesis splitting irregularly into 4 lobes, these up to 2 mm. long and 
wide, glabrous except at apex; disk cup-shaped, 2.5 mm. across, the 
staminal ring short-hairy; style 6 mm. long or more; stamens 75-100, 
about equaling the style, the anthers about 0.3 mm. long; petals 4, 
obovate or subrotund, 1 mm. wide, 1-1.5 mm. long, silky-villous 
without; fruit globose to oblate, up to 1 cm. long and 1.5 cm. across. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, alt. 100 meters, forest, May, 
June, 1930, G. Klug 1341 (F, type). 



590 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Marlierea umbra ticola (HBK.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 17. 1855. 
Myrtus umbraticola HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 7: 258 (folio ed. p. 199). 
1825. Marlierea insculpta Diels, Verb. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 188. 
1907. 

A shrub or small tree 5-8 meters high, the inflorescence thickly 
and finely pubescent with appressed or ascending lustrous rufous or 
silver-tipped hairs up to 0.3 mm. long; lower leaf-surface with a few 
appressed pale hairs with darker bases; leaves lanceolate or elliptic, 
2.5-5.5 cm. wide, 8.5-17 cm. long, (2.8-) 3-4.5 times as long as wide, 
the tip gradually or abruptly and often conspicuously acuminate, 
the base acute to cuneate or somewhat rounded, the margins decur- 
rent on the stout, transversely rimose petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 4-10 
mm. long; petiole at maturity with the outer layers smooth and 
reddish brown, cracking transversely and at length longitudinally, 
separating and persisting; midvein impressed above, elevated nearly 
its own thickness beneath; lateral veins 20-25 pairs, never promi- 
nent but the major ones slightly impressed as delicate lines above, 
slightly raised beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals or 
slightly weaker, arched between them, 1-2.5 mm. from margin; 
blades dark and lustrous but without apparent glands above, dull 
green or brown, and finely dark-dotted beneath; inflorescence a 
many-flowered axillary panicle 7-10 cm. long, mostly twice com- 
pound with the flowers sessile or nearly so along the slender divari- 
cate branches, the lowest of which may be as long as the central 
branch or even longer; peduncle 1-2 cm. long, terete or slightly com- 
pressed, usually rimose like the petioles, 1-2.5 mm. thick; branches 
straight, slender, up to 10 cm. long and with more than 40 flowers 
in bracteate, opposite or sometimes alternate pairs; bracts persist- 
ent, squarrose, ovate, broad-based and somewhat surrounding the 
buds, acute, 1 mm. long or less; buds 2-2.5 mm. long, dark or black 
in drying, glabrous except the ciliate tips, broadly obovoid, the hy- 
panthium obconic, the tip rounded; calyx-lobes 4, approximate in 
the bud, very small, with deltoid ciliate tips, the calyx splitting 
irregularly at anthesis between the lobes into irregular glabrous divi- 
sions about 2.5 mm. long and 2 mm. wide; disk glabrous; style 4-5 
mm. long; stamens 60-75, about 4 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. 
long; fruit globose, smooth or minutely verruculose, 5-10 mm. in 
diameter. A commonly collected species of the basins of the Orinoco 
and Casiquiare rivers in Colombia and Venezuela, and known also 
from various stations in Amazonian Brazil; the type of M. insculpta 
came from Marary on the upper Rio Jurud, Ule 5080, 5081. F. M. 
Negs. 23407, 36908. 



FLORA OF PERU 591 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Bolivia and Brazil to Venezuela, 
and eastern Colombia. 

Marlierea velutina McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 178. 1956. 

A shrub or tree, densely velutinous on the branchlets, inflores- 
cence, buds, and petioles with coarse sharp erect yellowish brown 
hairs up to 1 mm. long; leaves on both surfaces thinly hirsutulous 
with similar hairs; leaves elliptic, oblong, or lanceolate, 4-6 cm. wide, 
13-18 cm. long, about 3 times as long as wide, acute or shortly and 
slenderly acuminate at tip, narrowly rounded at base, the margins 
decurrent on the stout petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 5-7 mm. long; mid- 
vein flat above or sulcate near base, velutinous, prominent and ele- 
vated its own diameter beneath; lateral veins about 20 pairs, slightly 
elevated above, prominulous beneath; marginal vein about equaling 
the laterals, somewhat arched between them, 1.5-3 mm. from mar- 
gin; blades at maturity dull, dark and obscurely punctate above, 
yellow green or brown and hairy beneath, without apparent glands; 
inflorescence of many-flowered, 2 or 3 times compound, axillary or 
falsely terminal panicles 6-10 cm. long, the flowers solitary or in 3's 
near the tips of the branches; peduncle 3.5-5 cm. long, compressed, 
2.5 mm. wide below the first branches; primary branches 1.5-2.5 cm. 
long, the lateral pedicels 3-5 mm. long, the central flowers sessile or 
nearly so; bracts and bracteoles deciduous before an thesis, linear, 
2-3 mm. long; buds probably about 7 mm. long, not seen; hypan- 
thium 3-4 mm. long, broadly ellipsoid or urceolate to subglobose, 
with about 8 prominent longitudinal ridges; calyx-lobes in bud united, 
with free, bluntly deltoid tips about 1 mm. long, 1.5 mm. wide, the 
calyx in anthesis splitting irregularly into 4 somewhat elliptic lobes 
2-3 mm. wide, 3-4 mm. long, the split extending into the edge of the 
staminal disk and the margin of the disk recurved with the lobes; 
disk about 4 mm. wide, deeply depressed at center, velutinous; style 
7 mm. long, hairy two-thirds of its length; stamens very numerous, 
probably about 200; petals obovate-cuneate, 2 mm. wide, 3 mm. 
long; ovary bilocular, with 2 ovules in each locule. Known only 
from the type, Rusby 2683, collected at the falls of the Rio Madeira, 
Brazil. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

2. CALYPTRANTHES Swartz 

Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 18-33. 1855; and in Mart. Fl. Bras. 
14, pt. 1:38-55. 1857. 



592 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Calyx completely closed in the bud, circumscissile, the operculum 
usually attached at one side in anthesis, finally completely dehiscent. 
Petals none, or in a few species 2-3 (-5), small and inconspicuous. 
Inflorescence-axis usually abortive above the first node, with the 
paired panicles arising from opposite axils at the lowest nodes of the 
axis. Pubescence usually at least in part of dibrachiate hairs. 

A distinctive genus of perhaps 50-75 species, ranging from Florida 
through the West Indies and eastern South America to Uruguay. 
Early reports of this genus from Asia were based primarily on species 
now referred to Syzygium Gaertn., a genus of the Eugeniinae. 

Flowers very large for the genus, the buds 7-8 mm. long, convex or 
nearly flat at the apex, lacking a narrow apiculum; inflorescence 
pale-scurfy and also appressed-puberulent with minute brown- 
ish dibrachiate hairs 0.1 mm. long; leaves 25-39 cm. long, nar- 
rowly elliptic, nearly sessile, appearing cordate-auriculate at 
base, the stout petiole 4 mm. long C. maxima 

Flowers smaller, the buds if 5 mm. long or more fusiform and apicu- 
late, or noticeably hirsute or velutinous; inflorescence glabrous 
to hairy; leaves usually smaller and slender-petiolate, if sessile 
or essentially so the buds not as above. 

Leaves sessile, with veins impressed on the upper surface; blades 
cordate at base or the margins much produced and plicate. 

Leaves ovate, cordate, 9-12 cm. long; inflorescence glabrous; 
buds fusiform, 6-7 mm. long C. sessilis 

Leaves obovate, with the margins near base produced into 
puckered folds, the blades 30-38 cm. long; inflorescence 
appressed-hirsutulous; buds 3.5 mm. long, obovoid. 

C. plicata 

Leaves petiolate, cuneate to acute or somewhat rounded at base, 
the veins usually not impressed. 

Inflorescence of paired spikes, the individual flowers sessile along 
the axis or the lowest in sessile or very short-peduncled 
groups of three. 

Buds glabrous; leaves 2.5-6 cm. long, often obovate with 
rounded or sometimes short-acuminate tip; flowers 
mostly 3 or 5 (-11) in each spike C. pulchella 

Buds strigose or hirsute; leaves 7-16 cm. long, elliptic to 
ovate, usually prominently and often narrowly acumi- 
nate; flowers more numerous. 



FLORA OF PERU 593 

Branchlets and inflorescence, including the buds, thickly 
rufous-hirsute; buds broadly obovoid to nearly glo- 
bose, 5-6 mm. long, concealed by the hairs; flowers 
8-13 in each spike C. krugioides 

Branchlets and inflorescence with appressed yellow or 
brown dibrachiate hairs; buds obovoid or broadly 
fusiform, 2-2.5 mm. long, rather sparingly hairy. 

Spikes mostly 8-12 cm. long, the numerous flowers in 
several sessile clusters of 10-20 flowers each; leaves 
short-acuminate, the lateral veins not impressed 
above, slender and closely parallel C. densiflora 

Spikes 3-5.5 cm. long, the flowers 25 or fewer on each, 
in small sessile clusters of 1-3 each; leaves with nar- 
row acumen 1.5-2 cm. long; lateral veins impressed 
above, the principal ones prominent beneath and 
contrasting with the less conspicuous intermediates. 

C. brevispicata 

Inflorescence of paired panicles or compound dichasia, the basal 
branches elongated and again branched, or occasionally 
with solitary terminal flowers. 

Branches of the inflorescence uniformly but sometimes thinly 
beset with appressed or erect hairs; hypanthium vari- 
ously strigose to tomentose, except in C. multiflora. 

Hypanthium glabrous; inflorescence loosely pubescent with 
numerous erect or somewhat appressed soft pale rufous 
hairs; midvein convex above; buds 2-2.5 mm. long. 

C. multiflora 

Hypanthium strigose or variously velutinous or tomentose, 
if nearly glabrous the midvein sulcate or narrowly im- 
pressed above. 

Inflorescence-branch an umbelliform cyme 2-5 cm. long 
with 15 flowers or fewer, the ovate boat-shaped 
bracts subfoliaceous, persistent; inflorescence, in- 
cluding the flowers, thickly hirsute with coarse rufous 
sessile dibrachiate hairs up to 1.5-2 mm. long and 

attached near one end C. longifolia 

Inflorescence-branch paniculate or by reduction race- 
mose, often 3 to 4 times compound and many- 
flowered (if short and few-flowered not hirsute as 
above); bracts completely deciduous before an the- 



594 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

sis or occasionally a few (especially the basal ones) 
persisting; hairs of the inflorescence various, mostly 
sessile and less than 1 mm. long. 

Hairs of the inflorescence golden-yellow, dibrachiate, 
up to more than 1 mm. long, the basal stalk of the 
hair erect and often as long as the spreading or 
ascending branches; leaves 6 cm. long or less, 
rounded to obscurely acuminate at tip; branch- 
lets 2-winged; flowers mostly 10 or fewer on each 

branch C. tridymantha 

Hairs of the inflorescence sessile and somewhat ap- 
pressed and mostly less than 0.5 mm. long, or with 
very short hairs intermixed, or the inflorescence 
velutinous or tomentose, usually with red or rusty 
hairs. 

Leaves large, mostly more than 15 cm. long (often 
20-30 cm. long), with 20-35 pairs of lateral 
veins; buds obovoid or obconic, scarcely apic- 
ulate, 3-5 mm. long; inflorescence with abun- 
dant rufous pubescence. 

Lateral and marginal veins scarcely apparent on 
lower leaf-surface, the surface covered with 
very numerous, closely appressed pale hairs 
up to 0.2 mm. long; blades tapering from the 
middle or below to a slender apex; inflores- 
cence 5 cm. long or less, few-flowered. 

C. macrophylla 

Lateral and marginal veins forming a conspicuous 
gridiron pattern on the lower leaf-surface, 
which is glabrous or sparingly appressed- 
pubescent at maturity; blades abruptly and 
narrowly acuminate; inflorescence 6-10 cm. 

long, many-flowered C. speciosa 

Leaves of moderate size, usually less than 20 cm. 
long or, if longer, the lateral veins 15 pairs or 
fewer, or the buds 2-2.5 mm. long; buds and 
pubescence various. 

Flowers small, the buds 2-2.5 mm. long, obovoid, 
the apex rounded or shortly apiculate; pan- 
icles mostly 3 times compound, many-flow- 
ered, the branches sparingly covered with 






FLORA OF PERU 595 

appressed pale or sometimes reddish hairs, 
the hypanthium strigose, sometimes very 
sparingly so; paired panicles from an abor- 
tive flattened axis 10 mm. long or less. 
Lower leaf-surfaces with few dark hairs and 
usually with rather numerous persistent, 
nearly colorless appressed hairs; leaves 
elliptic, broadest at the middle, 5-10 cm. 
long with 12-15 lateral veins on each side; 

style 4-4.5 mm. long C. ruiziana 

Lower leaf-surfaces glabrous except for a few 
dark hairs; leaves ovate or lanceolate, usu- 
ally widest somewhat below the middle, 
9-15 (-25) cm. long, with 20-25 pairs of 
veins on each side; style 5-6 mm. long. 

C. simulata 

Flowers larger, the buds 3-6 mm. long, variously 
shaped; panicle compound, or by reduction 
racemoid, its branches and the hypanthium 
uniformly and usually conspicuously ap- 
pressed-hairy, velutinous or tomentose with 
ferruginous or dark reddish hairs; panicles 
various. 

Inflorescence-branch a spike with all flowers 
sessile, or the lower branches 1-2 cm. long, 
1- or 3-flowered; buds 5-6 mm. long, abun- 
dantly hirsute, the hypanthium hairy 

within C. krugioides 

Inflorescence-branch a panicle, usually many- 
flowered and 3 times compound; buds 3-4 
mm. long, appressed-hairy to tomentose, 
the hypanthium glabrous within. 
Midvein impressed above; hypanthium ap- 
pressed-hairy, the hairs of the inflores- 
cence rusty-brown; buds fusiform, 3-3.5 
mm. long; panicle narrow, the lowest 
branches about 1.5 cm. long. 

C. tessmannii 

Midvein convex above (and then sometimes 
sulcate) or raised in a narrow ridge; hy- 
panthium loosely velutinous or tomen- 



596 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

tose; buds obovoid or ellipsoid; lower 

branches of the panicle relatively long. 

Leaves 15-21 cm. long, about 4 times as 

long as wide, the straight marginal 

vein and the 10-15 short lateral veins 

prominent beneath; petiole very stout, 

3 mm. thick, 7 mm. long; buds broadly 

ellipsoid, heavily tomentose with dark 

red hairs, the hypanthium urceolate 

in anthesis C. rufotomentosa 

Leaves 10-16 cm. long, about 2.5 times as 
long as wide, the marginal vein con- 
sisting of a series of loops or arches 
between the 8-12 pairs of laterals; 
petiole 1 mm. thick, 8-10 mm. long; 
buds obovoid, sparingly or rather 
densely velutinous with rusty-brown 
or reddish hairs, the hypanthium prob- 
ably turbinate in anthesis. 

C. cuspidata 

Branches of the inflorescence (including the hypanthium) 
completely glabrous or with a very few scattered hairs 
about the base and the nodes of the panicle. 

Panicles with 20 flowers or fewer, sometimes reduced and 
raceme-like or spikelike; peduncle and rachis filiform 
or very slender, often terete and nearly straight, usually 
less than 1 mm. thick; branchlets narrowly 2-winged. 

Flowers mostly sessile on the axis, only the lower clusters 
pedunculate; wings of the branchlets often 0.5 mm. 
high; buds 4-7 mm. long, obtuse or obscurely 
apiculate C. pulchella 

Flowers mostly on very long slender pedicels; wings of 
the branchlets scarcely higher than thick; buds 2-3 
mm. long, narrowly and conspicuously apiculate. 

C. bipennis 

Panicles many-flowered, 3 to 4 times compound, the pe- 
duncle usually somewhat angular near summit and 
1-1.5 mm. thick, the rachis often irregularly enlarged 
and zigzag; wings, if produced on branchlets, not per- 
sisting through the growing season. 



FLORA OF PERU 597 

Lower leaf-surface obscurely gland-dotted, the dots about 
15 per square mm.; leaves relatively narrow, mostly 
2.5 times as long as broad, or longer; panicle- 
branches irregularly alternate C. paniculata 

Lower leaf-surface prominently dark-dotted, the dots 
more than 50 per square mm. ; leaves broader, mostly 
2.3 times as long as broad, or less; panicle-branches, 
both large and small, often verticillate or fasciculate. 

C. crebra 

Calyptranthes bipennis Berg, Linnaea 31: 248. 71862. 

A shrub or tree up to 15 meters high, glabrous except for a few 
hairs on the young terminal vegetative buds; young leafy branchlets 
2-winged, the wings up to about 0.2 mm. high, arising just above the 
axil at one node and terminating in stipule-like tips up to 1 mm. 
long between the petiole bases at the node above; leaves elliptic, 
lanceolate or ovate, (1-) 2-5 cm. wide, 3-7 (-11) cm. long, 2-3 (-4) 
times as long as wide, acuminate (often slenderly so), the base cune- 
ate, or rounded and finally subcuneate, the margins decurrent on 
the petiole 2-3 mm. long and up to 1 mm. thick; midvein prominent 
beneath, on the upper surface broadly impressed near base in a 
rounded channel, plane near the tip; lateral veins slender, slightly 
raised on both surfaces or but obscurely so above, about 10-12 prin- 
cipal pairs but with relatively strong intermediate veins, the blade 
thus often seeming to have numerous close parallel veins; marginal 
vein continuous, 0.5-1 (-2) mm. from margin, little arched between 
the laterals; leaves dull and pale green in drying, or the lower sur- 
face pale brown; upper surface smooth, usually with at least a few 
impressed dots; lower surface more or less prominently brown dotted; 
inflorescence axillary, the axis either abortive and 0.5-2 mm. long, 
or elongate and leafy; flowering branches 2, opposite, arising from 
the lowest nodes of the axis, filiform, 2-5 (-9) cm. long, 0.2-0.7 mm. 
thick below the nodes, 1 to 3 times compound; peduncle 9-22 mm. 
long; nodes of the flowering axis 1-3, the pedicels filiform, 2-7 mm. 
long, 1-flowered or with 2 or 3 nearly sessile flowers at the tip; bract 
at base of flowering branch linear, 0.7 mm. wide, 1.7 mm. long; other 
bracts and bracteoles not seen; buds obovoid, prominently gland- 
dotted, attenuate at base at least when young, 2-3 mm. long, nar- 
rowly apiculate, the apiculum often conspicuous; calyptra about one- 
third as long as the unopened bud; style 3-5 mm. long; petals none; 
stamens about 75, up to 4 mm. long; fruit globose, 5-7 mm. in 



598 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

diameter. The several collections which I should refer to this species 
show unusual variation in size of leaves, but are otherwise so similar 
that there is little doubt that they are conspecific. The type speci- 
men, which is in young bud only, bears small and narrow leaves up to 
1 cm. wide and 4 cm. long. The inflorescences are poorly developed, 
each branch bearing three pedicellate flowers only. Superficially this 
specimen bears little resemblance to such large-leaved examples as 
those in Killip & Smith's no. 27702 and Krukoff 's nos. 5203 and 5205, 
but in characters other than leaf-size there is good agreement. The 
development of the inflorescence and the presence of 1-flowered or 
3-flowered pedicels evidently vary from plant to plant, and under 
conditions which affect vigor and development; in some cases both 
1-flowered and 3-flowered pedicels are found on the same plant, and 
I regard as taxonomically unimportant, in this case, the difference 
between the 3-flowered cymes of the type specimen, and the approxi- 
mately 20-flowered panicle-like branches of Killip & Smith's no. 
27702. The type specimen of C. bipennis apparently is merely a 
small-leaved extreme, collected at an early stage in development, of 
a species population which is widespread and relatively uniform in 
Brazilian Amazonia and adjacent Peru. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 430. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 6584- Loreto: Yurimaguas, 
Killip & Smith 27702. Fl. Huallaga ad cataractas, July, 1856, 
Spruce 4596, type. Amazonian Brazil. 

Calyptranthes brevispicata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 181. 
1956. 

A tree 4 meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence, petioles and 
lower leaf-surfaces sparingly covered with appressed fusiform yellow- 
ish brown dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long (or to 1 mm. long 
on the midvein); leaves elliptic-lanceolate, 3.5-5 cm. wide, 11-15 cm. 
long, about 3 times as long as wide, narrowed toward the apex from 
about the middle, gradually or rather abruptly long-acuminate, the 
tip 3 mm. wide at base, 1.5-2 cm. long; base of blade acute and 
finally cuneate, the margins decurrent on the stout petiole 1.5 mm. 
thick, 8 mm. long; midvein sharply sulcate and impressed above, 
prominently elevated beneath; lateral veins 20 or more pairs, im- 
pressed above, prominent beneath and contrasting with the smaller 
and less conspicuous intermediate veins; marginal vein nearly 
straight, about equaling the laterals, 2-3 mm. from margin, slightly 
impressed above and prominently elevated beneath, a smaller but 
distinct submarginal vein beyond it; blades somewhat lustrous, green 
and impressed-puncticulate above, somewhat yellowish beneath, 



FLORA OF PERU 599 

with small dark dots and numerous appressed hairs; inflorescence 
axillary, the axis very short and flat, about 2 mm. long and wide, 
the flowering branches 2, spicate, 3-5.5 cm. long, from the lowest 
nodes of the axis, the peduncle short, about 1 cm. long, nearly terete, 
1-1.3 mm. thick below the first node; flowers 25 or fewer on each 
branch, 1-3 in small sessile clusters at the 3-4 principal nodes and 
the tip; bracts deciduous before an thesis; buds about 2.5 mm. long, 
broadly fusiform, brown-hairy and somewhat arachnoid-pubescent, 
broadly and sometimes obscurely apiculate; calyptra domelike; hy- 
panthium after dehiscence broadly campanulate, 1.5 mm. high, about 
2 mm. across the rim; style 6 mm. long; stamens about 50, white, to 
6 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. long. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 454. 

Loreto: Florida, Rio Putumayo, at mouth of Rio Zubineta, alt. 
200 meters, forest, March-April, 1931, G. King 2040 (US, type). 

Calyptranthes crebra McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 181. 1956. 

Tree 4-10 meters high, completely glabrous or the vegetative 
buds strigose with reddish fusiform dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. 
long, and a few similar hairs persistent at the base and about the 
nodes of the inflorescence; leaves elliptic to ovate, 4-5 cm. wide, 
8.5-10.5 cm. long, about 1.8-2.3 times as long as wide, short-acumi- 
nate, the base cuneate, the margins decurrent on the stout petiole 
1-1.5 mm. thick, 4-5 mm. long; midvein broadly sulcate above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 12-15 pairs in addition to the 
scarcely less conspicuous intermediates, slightly elevated on both 
surfaces but obscure on both; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals, nearly straight, 1.5-2 mm. from margin; upper surface olive 
green to brown in drying, impressed-puncticulate, the lower pale or 
dark tan, with abundant (more than 50 per square mm.) dark prom- 
inent glands; inflorescence axillary or falsely terminal, the axis about 
1 mm. long, the 2 flowering branches from the lowest nodes, 5-11 cm. 
long, mostly 3 times compound, many-flowered, the peduncle often 
half as long as the entire inflorescence, terete, 1 mm. thick or a little 
more; lowest branches of the panicle sub-verticillate, three larger 
and as many smaller arising nearly together; upper nodes mostly 
alternate and enlarged, the branchlets often fasciculate, the rachis 
zigzag and flattened; flowers yellow-green (Klug), near tips in 3's or 
in clusters up to 10; bracts deciduous before anthesis; buds 2 mm. 
long or less, obovate, somewhat expanded above the middle, shortly 
apiculate; hypanthium after dehiscence broadly campanulate, about 
1.3 mm. long and 1.5 mm. wide; calyptra concave; style 5 mm. long; 
stamens 60-75, about as long as the style; anthers about 0.2 mm. 



600 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

long; fruit globose, about 5 mm. in diameter, finely glandular- ver- 
ruculose, surmounted by the very short flaring neck of the hypan- 
thium. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 470. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, forest, alt. 100 meters, Octo- 
ber-November, 1929, G. Klug 77, 78 (F, type), 607. 

Calyptranthes cuspidata DC. Prodr. 3: 258. 1828. 

Probably a tree, the vegetative buds, petioles, branchlets and 
inflorescence velutinous with rusty brown or light reddish brown 
partly dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves glabrous both 
sides, elliptic or oblanceolate, 4-5 cm. wide, 10-16 cm. long, about 
2.5 times as long as wide, at apex cuspidate-acuminate with acumen 
1-1.5 cm. long, the base acute, the margins decurrent on the chan- 
neled petiole 1 mm. thick, 8-10 mm. long; midvein convex or nar- 
rowly sulcate above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 8-12 pairs, 
sometimes with nearly similar intermediate veins, slightly convex 
on both sides of the blade; marginal vein about equaling the laterals 
and arched between them, or scarcely forming a distinct vein, 2-4 
mm. from margin, often with smaller veins evident beyond it; blade 
smooth and featureless above, paler and dull beneath with pale in- 
conspicuous glandular dots; inflorescence to 10 cm. long, 3 times 
compound, many-flowered; flowers sessile, clustered near the tips of 
the branches; buds 3.2-4 mm. long, obovoid, the calyptra rounded 
and domelike, punctate, and (in the type) glabrate; hypanthium 
markedly produced beyond the ovary, the orifice about 1 mm. across; 
stamens probably 50-75. The type, which I saw in Munich in 1954, 
bears both buds and opening flowers; it is labeled "Rio dos Enganos, 
in flumen Japura, Provinciae Rio Negro," Martins (F. M. Neg. 
19884). Krukoff's no. 6221 (NY, US), from the State of Ama- 
zonas, Mun. Humayta, near Tres Casas, is referred to this species 
with some doubt. It is said to be a tree 60 feet high; the plants are 
in young bud with inflorescence scarcely developed. The foliage 
closely resembles that of the type of C. cuspidata, but the inflores- 
cence appears to be more strongly velutinous than in the Martius 
specimen. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Calyptranthes densiflora Poepp. ex Berg, Linnaea 27: 30. 1855. 

A tree 4-7 meters high, sparsely covered in the inflorescence and 
on the lower leaf-surfaces with brownish-yellow fusiform sessile but 
rather loosely appressed dibrachiate hairs up to 0.8 mm. long on 



FLORA OF PERU 601 

the midvein and about 0.5 mm. long on the inflorescence; leaves 
elliptic or ovate, 3-5.5 cm. wide, 7-13 cm. long, 2-2.5 times as long 
as wide, acuminate, the base acute to rounded, the margins decur- 
rent on the stout petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 5-6 mm. long; midvein 
impressed or sharply sulcate above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
15-20 pairs, slender and close with numerous intermediate veins, 
obscure above, more distinct beneath; marginal vein about equaling 
the laterals, 1.5-2 (-3.5) mm. from margin; leaves nearly concolorous, 
lustrous and smooth and obscurely impressed-puncticulate above, 
slightly more yellowish-green or -brown beneath, the surface rather 
sparingly dotted with small glands, often with pale appressed hairs 
and some brownish-yellow dibrachiate hairs; inflorescence axillary, 
the axis flattened, 2-4 mm. long and at least 2-3 mm. wide; flower- 
ing branches 2, spicate, (3-) 8-12 cm. long, opposite, arising from 
the lowest nodes of the axis, the peduncle about half as long as the 
entire branch, angled but scarcely compressed, 2-2.5 mm. thick just 
below the first node; flowers sessile in clusters of 10-20 at each of 
3-5 nodes and at the tips, the clusters sub-opposite or usually some 
or all of them alternate, the axis often zigzag; bracts about half as 
many as the flowers and simulating an involucre about the clusters, 
1-2.5 mm. wide, 2-3 mm. long, obovate, cucullate, glabrous on the 
inner surface; buds 2-2.5 mm. long, obovoid, gland-dotted, not 
apiculate, strigose with lustrous golden or somewhat arachnoid hairs; 
calyptra 1.5-2 mm. across, explanate; hypanthium hollow nearly to 
the base of the bud, the walls thin and collapsing after anthesis; style 
5-6 mm. long; stamens 30-40, up to 5 mm. long, the anthers 0.4-0.5 
mm. long; fruit (according to Poeppig) smaller than a pea, globose, 
crowned with the tubular hypanthium. F.M. Neg. 31509. 

San Martin: Zepelacio near Moyobamba, King 3307, 3747. In 
sylvis ad Mission Tocache, Poeppig 2019 (type, herb. Wien). 

In Poeppig's original specimen, which I have seen through the 
kindness of Dr. Rechinger, the spikes are apparently somewhat un- 
developed and perhaps abnormal; they are about 1.5 cm. long, each 
with 25-40 flowers closely packed in a sub-cylindric cluster. 

Calyptranthes krugioides McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 182. 
1956. 

Tree to 20 meters high, the branchlets and inflorescence thickly 
rufous-hirsute with coarse flexuous hairs about 0.5 mm. long; mid- 
vein above densely and veins beneath sparingly hairy in young foli- 
age; leaves elliptic or ovate, 2.5-6.5 cm. wide, 10-16 cm. long, 2.5-3 
(-4) times as long as wide, about equally and often abruptly narrowed 



602 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

to the slenderly or caudately acuminate tip, and to the rounded or 
subcuneate base, the margins decurrent on the stout petiole 1.5-2 
mm. thick and 5-11 mm. long; principal veins impressed above, the 
mid vein sulcate but raised in a narrow central line in this groove; 
veins prominent beneath, the principal laterals 10-12 pairs, the mar- 
ginal vein about equaling the laterals, 2-4 mm. from the margin; 
leaves drying brown, dull, the upper surface smooth and without 
evident glands, the lower lighter in color, minutely dark-dotted; in- 
florescences axillary, paired, spikelike, 5-6 cm. long, the axis with 
3-4 flowering nodes, about 1 mm. in diameter but appearing more 
than 2 mm. thick because of the hairs; flowers distant, 8-13 in each 
spike, at the upper nodes solitary and sessile, at the lower nodes in 
groups of 3 on a common branch 3 mm. long; bracteoles ovate, acute, 
about 2.5 mm. long; buds broadly obovoid to nearly globose, 5-6 mm. 
long, obscurely apiculate, completely concealed by the hairs; calyp- 
tra about 3.5 mm. high; hypanthium cup-shaped, sparingly strigose 
within; style 8 mm. long, glabrous or with a few hairs at base; sta- 
mens 125-150, nearly as long as the style, the anthers 0.5 mm. long; 
petals 3, elliptic, rounded at the apex, 3 mm. wide and 4 mm. long 
in the mature bud; fruit not seen. The name is given in reference to 
the superficial resemblance between this species and Krugia ferru- 
ginea, of northern South America and the West Indies. Univ. of 
Mich. Neg. 465. 

Loreto: Iquitos, edge of lake, October 11, 1929, alt. 120 meters, 
Williams 3675 (F, type). Amazonian Brazil (basin of Rio Jurud, 
Krukoff5041). 

Calyptranthes longifolia Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 
46. 1857. C. pleophlebia Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 188. 
1907. 

Shrub to 3 meters high, thickly appressed-hairy in the inflores- 
cence, on the young branchlets and buds and petioles, with coarse 
rufous mostly dibrachiate hairs up to 1.5 (-2) mm. long; leaves at 
least when young with a few long hairs beneath; leaves elliptic or 
lanceolate, 4-6.5 (-8) cm. wide, 10-25 cm. long, 2.5-4.5 times as 
long as wide, gradually or abruptly acuminate at tip, rounded or 
often subcuneate at base, the margins decurrent on the stout short 
petiole 1.5-2.5 mm. thick, 4-6 (-8) mm. long; midvein impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 15-20 pairs, like the mar- 
ginal vein usually somewhat impressed above and rather prominent 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, somewhat arched 



r. FLORA OF PERU 603 

between them, 2-5 (-10) mm. from the margin; leaves rather dull 
when dry, at least the lower surface turning pale brown; upper sur- 
face smooth or inconspicuously impressed-puncticulate; lower surface 
sparingly glandular; inflorescence a pair of few-flowered stout cymes 
2-5 cm. long, the axis 1.5 mm. thick, from the lowest nodes of an 
axillary branch, this branch aborting or (usually, in the specimens 
seen) elongating and becoming leafy at tip, the cymes appearing 
lateral and supra-axillary; cymes about 15- or fewer-flowered, with 
1-5 (usually 2-3) nodes, each with an oblong or bluntly triangular 
bract, 3-3.5 mm. wide and 4-15 mm. long, at base; flowers sessile, 
mostly in crowded laterally compressed bracteate clusters of 3 to 5 
at the tips of the branches; bracts ovate, rounded on the back, acute, 
2-3.5 mm. long, persistent until the fruit is grown; buds about 2.5 
mm. long, obovoid, very shortly apiculate, completely hidden by the 
abundant hairs; calyptra explanate at anthesis, about 2 mm. wide; 
style undeveloped in specimens examined; stamens about 75, 3-4 
mm. long; fruit purple (Killip & Smith), probably globose, about 
1.5 cm. in diameter, 1-seeded, the seed kidney-shaped, 1 cm. long. 
As already pointed out by Amshoff (Med. Bot. Mus. Rijksuniv. 
Utrecht 86: 150. 1942), the flowers of a closely related species, 
Calyptranthes fasciculata Berg, are often unisexual. A similar con- 
dition apparently prevails in the present species, and in C. speciosa 
var. gigantifolia. F.M. Negs. 23383, 23388. 

San Martin: Chazuta, Rio Huallaga, Klug 4103. Loreto: Yuri- 
maguas, Poeppig 2162, type; Williams 4666. Stromgebiet des Uca- 
yali von 10 S. bis zur Mundung, Tessmann 3432 (F.M. Neg. 23394). 
Cerro de Escaler, 1300 meters, Ule 6751, type of C. pleophlebia. 
Junin: Colonia Perene, Killip & Smith 24933. Bolivia. 

Calyptranthes macrophylla Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1 : 
45. 1857. 

A shrub or tree to 5-6 meters high, the inflorescence covered with 
dark rusty fusiform, closely appressed dibrachiate hairs 0.3 mm. 
long; lower leaf-surface covered with very numerous, closely ap- 
pressed lustrous pale hairs 0.1-0.2 mm. long, mixed with a few 
darker dibrachiate hairs, these on the midrib up to 0.5 mm. long; 
leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate, 5.5-9 cm. wide, 18-24 cm. long, 
2.7-4.2 times as long as wide, narrowed from the middle or below 
to the long-acute or gradually long-acuminate tip, rounded at base, 
the margins decurrent on the stout pubescent petiole 2.5 mm. thick, 
10-12 mm. long; midvein impressed or sulcate above, raised its own 
thickness beneath; lateral veins very slender, 30-35 pairs, very 



604 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

slightly elevated both sides; marginal vein nearly straight, about 
equaling the laterals, 1.5-2 mm. from the inrolled margin; blades 
lustrous, greenish-brown or darker and minutely impressed-punctic- 
ulate above, pale tan and somewhat lustrous beneath from the cov- 
ering of small hairs which also nearly cover the numerous small dark 
glands; inflorescence axillary, the axis flattened and short, 3-10 mm. 
long, 2-3 mm. wide; flowering branches 1.5-6.5 cm. long, only the 
two lateral developed, or also a third representing the principal axis 
of the flowering branch; each branch 5- to many-flowered, the flowers 
sessile or on pedicels 2.5 mm. long; bracts lance-linear, about 5 mm. 
long, probably deciduous at anthesis; buds obconic, scarcely apicu- 
late, 3-4 mm. long; disk in fruit sunken, glabrous, about 3 mm. wide; 
fruit globose, 7-11 mm. in diameter, the hypanthium prolonged into 
a cylindrical neck 1-1.5 mm. long, 2-2.5 mm. wide; calyptra some- 
times persistent on the fruit, explanate, 2.5 mm. across. Flowering 
specimens of this species have apparently not been recently collected, 
but the species itself is well known from the upper Amazon region of 
Brazil and from nearby Venezuela. The Krukoff specimen cited 
below is included with some doubt as to its identity; the leaves are 
sparsely pubescent, and slightly more prominently acuminate than 
in the other specimens seen; the flowers are more numerous, and the 
pubescence of the inflorescence is of relatively loose and pale hairs; 
possibly it represents a distinct species but this cannot be determined 
with certainty from the material, which is in bud only, and with 
over-mature and weathered foliage. F.M. Neg. 31510. (See also a 
note under C. speciosa.} 

Rio Acre: Near mouth of Rio Macauhan, Krukoff 5498. Ama- 
zonian Brazil to Venezuela. 

Calyptranthes maxima McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 182. 
1956. 

A small tree, the branchlets and inflorescence puberulent with 
minute appressed brownish dibrachiate hairs about 0.1 mm. long, 
the inflorescence (and especially the hypanthium) pale scurfy as well; 
leaves elliptic, thin in texture, 7.5-10.5 cm. wide, 25-39 cm. long, 
3.5-4 times as long as wide, about equally narrowed to both ends, 
acuminate at tip, appearing cordate-auriculate at base when dry; 
petioles dark and stout, about 3 mm. thick, 4 mm. long, the thick- 
ened portion extending 5-6 mm. beneath the blade and there merg- 
ing into the unmodified midvein, the whole petiole depressed below 
the plane of the base of the leaf and lying in a short steep-sided fur- 
row; midvein centrally sulcate, but elevated on the upper surface, 



FLORA OF PERU 605 

prominent beneath; lateral veins very slender, 25-35 pairs in addi- 
tion to some intermediates, convex on both sides, more conspicuous 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, nearly straight, 
2-4 mm. from margin; blades pale green and lustrous above, paler 
and with small dark glandular dots beneath; inflorescence from the 
terminal node of a stout terminal bracteate shoot 1.5 cm. long; bracts 
of the shoot scarious, coriaceous, lance-attenuate, 6 mm. wide, 15-25 
mm. long; bracteoles scarious, linear, blunt-tipped, 2.5 mm. wide 
and 7 mm. long, deciduous at anthesis; inflorescence branches soli- 
tary, 6-10 cm. long, 1 to 2 times compound, 6- to 11-flowered, on 
stout compressed peduncles 3.5 mm. wide below the first node; lower 
divisions of the primary branch 8 mm. long, 3-flowered; all flowers 
except the terminal one on flat pedicel-like branchlets 2-3 mm. long, 
2 mm. wide; buds 7-8 mm. long, obovoid and nearly flat- topped, the 
calyptra nearly flat, scarcely apiculate, 5-6 mm. across, glabrous 
inside; hypanthium glabrous within, prolonged 2.5 mm. beyond the 
summit of the ovary; stamens about 200, 5 mm. long, densely fring- 
ing the orifice of the hypanthium in a zone 1.5 mm. wide; anthers 
0.6-0.8 mm. long; style stout, about 8 mm. long, 0.4 mm. in diam- 
eter, enlarged (perhaps deformed) distally; ovary bilocular, the 
ovules in each locule 2, ascending. Known only from the Trapecio 
amazonico, in Colombian territory very near to the Peruvian bound- 
ary, Schultes & Black 8526, type. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Colombia. 

Calyptranthes multiflora Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 
42. 1857. ?C. poeppigiana Berg, I.e. 45. 

A tree, pubescent in the inflorescence with numerous erect rufous 
hairs up to 0.2 mm. long, and usually with a few appressed, slightly 
longer and sometimes dibrachiate hairs near the base of the pan- 
icles; petioles and mid veins of young leaves near the base sparingly 
pubescent; leaves elliptic or narrowly ovate, 2-4 (-6) cm. wide, 
5-10 cm. long, (1.7-) 2.4-3 times as long as wide, about equally 
narrowed to the short-acuminate tip and the cuneate or subcuneate 
base, the margins decurrent on the short stout petiole 2-2.5 (-3.5) 
mm. long; midvein prominent beneath, not impressed above but 
plane or forming a low flat or convex ridge 0.5-1 mm. wide; lateral 
veins about 10 pairs, but often seeming to be 20 or more closely 
parallel veins on a side because of the many smaller intermediates; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals, somewhat arched between 
them, usually less than 1 mm. from margin (up to 4 mm.); leaves 
dull in drying, nearly concolorous or the lower surface paler, both 



606 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

sides with small inconspicuous glandular dots, the veins obscure 
above, evident beneath at least in mature leaves; inflorescence a 
pair of panicles, up to 8.5 cm. long and 2-3 cm. wide, from the basal 
nodes of a short axillary axis (or the axis elongating 3-4 mm. and 
producing a second and shorter pair of panicles from the next node) ; 
panicles 3 times compound, usually with about 5 irregular nodes, 
the lower branches up to 7- or 9-flowered; pedicels of the ultimate 
branchlets none, or up to 2 mm. long; flowers sessile above the brac- 
teoles, but the base of the hypanthium often narrowed into a pedicel- 
like base; bracts and bracteoles linear, glabrous, deciduous before 
anthesis, the former 2-4 mm. long, the latter 1-1.5 mm.; buds 2-2.5 
mm. long, glabrous, roughened by the prominent glands, apiculate, 
obovoid and usually attenuate at base; calyptra about one- third the 
length of the bud; petals 2 or more, spatulate, erose, 1 mm. long and 
nearly as wide; style 5 mm. long; stamens about 100, up to 6 mm. 
long; fruit not seen. F.M. Neg. 23384. 

Loreto: Timbuchi, Williams 1087. Manfinfa, Williams 1089. 
Amazonian Brazil, Venezuela and Colombia. 

Calyptranthes poeppigiana Berg, the type of which came from 
Ega, Brazil (Poeppig, s.n., in herb. Wien), is indistinguishable from 
C. multiflora except that the inflorescences are reduced to paired or 
glomerate spikelike branches 1.5-3 cm. long. Dr. Rechinger kindly 
made the type of C. poeppigiana available for my study, but I have 
not seen any other specimens resembling it, and I suppose that it 
represents an aberrant form of the relatively widespread C. multi- 
flora. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 1018. 

Calyptranthes paniculata R. & P. Fl. Peruv. Prodr. 74. t. 13. 
1794. C. fragrans in herb. Ruiz, ex Berg, Linnaea 27: 20. 1855. 

Tree to 30 meters high, completely glabrous or the vegetative 
buds strigose with reddish fusiform dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. 
long, and a few similar hairs persistent at the base and about the 
nodes of the inflorescence; leaves elliptic to lance-ovate or ovate, 
2.5-4 (-6.5) cm. wide, 8-12.5 cm. long, (2-) 2.5-3.2 times as long as 
wide, bluntly short-acuminate, at base cuneate or sub-cuneate, or 
occasionally somewhat rounded, the margins decurrent on the petiole 
1.5 mm. thick, 7 mm. long; midvein broadly sulcate above, promi- 
nent beneath; lateral veins very slender, about 12 (-15) pairs, ob- 
scure above, slightly elevated beneath; marginal vein about equaling 
the laterals and arched between them, 2-3 (-6) mm. from margin, 
with an outer, very fine, submarginal vein beyond it; leaves in dry- 



FLORA OF PERU 607 

ing pale green or brown above, somewhat lustrous and impressed- 
puncticulate, the lower surface greenish-brown, sparingly and mi- 
nutely gland-dotted; inflorescence axillary, the axis tangentially 
flattened, 2.5-3 mm. long and wide, the 2 flowering branches from 
the lowest nodes, 8-10 cm. long, 3 to 4 times compound, many- 
flowered, divaricately and irregularly branched, the peduncle terete 
or nearly so, 1-1.5 mm. thick; branches alternate or opposite, the 
nodes often enlarged, the ultimate branchlets divaricate or somewhat 
reflexed, 2-10 mm. long, distally enlarged and bearing 1-3 sessile 
terminal flowers; bracts deciduous at anthesis, ciliate, 1-1.5 mm. 
long; buds 3-3.5 mm. long, obovoid or constricted about the mid- 
dle, narrowed to the broad sessile base; calyptra about half as long 
as the persistent hypanthium, broadly infundibuliform, 1.3-1.5 mm. 
wide, with a conic apiculum 0.5 mm. long; hypanthium after dehis- 
cence campanulate, 1.5-2 mm. across the orifice; fruit and flowers 
unknown. F.M. Neg. 23387. 

Huanuco: Pozuzo, Ruiz (type, in herb. Madrid?, not seen). 
Rio Acre: near mouth of Rio Macauhan, Krukoff 5258, 5487. Local- 
ity uncertain: Ruiz (isotype of C. fragrans, herb. Geneva ex herb. 
Berol. ex herb. Lambert); Ruiz 24/45 (herb. Chicago ex herb. 
Madrid). 

Calyptranthes plica ta McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 182. 1956. 

A shrub 4.5 meters high, nearly glabrous except that the inflores- 
cence is appressed-hirsutulous with rufous partly dibrachiate hairs 
up to 0.6 mm. long, the petioles and the midveins on the lower sur- 
face of the leaf puberulent; leaves large, sessile, obovate, 10-12 cm. 
wide, 30-38 cm. long, 2.5-3 times as long as wide, short-acuminate, 
narrowed to a width of 4-5 cm. near base and the margins there 
broadly decurrent and plicate on the enlarged petiolar base which is 
5 mm. thick on the lower surface; mid vein impressed or deeply sul- 
cate above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 20-25 pairs, impressed- 
above, prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals and but slightly arched between them, 2-4 mm. from the mar- 
gin; upper surface of blade dull and obscurely impressed-punctate; 
lower surface dull and probably paler, without apparent glands; in- 
florescence a divaricately branched, 3 times compound, bracteate 
panicle up to 7 cm. long, the panicle-branches very slender, up to 
1.5 mm. in diameter, the nodes with conspicuous persistent divari- 
cate boat-shaped attenuate bracts 2-3 mm. long (the lowest up to 
1.5 mm. wide, 5 mm. long); flowers 50-100, mostly sessile in pairs 
along the spikelike secondary branches of the panicle, or in 3's at 



608 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

the tips of the branches; immature buds obovoid, 3.5 mm. long, the 
calyptra pointed and somewhat apiculate, the hypanthium turbinate, 
glabrous within, prolonged at least 1 mm. beyond the summit of the 
ovary; stamens about 60; style not seen in buds examined; petals 
none. A distinctive species, but unfortunately known only from 
the type specimen, which includes a single inflorescence with half- 
grown buds, and another, detached inflorescence with very much 
younger, undeveloped buds. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil (Amazonas, Mun. Sao Paulo 
de Olivenca, Krukoff 8432, type). 

Calyptranthes pulchella DC. Prodr. 3: 257. 1828. 

A tree to 8 meters high, glabrous except the vegetative buds and 
youngest branchlets strigose (usually very sparingly) with reddish 
hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; branchlets 2-winged, the wings up to 0.5 
mm. high, arising just above the axil at one node and terminating 
between the leaf -bases at the node above, in an auricle-like prolonga- 
tion 1-1.7 mm. long; leaves obovate or broadly elliptic, 1.5-3.3 cm. 
wide, 2.5-6 cm. long, 1.5-2 times as long as wide, the apex rounded, 
acute but blunt-tipped, or broadly and shortly acuminate, the base 
acute or cuneate, the margins decurrent on the stout channeled peti- 
ole 1 mm. thick, 2-3 mm. long; midvein sulcate and mostly impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins very slender and scarcely 
apparent, about 10-12 pairs with several intermediates; marginal 
vein like the laterals, 0.5-1 mm. from the margin; leaves dull in dry- 
ing, pale green and indistinctly impressed-puncticulate above, pale 
brown and dotted with small dark glands beneath; inflorescence 
axillary, the axis either abortive and 1 mm. long, or elongate and 
leafy; flowering branches 2, 3-5.5 cm. long, opposite, arising from 
the lowest nodes of the axis, filiform or very slender, terete at base, 
gland-dotted, the peduncle distally enlarged and compressed, 2-2.5 
cm. long, up to a little more than 1 mm. wide below the first node, 
often more slender; flowers few, mostly 3-11, sessile on the axis and 
at the tip or the lowest on lateral branches 3-6 mm. long; bracts and 
bracteoles not seen; buds 4-7 mm. long, 2-3 mm. thick, oblong or 
constricted above the middle, prominently gland-dotted and obconic 
above the broadly sessile base, obtusely pointed and rounded or ob- 
scurely apiculate, the calyptra urceolate, 2-3 mm. long; style gla- 
brous, 6-8 mm. long (often with a subglobose small gall near the 
middle, the gall caused by a member of the Cynipidae); stamens 
about 125, up to 5-6 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. long; fruit 
globose, 8 mm. in diameter, thickly glandular-verruculose. The 



FLORA OF PERU 609 

Peruvian plant resembles the type of C. pulchella 5 parviflora Berg, in 
Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1 : 516. 1859, namely Spruce's no. 2729 from near 
Panure" on the Rio Vaupe"s. The type of C. pulchella var. pulchella, 
a collection made by Martius in the State of Minas Geraes, has the 
inflorescence and hypanthium sparsely red-strigose, but a compari- 
son made at Munich in 1954 between this specimen and an isotype 
of d parviflora indicates that these are conspecific. The Peruvian 
specimens have larger buds than the plants collected by Martius and 
Spruce; for notes on the varieties of this species see Mem. N. Y. 
Bot. Card. 10: 76-77. 1958. F.M. Neg. 19897 (var. pulchella}. 
Univ. of Mich. Neg. 1031 (var. parviflora). 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, Klug 1373. Timbuchi, Williams 959. 
Southern Brazil; Amazonian lowlands, Brazil to Colombia. 

Calyptranthes rufotomentosa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 
183. 1956. 

A shrub, the inflorescence densely tomentose with dark reddish- 
brown tangled hairs up to 1 mm. long; leaves glabrous, oblanceolate, 
4-5 cm. wide, 15-21 cm. long, about 4 times as long as wide, nar- 
rowly acuminate with blunt-pointed acumen, the margins attenuate 
toward the base from above the middle, then abruptly narrowed and 
passing into the ventral surface of the nearly terete, stout, dark gla- 
brous petiole 3 mm. thick, 7 mm. long; midvein elevated above in a 
flattened ridge or merely convex, elevated beneath its own thick- 
ness; lateral veins 10-15 pairs, rather distant and without conspic- 
ous intermediates, convex but not prominent above, more evident 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, nearly straight, 
prominent beneath, 3-4 mm. from margin; blades dark and lustrous 
above, and obscurely impressed-punctate, the lower surface dull and 
paler; inflorescence (not seen attached) about 6 cm. long, 3 times 
compound, about 50-flowered, the flowers clustered toward the tips 
of the branches, sessile; bracts scarious, glabrous or glabrescent dor- 
sally, the larger ones linguaeform, 3 mm. wide, 8 mm. long, subper- 
sistent; buds probably 3-4 mm. long before opening; hypanthium in 
open flowers urceolate, 4 mm. long, rounded at base, 3-3.5 mm. 
across the mouth, glabrous within, produced 1.5 mm. beyond the 
summit of the ovary; calyptra conic, apiculate, 1 mm. high, 1.5-2 
mm. across; stamens about 75, 2 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. long; 
style not seen; petals 3(?), narrow and slender-pointed, 0.6 mm. wide, 
1.7 mm. long. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil (Amazonas, Sao Paulo de 
Olivenca, Ducke 2240, type). 



610 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Calyptranthes ruiziana Berg, Linnaea 27: 22. 1855. 

Shrub or small tree to 5 meters high, the branchlets not or very 
narrowly winged, the branchlets, inflorescence and vegetative buds 
thinly covered with yellowish- or reddish-brown fusiform appressed 
dibrachiate hairs mostly about 0.3 mm. long (up to 0.6 mm. long 
or more, on leaf -bases) ; lower leaf-surfaces with few dark hairs and 
usually with rather numerous persistent pale appressed hairs; leaves 
elliptic, 2.5-4 cm. wide, 5.5-10 cm. long, 2-3 times as long as wide, 
acuminate, the base acute, the margins cuneately decurrent on the 
stout petiole 1-1.3 mm. thick, 6-7 mm. long; midvein sulcate above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 12-15 pairs or apparently more 
because of the numerous parallel intermediate veins, obscure above, 
somewhat elevated but not very prominent beneath; marginal vein 
about equaling the laterals and little arched between them, 0.7-2 mm. 
from the margin; blades smooth and somewhat lustrous, green or 
drying brown above, impressed-puncticulate but this often obscure 
in mature leaves; lower surface yellow-green or whitish, obscurely or 
apparently not at all dotted; inflorescence axillary, the axis tangen- 
tially flattened, glabrous, 2 mm. wide, very short or up to 10 mm. 
long; flowering branches 2, from the lowest nodes, 3 times compound, 
many-flowered, (4-) 6-10 cm. long, the panicle 4-5 cm. wide at base, 
the branches opposite or alternate, the flowers sessile, aggregated 
toward the tips of the branches and mostly in 3- to 10-flowered 
clusters, these short-pedunculate except the terminal; bracts decid- 
uous before anthesis; buds 2-2.5 mm. long, obovate, shortly apicu- 
late or nearly rounded at tip, the base obconic, strigose; hypanthium 
after dehiscence campanulate, 1.5-1.7 mm. long, the orifice 1.3-1.7 
mm. wide in flower and fruit; calyptra concave, 1.3-1.7 mm. wide; 
style 4-4.5 mm. long; stamens about 60, up to 5 mm. long, the an- 
thers about 0.3 mm. long; fruit globose or oblate, 4-6 mm. in diam- 
eter, thickly gland-dotted, the hypanthium prolonged into a short 
neck more than 1 mm. wide and nearly 1 mm. long. 

Loreto: Along Rio Itaya, Williams 175. Along Rio Mazan near 
Iquitos, Williams 8148. Without locality: Ruiz (type, in herb. 
Berlin, not seen); Ruiz 5105 (probable isotype, herb. US ex herb. 
Berlin ex herb. Lambert) . 

Tentatively referred to this species, but with slightly larger, 
nearly eglandular fruit, and narrower leaves, is Killip & Smith's 
no. 29199, from San Lorenzo, Loreto, between mouths of Rio Pas- 
taza and Rio Huallaga. A plant which will be found here in the key, 
but perhaps represents another species, is Killip & Smith's no. 28293 



FLORA OF PERU 611 

(herb. NY), from between Yurimaguas and Balsapuerto, on the 
lower Rio Huallaga. The leaves are up to 11 cm. wide and more 
than 20 cm. long, with markedly impressed veins (including the 
marginal and the 15 or more pairs of laterals). The lower panicle 
branches are 5 cm. long. The calyptra is conic, apiculate, 1 mm. 
long; fruit 6-7 mm. in diameter, with style 4.5 mm. long. 

Calyptranthes sessilis McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 183. 1956. 

A small shrub, glabrous except a few minute flat brownish hairs 
at the base of the hypanthium; leaves ovate, cordate, sessile (the 
broad compressed petiolar base up to 3 mm. long and wide), 4-7 cm. 
wide, 9-12 cm. long, 1.8-2.5 times as long as wide; blades acuminate, 
the acumen rounded at very tip; midvein prominent beneath, im- 
pressed above; lateral veins about 15 pairs, impressed above; mar- 
ginal vein impressed above, about equaling the laterals and arched 
between them, 3-6 mm. from the margin, and with a smaller vein 
parallel to it and between it and the margin; leaves dull in drying, 
the upper surface obscurely glandular at maturity, the lower more 
plainly gland-dotted; inflorescence axillary or falsely terminal, con- 
sisting of paired narrow panicles 6 cm. long, these opposite and aris- 
ing from the two sides of a primordium in the axil of each of the 
terminal leaves; panicles sometimes bracteate at base, the bracts 
lanceolate, keeled, 3 mm. wide, 6 mm. long; peduncle 2-3 cm. long, 
somewhat compressed and 1.7 mm. wide below the first node; nodes 
about 5, somewhat irregular, the lower ones bearing paired pedicel- 
late clusters of 3 flowers each, or all nodes with the pedicels 1-flow- 
ered and opposite or subopposite; bracteoles and bracts (except the 
basal) not seen; flowers sessile, or on stout pedicels up to 2 mm. long, 
0.5 mm. thick; buds fusiform, 6-7 mm. long and 2 mm. thick, taper- 
ing about equally to the slender hypanthium and the cylindrical apex, 
or somewhat abruptly contracted into the beak; operculum 4-4.5 
mm. long; petals none; style 8.5 mm. long; stamens 60-75, about 
8 mm. long; anthers broadly elliptic, about 1 mm. long; fruit globose, 
7 mm. thick; seed 6 mm. long, the radicle about half as long, com- 
pressed to one side of the cotyledons. Calyptranthes spruceana Berg, 
in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 45. 1857, based on Spruce 1551 from the 
lower Rio Negro, is very similar. In that species, however, the buds 
are said to be globose and 5 mm. in diameter, the leaves are obtusely 
rounded at the tips, the veins are not impressed on the upper sur- 
face, and the fruits are more clustered near the tips of the inflores- 
cence. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 446. 



612 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, Williams 4583 (F, type); Killip & Smith 
27603. 

Calyptranthes Simula ta McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 184. 
1956. 

Shrub or tree to 9 meters high, the inflorescence [and probably 
the vegetative buds and young leaves and branchlets] with a thin 
covering of flat fusiform yellowish T brown appressed hairs mostly 
about 0.2-0.3 mm. long, a few similar hairs persisting on the lower 
leaf-surface; leaves ovate or lanceolate, 3.5-6 cm. wide and 9-15 cm. 
long, or on vigorous branches 7-8 cm. wide, 18-25 cm. long, all 2.5- 
3 (-3.6) times as long as wide, somewhat narrowed toward the apex 
from the middle or below and prominently triangular-acuminate, 
gradually rounded to the subcuneate base, the margins decurrent on 
the stout dark petiole 1.5-2.5 mm. thick, 7-12 mm. long; midvein 
broadly sulcate above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 20-25 or 
more pairs in addition to several intermediate ones, all slender, 
slightly raised on both surfaces, prominulous beneath; marginal vein 
similar to the laterals and arched between them, 2-3 (-5) mm. from 
margin, a very fine submarginal vein visible beyond it; blades dry- 
ing green, the upper surface smooth and impressed-puncticulate, the 
lower yellow-green, dull, finely dark-dotted; inflorescence axillary, 
the short axis much flattened tangentially, up to 3 mm. wide and 
about 4 mm. long, the paired flowering branches from the lowest 
node, 6-11 cm. long, the peduncle 1.5-2 (-4) cm. long, somewhat 
angled or compressed, 1.5-2 mm. wide below the first node; panicle 
narrow, or broader and loosely many-flowered, 3 to 4 times com- 
pound, the lower branches up to 3-5 cm. long; flowers numerous, 
sessile, mostly in 3's on short peduncles along the branches and near 
the tips; branches opposite or mostly alternate; bracts deciduous 
before anthesis; buds 2-2.5 mm. long, obovoid, turbinate and more 
or less rufous-strigose near base, and often arachnoid-whitened as 
well, the apex rounded or shortly apiculate; hypanthium after de- 
hiscence broadly campanulate, 1.3-1.5 mm. long, the orifice about 
1.5 mm. wide; calyptra explanate, 1.3-2 mm. wide; style 5-6 mm. 
long or a little less; stamens 40-50, 4-6 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. 
long. This species is known only from specimens in which the flow- 
ering branches are borne in the terminal axils of the twigs, on old 
wood or what appears to have been a vigorous shoot of the preced- 
ing season. The normal size and shape of the leaves on average 
twigs cannot be determined with certainty, nor can the winged or 
non-winged condition of the young branchlets be ascertained. It is 



FLORA OF PERU 613 

possible that this plant is conspecific with Calyptranthes tessmannii, 
which it resembles in many respects. From the specimens at hand, 
however, the two are abundantly separable by many characters. 

Loreto:'lquitos, Aug. 2-8, 1929, Killip & Smith 26916, 27352. 
Iquitos, Tessmann 5372 (G); Peru-Colombia boundary, forest near 
Rio Putumayo, Sept. 26-Oct. 10, 1930, G. King 1614 (MICH, type). 

A collection from Tarapoto, San Martin, Williams 6539, is prob- 
ably the same species; it bears immature globose or oblate fruit about 
1 cm. in diameter; the pubescence is exactly that of C. simulata and 
the leaves are very like those of that species except that the lateral 
veins are hardly more than 15 pairs; the fertile axis is continuous 
and leafy and the flowering branch is lateral from its base. 

Calyptranthes speciosa Sagot, Ann. Sci. Nat. ser. 6, 20: 187. 
1885, var. gigantifolia (McVaugh) McVaugh, Mem. N. Y. Bot. 
Card. 10: 79. 1958. C. gigantifolia McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 
181. 1956. 

Tree up to 20 meters high, the inflorescence densely appressed 
pubescent with coarse rufous mostly dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. 
long, the leaves glabrous or pubescent beneath especially when young 
with a few pale flaccid hairs or with a few dibrachiate hairs inter- 
mixed; leaves elliptic or oblong, 6-15 cm. wide, 14-38 cm. long, 2.5-4 
times as long as wide, rather abruptly narrowed at both ends, the 
tip narrowly acuminate, the base rounded and the margins decur- 
rent on the stout petiole 8-12 mm. long, 1.5-3.5 mm. thick; mid vein 
and usually the marginal vein impressed above, all veins prominent 
beneath; lateral veins 20-30 pairs; marginal vein continuous, about 
equaling the laterals and somewhat arched between them, 2-4 mm. 
from the nearly plane margin, usually with a smaller outer vein be- 
yond it; leaves often browning in drying, the upper surface smooth, 
sparingly and often obscurely impressed-puncticulate, the lower sur- 
face gland-dotted; inflorescence axillary and usually 4 times com- 
pound, often appearing supra-axillary when the central axis elongates 
and becomes leafy, or terminal when no more than one axillary bud 
develops at a terminal node; basal and longest branches of the pan- 
icle 3 times compound, 6-10 cm. long with up to 100 flowers, divari- 
cately branched, the branches compressed and up to 2 mm. wide 
below the nodes; buds 3-5 mm. long, sessile, obovate, rounded or 
obscurely apiculate at tips, clustered near the tips of the branchlets; 
calyptra about half as high as the persistent hypanthium; bracts and 
bracteoles mostly deciduous before anthesis, lanceolate to ovate, 
1-2.5 mm. long or the lowest bracts persistent, foliaceous, ovate, 



614 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

1.5 cm. long, 6-8 mm. wide; style apparently defective in all flowers 
seen, 1-1.5 mm. long; stamens 150-175, about 5 mm. long, cream- 
color or golden-yellow (Klug), the anthers about 0.5 mm. long; fruit 
globose, not seen mature, but by analogy with related species prob- 
ably 8-10 mm. in diameter. Colombian specimens collected by 
Mutis (nos. 1940, 2234, 2951, 3961, and 5754) appear to belong to 
this variety also. Also closely related is Calyptranthes macrophylla 
Berg, based on Poeppig 2739, from Ega, Brazil. This latter species, 
however, differs markedly in leaf-characters: its leaves are more 
coriaceous, acute rather than acuminate, less prominently veined; 
the marginal vein is close to the margin and not impressed above; 
the lower surface is densely pubescent with minute appressed pale 
hairs and with numerous dibrachiate hairs intermixed. In this last 
respect C. macrophylla agrees precisely with C. speciosa var. speciosa 
of the Guianas. C. gigantifolia is scarcely distinguishable from typ- 
ical C. speciosa and surely does not merit recognition as a distinct 
species. Its leaves are glabrous or nearly so beneath (densely and 
finely pubescent, as noted above, in C. speciosa) ; the midvein is im- 
pressed on the upper surface (in C. speciosa sometimes impressed but 
more often plane or convex) ; the marginal vein lies 2-4 mm. from the 
margin (as against usually less than 1 mm. in C. speciosa) ; the flowers 
in C. gigantifolia appear to be somewhat larger than those of C. speci- 
osa and with more numerous stamens (150-175 as against 80), but 
seem otherwise indistinguishable. The inflorescence in the two 
plants, with its somewhat unusual supernumerary branches, appears 
to be identical. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 486. 

San Martin: Juanjui, Klug 4277 (US, type). Loreto: Florida, 
Klug 2332, 2347. Bolivia, Amazonian Colombia. 

Calyptranthes tessmannii Burret, in herb., ex McVaugh, 
Fieldiana Bot. 29: 184. 1956. 

A shrub or tree, the branchlets and vegetative buds, inflorescence 
and petioles loosely appressed pubescent with yellow-brown fusi- 
form dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, a few hairs persisting 
on the lower surface of the leaves, especially on the mid veins; branch- 
lets narrowly wing-angled, the wings arising above the axil at one 
node and terminating between the leaf-bases at the node above, the 
terminal auricle wider than the wing, up to 0.5 mm. wide, 1.7-2.5 
mm. long; leaves elliptic, 3-4.5 cm. wide, 8-11.5 cm. long, about 2.5 
times as long as wide, nearly equally rounded to both ends, the tip 
abruptly and caudately acuminate, the acumen 3 mm. wide at base, 
1.3-2.5 cm. long; base of blade acute or slightly rounded, the mar- 



FLORA OF PERU 615 

gins cuneately decurrent on the stout petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 8-10 
mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral 
veins about 15 pairs, slightly elevated on both surfaces, prominu- 
lous beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched 
between them, prominulous beneath, 1-2.5 mm. from margin, with 
a faint submarginal vein sometimes discernible beyond it; blades 
dark or dull green above, smooth and impressed-punctate, the lower 
surface paler, yellowish-green, dotted with small glands; fertile 
branches leafy, axillary, the primary axis 5 mm. long or less, tan- 
gentially much flattened, 3 mm. wide below the first node, from 
which arise the 2 opposite narrow panicles 5-10 cm. long and up to 
2.5 cm. wide at base; peduncle 2-3.5 cm. long, somewhat com- 
pressed, 1.5-2.5 mm. wide below the first node; lower branches 
about 1.5 cm. long, 10-flowered, the branches from the upper nodes 
shorter, often alternate, the flowers sessile, fewer, in short-peduncu- 
late clusters; bracts narrowly elliptic or oblanceolate, 3 mm. long, 
partly persistent until anthesis; buds 3-3.5 mm. long, fusiform, ap- 
pressed brown-hairy, the narrow apiculate tip 1 mm. long (up to 
2 mm. on the calyptra after dehiscence) ; calyptra about 2 mm. wide, 
the hypanthium after dehiscence broadly infundibuliform or cam- 
panulate, less than 2 mm. long; style 6 mm. long; stamens about 50, 
as long as the style, attached about at the line of dehiscence and 
falling almost with the calyptra; anthers about 0.3 mm. long. 
F.M. Neg. 23395. 

Loreto: Stromgebiet des Maranon von Iquitos aufwarts bis zur 
Santiago-Miindung am Pongo de Manseriche, ca. 77 30' west, G. 
Tessmann 4832 in 1924 (G, type). 

Calyptranthes tridymantha Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 
48: 188. 1907. 

Shrub 3-9 meters high, loosely tomentose on the young branch- 
lets and vegetative buds and inflorescence, with golden-yellow di- 
brachiate hairs up to more than 1 mm. long, the basal stalk of the 
hair erect and often as long as the spreading or ascending branches; 
mature leaves often with a few hairs persisting beneath; branchlets 
narrowly 2-winged, the wing up to 0.5 mm. wide, arising above the 
axil at one node and terminating between the leaf-bases at the node 
above, in an auricle-like prolongation 2 mm. long; leaves elliptic, 
ovate, or occasionally obovate, 2-3.5 cm. wide, 3-5.5 cm. long, 1.8- 
2.4 times as long as wide, the apex rounded to obscurely and bluntly 
acuminate, the base rounded, or somewhat narrowed from below 
the middle and abruptly contracted to the very base, the margins 



616 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

shortly decurrent on the petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 2-2.5 mm. long; 
midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 10-12 
pairs, slightly elevated and visible on both sides, but very slender 
and with numerous intermediate veins nearly the same size; mar- 
ginal vein distinctly double, the inner about equaling the laterals 
and slightly arched between them, 1-1.5 mm. from margin; leaves 
dull green and obscurely or not at all impressed-puncticulate above, 
pale brown beneath, the glands not or scarcely apparent; inflores- 
cence axillary, the axis abortive, the flowering branches 2, 3-5 cm. 
long, each few- (about 9-) flowered, opposite from the lowest nodes, 
tomentose and very minutely gland-dotted, the peduncle 2-2.5 cm. 
long, slightly compressed distally and about 1 mm. wide near sum- 
mit; lateral secondary branches usually a single pair, 6-20 mm. long; 
flowers sessile, in terminal triads; bracts deciduous before anthesis, 
subfoliaceous, less than 1 cm. long; bracteoles not seen; buds prob- 
ably about 5 mm. long, shortly apiculate; calyptriform calyx [i.e., 
the calyptra?] 2-2.5 mm. across (Diels); style longer than the sta- 
mens; stamens 6 mm. long, white (Diels) ; petals none. A distinctive 
species by virtue of the golden-yellow tomentum of erect, stalked 
and branched hairs. F.M. Neg. 23396. 

Rio Acre: Near mouth of Rio Macauhan, Krukoff 5549. Ama- 
zonian Brazil. 

3. MYRCIA DC. 

Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 35-80, 82-129. 1855-1856; and in 
Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 59-143, 150-210. 1857. 

Calyx-lobes 5 (rarely 4), distinct and imbricated in bud and in 
flower, and usually persistent on the fruit; hypanthium variously or 
not at all prolonged beyond the summit of the ovary. Petals usu- 
ally 5, often half as long as the stamens or longer, and conspicuous. 
Inflorescence-axis usually prolonged, with several pairs of lateral 
branches. 

A large genus of tropical America; Myrcia DC. and Aulomyrcia 
Berg, according to Berg, together comprised more than 400 species. 
The supposed distinction between these two groups lies in the hypan- 
thium, which in Myrcia is described as "scarcely produced beyond 
the ovary, and constricted beneath the calyx," and in Aulomyrcia 
is described as "strongly produced beyond the ovary, but not con- 
stricted beneath the calyx." Although numerous species can be 
assigned to one genus or the other on the basis of this character, 
it seems quite impossible to apply the character generally because 



FLORA OF PERU 617 

various other species occupy positions intermediate between the ex- 
tremes, and the placement of a given species in Myrcia rather than 
Aulomyrcia, or the reverse, can hardly be made objectively. I have 
therefore followed Bentham, in Benth. & Hook. f. Gen. PI. 1: 716. 
1865; Kiaerskou, Enum. Myrt. Bras. 63. 1893; and Urban, Bot. 
Jahrb. 19: 577-582. 1895, in relegating Aulomyrcia to synonymy. 

Leaves sessile, cordate. 

Leaves ovate, 13-17 cm. wide, 1.7-2 times as long as wide, the 
veins impressed above; inflorescence decompound, stout, 20 
cm. long or more; buds 7 mm. long or more; northeastern 
Peru (Loreto) M. obumbrans 

Leaves lanceolate, 3.5-5 cm. wide, 2.5^4 times as long as wide, 
the lateral veins not impressed above; inflorescence few- 
flowered, 4-7 cm. long; buds 4-6 mm. long; northern Bolivia 
(La Paz) M. connata 

Leaves definitely petiolate, cuneate or rounded at base or occasion- 
ally subcordate. 

Inflorescence at anthesis (and usually in fruit) conspicuously 
bracteate, the bracts ovate, pointed, 6-12 mm. long; calyx- 
lobes 2.5-6 mm. long, lanceolate or ovate, much longer than 
wide; branchlets long-hirsute. 

Hairs of branchlets reddish-brown, up to 3.5 mm. long; calyx- 
lobes 4, the larger ones 6 mm. long M. huallagae 

Hairs of branchlets yellowish-brown, up to 2 mm. long; calyx- 
lobes 5, rarely 4, the larger ones 2.5-4 mm. long. 

M . bracteata 

Inflorescence with small inconspicuous bracts which are deciduous 
before the flowers open or occasionally at least in part per- 
sistent; calyx-lobes 3 mm. long or usually less, rounded to 
sub-truncate or triangular, mostly as wide as, or wider than, 
long; branchlets various. 

Leaves 2.5-7 cm. long, narrowly elliptic or oblanceolate, mostly 
5-6 times as long as wide, blunt- tipped M. salicifolia 

Leaves broader, usually larger and not more than 3 times as 
long as wide, if narrow and elongate the tips acuminate or 
narrowly acute. 

Summit of the ovary, and interior of the prolonged and cup- 
like hypanthium, glabrous; fruit usually globose, 5-6 mm. 
in diameter. 



618 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Outer surface of the hypanthium glabrous, the branches of 
the inflorescence glabrous or sparingly pubescent. 

Leaves small, less than 3 cm. long, elliptic to obovate, 
rounded to blunt-pointed at tip, mostly cuneate at 
base; inflorescence 3-4 cm. long, often exceeding the 
leaves; flowers mostly 11 or fewer. . .M. myrtillifolia 

Leaves mostly 4-10 cm. long, elliptic or ovate, rarely 
obovate; inflorescence larger, if as little as 5 cm. 
long then equaling or shorter than the leaves; 
flowers usually more numerous. 

Pubescence of inflorescence and young vegetative 
growth rufous; plant often drying reddish-brown 
or nearly black; glandular dots inconspicuous or 
scarcely apparent on the upper leaf-surface, or 
impressed-punctate. 

Buds 2.5-3.5 mm. long; inflorescence glabrous or 
nearly so, only the bracts and leaf-buds pubes- 
cent; plants green to reddish-brown in drying. 

M. yungasensis 

Buds 1.7-2.5 mm. long; inflorescence thinly ap- 
pressed-pubescent except the hypanthium; 
plants often blackening in drying . M. amazonica 

Pubescence silvery-white or yellowish-white, the plant 
drying bright green; glandular dots abundant and 
conspicuous on both leaf-surfaces (inconspicuous 
in some Peruvian specimens); inflorescence gla- 
brous or nearly so; buds 2 mm. long or less. 

M. multiflora 

Outer surface of the hypanthium and branches of the in- 
florescence pubescent. 

Hairs of the hypanthium flexuous, rufous or white-tipped; 
calyx-lobes membranous, bluntly triangular, less 
than 1 mm. long and wide, separate and imbricate, 
with evident sinuses between them . . M. mathewsiana 

Hairs of the hypanthium somewhat stiff and appressed, 
yellowish or pale reddish ; calyx as a whole truncate, 
the individual lobes thickened and glandular-ver- 
ruculose, about 1.5 mm. wide and 0.5 mm. high, 
together appearing as a 5-notched ring at the sum- 
mit of the hypanthium M . aliena 



FLORA OF PERU 619 

Summit of the ovary and usually the interior of the hypan- 
thium hairy; hypanthium variously or not at all pro- 
longed beyond the ovary, the center of the flower thus 
flat or variously depressed; fruit various. 

Outer surface of the hypanthium glabrous, the entire plant 
glabrous or nearly so; fruiting hypanthium prolonged 
into a neck 2 mm. long at the apex of the fruit. 

M. subglabra 

Outer surface of the hypanthium hairy, usually strongly so; 
fruiting hypanthium, as far as known, not prolonged 
into a neck. 

Inflorescence slender, the axis often terete or, if com- 
pressed, mostly less than 1.5 mm. wide (measured 
just below the lowest branches) ; small-flowered spe- 
cies, the disk 1-2 (rarely to 2.5) mm. wide; fruit 
ellipsoid or oblong, 5-9 mm. long. 

Inflorescence 7- to 10- (rarely 20-) flowered, once- 
compound, the slender terete axis 1 mm. thick, 
3-10 cm. long; plant hirsute with spreading 
brownish-yellow hairs up to 1.5 mm. long. 

M. poeppigiana 

Inflorescence many-flowered, 3 to 4 times compound; 
axis terete or somewhat compressed, if hirsute the 
hairs ascending or appressed, 1 mm. long or less. 

Leaves impressed-punctate above even at maturity; 

lateral veins scarcely or not at all apparent 

above; inflorescence with minute mostly erect 

hairs 0.1 mm. long and usually with some 

longer hairs as well. 

Leaves mostly lanceolate, rounded at base, abun- 
dantly and conspicuously punctate; petiole 

3 mm. long or less M. sylvatica 

Leaves elliptic to lanceolate or ovate, mostly cune- 
ate at base, punctate but at maturity often 
inconspicuously so; petiole 4-6 mm. long. 

M. paivae 

Leaves not impressed-punctate above; lateral veins 
apparent above; inflorescence sometimes nearly 
glabrous, usually uniformly strigose to hirsute 



620 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

with appressed or ascending hairs up to 0.5- 
1 mm. long. 

Petioles 5-7 mm. long; leaves cuneate or some- 
what rounded at base; [slender or depau- 
perate forms of] M. fallax 

Petioles 1-3 (-4) mm. long; leaves appearing sub- 
sessile, rounded and often cordate-auriculate 

at base M . splendens 

Inflorescence relatively stout, the axis and branches com- 
pressed or strongly flattened; axis at least 1.5 mm. 
wide (often 2.5-4 mm. wide) (measured just below 
the lowest branches); flowers small or large; fruit 
various. 

Calyx in bud and in fruit truncate as seen from the 
side, much shorter than the globe of the petals 
before anthesis; calyx-lobes one-half to one-third 
as long as wide, with truncated or slightly rounded 
distal margins, forming a nearly straight band en- 
circling the summit of the hairy hemispheric or 
broadly cup-shaped hypanthium; center of flower 
depressed, the hypanthium prolonged up to 2 mm. 
beyond the summit of the ovary, the cavity hairy 
or in M. aliena nearly glabrous. 
Buds 2-2.5 mm. long or less; disk 2-2.5 mm. wide; 
calyx-lobes 0.3-0.5 mm. high, usually fleshy and 
often glandular-verruculose on the back. 
Inflorescence pale-strigose, the plants nearly gla- 
brous at maturity; lateral veins not impressed 
above, smooth and inconspicuous beneath; 
petals glabrous or essentially so .... M. aliena 
Inflorescence, and the whole plant, more or less 
velutinous with brownish red hairs; lateral 
veins impressed above, conspicuous and hairy 
beneath; petals glabrous or strigose without. 

M. directa 

Buds 4-5 mm. long; disk 4 mm. wide; petals ap- 
pressed-silky without; calyx-lobes thin-edged 
(sometimes sparingly roughened on the back), 

1.3-1.5 mm. high M. neesiana 

Calyx-margin not truncate, the lobes together not form- 
ing a recognizable unit but individually spreading, 



FLORA OF PERU 621 

with evident sinuses between them; lobes broadly 
rounded or triangular, as long as wide or only two- 
thirds as long as wide; center of the flower vari- 
ously depressed or quite flat. 

Inner surface of the calyx-lobes glabrous or with a 
few scattered hairs, often with large glandular 
dots; small-flowered species, the disk 1.3-2 
(rarely -2.5) mm. wide; style (as far as known) 
5 mm. long or less. 

Upper leaf-surface with 5-8 large convex glandu- 
lar dots per square mm.; principal veins, in- 
cluding the midvein and the marginal vein, 
impressed; inflorescence sparingly pubescent, 
markedly glandular; stamens 250-300. 

M. pertusa 

Upper leaf-surface without apparent glands, or 
with minute impressed glands; veins not im- 
pressed, or sometimes the laterals or the mid- 
vein somewhat so; inflorescence glabrous to 
hirsute; stamens 200 or fewer. 
Upper surface of the leaves thickly but minutely 
impressed-puncticulate; lateral veins (15-) 
20-25 pairs; inflorescence hirsutulous, often 
branching from the base and then appear- 
ing fasciculate, the main axis often 1 cm. 
long or less, flattened M . fascicularis 

Leaves not impressed-puncticulate, usually 
without apparent glands at maturity; lat- 
eral veins 10-15 pairs; inflorescence vari- 
ously pubescent or nearly glabrous, the 
main axis usually much longer than 1 cm., 
and without basal branches. 
Lateral veins impressed, 10-12 pairs, much 
stronger than the intermediate ones; 
midvein hairy, flat or somewhat convex 
above; inflorescence hirsute with yellow- 
ish hairs up to 1 mm. long; hypanthium 
elongate in bud, with about 10 narrow 
longitudinal ridges contrasting in color 
to the densely yellow-hairy intervals. 

M. ambivalens 



622 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Lateral veins not impressed, often slightly 
elevated in drying, about 12-15 pairs, 
often little stronger than the intermedi- 
ate ones; mid vein glabrous or pubescent, 
sulcate or slightly impressed; inflores- 
cence sparingly short-pubescent (rarely 
hirsutulous) ; hypanthium narrowly conic 
in bud, not ridged. 

Petioles 5-7 mm. long; leaves cuneate or 
somewhat rounded at base . . M. fallax 
Petioles 4-5 mm. long; leaves rounded and 
often cordate-auriculate at base; [vig- 
orous forms of] M. splendens 

Inner surface of the calyx-lobes appressed-pubescent; 

small- or large-flowered species; style various. 
Lower leaf-surface finely bullate, the raised areas 
occupying the small intervals between the 
reticulate veinlets, and coalescing so as to 
obscure the surface of the veinlets; pubescence 
of inflorescence soft, ochraceous or rusty. 

M. deflexa 
Lower leaf-surface smooth or verruculose, not 

bullate; pubescence various. 
Branches of the inflorescence, and the hypan- 
thium, abundantly tomentose or hirsutu- 
lous with reddish hairs; [see also M. 
platycaula'(p. 641), in which the hypan- 
thium is covered with rufous-tawny straight 
hairs, and M. directa, in which the calyx- 
lobes are only 0.3-0.5 mm. long]. 
Inflorescence rufous- tomentose; leaves 10-15 
cm. long, broadly and bluntly acuminate, 
or obtusely pointed, lustrous and nearly 
glabrous beneath, with prominent large 

glands M. atrorufa 

Inflorescence pale rufous-hirsutulous with 
hairs of different lengths intermixed; 
leaves 12-26 cm. long, abruptly acumi- 
nate, dull and pale beneath, eglandular 
but with numerous appressed hairs. 

M . egensis 



FLORA OF PERU 623 

Branches of the inflorescence, and the hypan- 
thium, with white or yellow, appressed or 
spreading, mostly straight hairs; hairs 
sometimes confined to the hypanthium, and 
then occasionally reddish or tawny. 

Lateral veins, and often the marginal vein 
also, impressed on the upper leaf-surface; 
[see also M. madida, a large-leaved spe- 
cies in which the lateral veins may dry 
as fine lines slightly below the surface 
level]. 

Leaves hirsute beneath, at least on the 
veins, with soft yellow hairs up to 
1 mm. long; inflorescence similarly 
hirsute with spreading or ascending 
hairs; lateral veins about 10 (rarely 
-15) pairs; disk 3-3.5 mm. wide. 

M. mollis 

Leaves sparingly appressed-pubescent be- 
neath, or with a few long hairs on the 
veins; inflorescence sparingly hispidu- 
lous to appressed-pubescent with short 
hairs; lateral veins mostly more than 
15 pairs. 

Leaves rounded, obtuse, or emarginate 
at apex, middle-sized (mostly less 
than 15 cm. long), relatively broad 
(mostly not more than twice as long 
as wide). 

Calyx-lobes about 1 mm. long; leaves 
rounded or emarginate at apex, 
1.3-1.5 times as long as wide; in- 
florescence and branchlets spar- 
ingly hairy M. fasciata 

Calyx-lobes 2-2.5 mm. long; leaves 
rounded to obtuse or obscurely 
apiculate, about twice as long as 
wide; inflorescence and branchlets 

velutinous M. dispar 

Leaves markedly acuminate or acute, 
mostly larger (16-27 cm. long ex- 



624 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

cept in one species), relatively nar- 
row (mostly 2-4 times as long as 
wide). 

Leaves middle-sized, less than 15 cm. 
long, nearly sessile, the petioles 
1.5-2 mm. long; blades bullate 
above in drying, the 15-20 pairs 
of ladder-like veins alternating 
with elongate raised and convex 
surface areas; marginal vein in- 
conspicuous beneath, the lateral 
veins prominent near the midvein 
only; small-flowered species, the 
disk 1.5-2 mm. wide . M.fenestrata 
Leaves larger, 16-27 cm. long, the peti- 
oles 3-8 mm. long; blades flat in 
drying; lateral and marginal veins 
all very prominent beneath; large- 
flowered species, the disk 3-4 mm. 
wide. 

Leaves appressed-pubescent beneath ; 
midvein sulcate above; flowers 
aggregated on very short angu- 
lar branchlets; hypanthium 
strongly angled in drying, whit- 
ened by thick felted hairs. 

M. pentagona 

Leaves nearly glabrous and mark- 
edly verruculose beneath; mid- 
vein forming a narrow ridge 
above; inflorescence loosely 
branched, the flowers mostly in 
3's on slender branchlets; hy- 
panthium conic, strigose. 

M. crassimarginata 

Lateral and marginal veins not impressed on 
the upper surface, usually slightly raised 
in drying. 

Leaves hirsute beneath, at least on the 
veins, with soft yellow hairs up to 
1 mm. long; inflorescence similarly hir- 



FLORA OF PERU 625 

sute with spreading or ascending hairs; 
disk (2.5-) 3-3.5 mm. wide; lateral 
veins about 10 (rarely -15) pairs. 

M. mollis 

Leaves appressed-pubescent or nearly gla- 
brous beneath; inflorescence appressed- 
pubescent or short-hirsutulous (the 
hairs less than 0.5 mm. long) ; disk and 
lateral veins various. 

Flowers aggregated near the tips of the 
panicle-branches, those of the ter- 
minal clusters sessile or on very short 
stout pedicels up to 1 mm. long and 
nearly as thick; disk 3 mm. wide or 
less. 

Hypanthium whitened with very short 
pale felted hairs; disk 2.5-3 mm. 
wide; leaves 18-23 cm. long; buds 
4-4.5 mm. long M. madida 

Hypanthium covered thinly by ap- 
pressed short silky hairs; disk 2- 
2.5 mm. wide; leaves 7-14 cm. 
long; buds 3 mm. long. 

M. concava 

Lateral flowers of the terminal clusters 
on slender pedicels 2-6 mm. long; 
disk 3-4 mm. wide; leaves 16 cm. 
long or less, with 10-15 pairs of 
lateral veins. 

Branches of the inflorescence short- 
hirsutulous; marginal vein about 
as strong as the laterals, strongly 
arched between them. 

M. albobrunnea 

Branches of the inflorescence ap- 
pressed-strigose or nearly gla- 
brous; lateral veins diminishing 
distally and usually not forming a 
distinct marginal vein. 

M. dichasialis 



626 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Myrcia albobrunnea McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 187. 1956. 

Tree 3-8 meters high, the inflorescence, branchlets, and petioles 
short-hirsutulous with stiff, erect, pale yellowish hairs 0.3 mm. long 
(these appressed, and up to 0.5 mm. long on vegetative buds, hypan- 
thium, and lower surfaces of leaves); leaves ovate, 4-7 cm. wide, 
9-16 cm. long, 2-2.5 times as long as wide, short-acuminate, the 
base rounded, the margins prolonged, raised above the surface, in- 
closing a space where decurrent on the stout petiole 1.5-2.5 mm. 
thick, 4-6 mm. long; mid vein sulcate and hairy above near base, 
plane or convex near tip, prominent beneath; lateral veins 10-15, 
with some intermediate veins nearly equaling them, rather obscure 
above, prominulous beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals and arched between them, 1.5-3 mm. from margin (or in the 
largest leaves 3-6 mm. from margin and more strongly arched); 
blades darkening in drying, smooth and lustrous above, dull and yel- 
lowish-green and rather prominently appressed-pubescent beneath; 
glands not apparent; inflorescence an axillary or falsely terminal pan- 
icle 6-10 cm. long, rather regularly twice (or partly 3 times) com- 
pound, the axis and main branches flattened, 1.5-2.5 mm. wide below 
the first node; branches mostly opposite and divaricate, the flowers 
in 3's or sometimes solitary on short lateral branches, the lateral 
pair of the triads usually on pedicels 2-3.5 mm. long and markedly 
more slender than the branches from which they arise; bracts and 
bracteoles apparently deciduous before anthesis; buds 3.5-4 mm. 
long, obovate, the hypanthium obconic, densely hairy, about as long 
as the calyx; calyx-lobes 5, broadly rounded, pubescent without and 
densely appressed-pubescent within, 2.5 mm. wide, 1.5-2 mm. long; 
disk about 4 mm. wide, hirsute, deeply sunken (1 mm.) in center; 
style 7.5-8 mm. long, hairy near base or half its length; stamens 
about as long as the style or longer, more than 200, the anthers 0.3 
mm. long; petals white, obovate, about 5 mm. long, hairy outside; 
flowers white and brown (Klug). This species strongly resembles 
M. dichasialis, a native also of the vicinity of Iquitos. The present 
species differs from M. dichasialis in having the branchlets markedly 
hirsutulous rather than glabrous or sparingly appressed-strigose. 
The flowers in M. albobrunnea are slightly larger than in M. dichasi- 
alis, the leaves are less markedly reticulate on the upper surface, the 
midvein is hairy above, and the marginal vein is distinct although 
strongly arched; the lateral flowers of the terminal triads are more 
conspicuously pedicellate in M. dichasialis than in M. albobrunnea. 
Univ. of Mich. Neg. 458. 



FLORA OF PERU 627 

Loreto: Iquitos, 100 meters, woods, Killip & Smith 27006, Aug. 3- 
11, 1929. Mishuyacu, 100 meters, forest, G. King 1080, Feb.-Mar., 
1930 (US, type). 

Myrcia aliena McVaugh, nom. nov. Aulomyrcia chilensis Berg, 
Linnaea 27: 38. 1855, not Myrcia chilensis Berg, 1855. 

A tree 4-8 meters high, nearly glabrous at maturity; the young 
growth, inflorescence, leaf -buds and base of hypanthium strigose with 
lustrous yellowish or pale reddish hairs up to 0.4 mm. long; leaves 
elliptic, or widest above the middle, 2-5 cm. wide, 5-12 cm. long 
(on shoots 6 by 15 cm.), mostly 2.3-3 times as long as wide; blades 
narrowed about equally to a conspicuous often curved acumen 1-2 
cm. long and to the base, where merging into a petiole 6-10 mm. 
long, 1 mm. thick; midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins 12-20 pairs; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, 
arcuate between them, and 1-2 mm. from margin; glandular dots 
inconspicuous at maturity of leaves; inflorescence (4-) 6-10 cm. long, 
regularly 3 or 4 times compound, the branches opposite or suboppo- 
site, the flowers 70 or fewer; bracts deciduous at anthesis, reddish, 
lanceolate, 2-3 mm. long; bracteoles similar, linear, 1-2 mm. long; 
buds obconic, 2-2.5 mm. long, the hypanthium densely yellow-stri- 
gose with appressed hairs; calyx-lobes low, truncate, thickened, fleshy 
and verruculose-roughened by their internal glands, the calyx form- 
ing a 5-notched ring about 0.5 mm. high at the summit of the hypan- 
thium, the lobes individually about 1.5 mm. wide, ciliate; petals pale 
yellow, rounded, broad-based, 3 mm. long; anthers 0.3 mm. long; 
styles at anthesis 1.7 mm. long. All the collections studied are in 
bud or with a few flowers in early anthesis; the very short style, 
and the apparently imperfect development of the hypanthium, in 
these flowers, suggests that this species is partly or completely dioe- 
cious. The original specimens of Poeppig, and those of Mathews, 
agree well with more recently collected series in all respects (includ- 
ing the very distinctive calyx) except that the leaves are smaller 
(rarely exceeding 5 cm. in length), short-acuminate, and relatively 
somewhat broader. F.M. Neg. 23315. 

San Martin: San Roque, 1,350-1,500 meters, Williams 7310, 7390. 
Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, 1,200-1,600 meters, Klug 3264, 3471. 
Huanuco: Between Tingo Maria and Pucallpa, Ferreyra 993. Shapa- 
jilla, near Tingo Maria, Ferreyra 1583. Honolulo, near Tingo Maria, 
Ferreyra 2286. Montes sylvat. ad Cassapi, Poeppig 1696 [= Poeppig 



628 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

133], type. Cassapi, 1 Mathews 1957. Cuchero, Poeppig Add. 59 
(herb. Wien). "Urcu Pichi," "Urcu-Yspi" (Williams). Bolivia; 
Amazonian Brazil; coastal Ecuador. The name Aulomyrcia chilen- 
sis was given because Berg erroneously assumed that a part of 
Poeppig' s original material had been collected in that country. 

Two collections from near Pongo de Manseriche, Tessmann 4297 
(G; NY) and 4698 (G) are referred to this species with some ques- 
tion. The specimens are larger than usual in M. aliena, with buds 
3.5-4 mm. long, the disk 3.5 mm. wide, the inflorescence up to 20 cm. 
long, and the leaves up to 10 cm. wide and 25 cm. long. 

Myrcia amazonica DC. Prodr. 3: 250. 1828. M. corymbosa 
DC. I.e. 252. M. elegans DC. I.e. 251. M. lauriflora DC. I.e. 252. 
M. nigrescens DC. I.e. 246. M. spixiana DC. I.e. 251. Aulomyrcia 
amazonica (DC.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 41. 1855. A. corymbosa (DC.) 
Berg, I.e. Calyptromyrcia elegans (DC.) Berg, I.e. 34. A. lauriflora 
(DC.) Berg, I.e. 64. A. nigrescens (DC.) Berg, I.e. 71. C. spixiana 
(DC.) Berg, I.e. 35. A. paraensis Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 
76. 1857. A. pruinosa Berg, in Mart. I.e. 114. A. spruceana Berg, 
in Mart. I.e. 76. 

A tree or large shrub, blackening in drying at least in the inflo- 
rescence; inflorescence and young growth thinly appressed-pubescent 
with red or pale hairs up to 0.3 mm. long, the leaves mostly glabrous 
except the petiole and the mid vein below; leaves coriaceous, elliptic 
or long-pointed, (2-) 2.5-3.5 (-4) cm. wide, 4-10 cm. long, mostly 
2.5-3 times as long as wide, often slenderly acuminate, the base 
acute to rounded, the margins decurrent on the petiole 3-6 mm. 
long; midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 10- 
12 pairs, indistinct above, sometimes slightly elevated, prominulous 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched be- 
tween them, 1-2 mm. from margin; blades usually dull, smooth and 
black above, at least slightly impressed-punctate, the lower surface 
reddish-brown, obscurely and finely dark-dotted; inflorescence up to 
8-20 cm. long, 3 times compound, the many flowers sessile or short- 

1 The sheets of Mathews 1957 at Paris and at Kew are without definite locality 
data. Mr. Sandwith informs me that according to bound vol. no. xxii, pp. 233 and 
250, of Miscellaneous Plant Lists at Kew, no. 1957 was received in June, 1835; 
it was originally identified as "Myrtacea" and it came in the collection made at 
Cassapi. A sheet at New York is numbered 1597, with the notation "Kew list 
loc. Tarapoto." In Miscellaneous Plant Lists, vol. xxii, p. 230, at Kew, no. 1597 
was provisionally identified as "Carapa??"; it was in the collection from Tarapoto, 
received on May 9, 1835. Apparently the number on the New York specimen 
became transposed, and the erroneous locality data were added later after con- 
sultation of the records at Kew. 



FLORA OF PERU 629 

stalked in opposite or alternate pairs along the secondary branches, 
or aggregated in 3's near the tips; bracts and bracteoles short, linear, 
deciduous before anthesis; buds obovate, 1.7-2.5 mm. long; hypan- 
thium campanulate or funnelform, glabrous; calyx-lobes 5, broadly 
rounded, often somewhat unequal, up to 1 mm. wide, 0.5-1 mm. 
long, ciliate-fringed, the inner surface glabrous or appressed-pubes- 
cent; disk hollow, 1.5 mm. wide, glabrous except the staminal ring; 
style glabrous, 3-4 mm. long; stamens 40-50, up to 5 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.2 mm. long; petals obovate, 2 mm. wide, 2.5 mm. long; 
fruit globose to oblate, 4 mm. high, 4-6 mm. across. Plants of this 
alliance, comprising one or possibly as many as 8 or 9 species are 
known from various widely scattered localities in the lower Amazon 
region, as far west as the Rio Negro and Rio Japura. Additional 
research is needed to clarify their relationships, but it appears that 
the names listed above in synonymy represent a single broadly inter- 
preted species. The chiefly Peruvian Myrcia yungasensis (Aulo- 
myrcia poeppigiana) is similar to M. amazonica but has somewhat 
larger flowers, the inflorescence is glabrous or essentially so, and the 
plants blacken but little in drying. Apparently M. amazonica proper 
has not yet been reported from Peru. Specimens collected by Kru- 
koff (nos. 5636 and 5705) near mouth of Rio Macauhan, Rio Acre, 
Brazil, have the inflorescence-characters of M. amazonica but are 
hardly at all blackened in drying, the leaves are short-acuminate, 
hairy below, and with the midvein elevated above in a narrow median 
line; unfortunately the plants are in young bud only; they may rep- 
resent an undescribed species. F.M. Negs. 19753, 19770, 19780, 
19808, 19827, 19838, 19846, 19864, 19866. 
Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Myrcia ambivalens McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 188. 1956. 

A shrub, the branchlets, inflorescence and petioles densely hirsute 
with pale or deep yellow, slender flexuous hairs up to 1 mm. long, the 
leaves sparingly pubescent with similar hairs; leaves ovate, elliptic, 
or obovate, 3-6.5 cm. wide, 5-12 cm. long, mostly 2-2.5 times as 
long as wide, tips abruptly and narrowly acuminate, lower half 
narrowed from the middle and rounded toward the base, at very 
base abruptly contracted to and very shortly decurrent on the com- 
pressed channelled petiole 1-2 mm. wide, 3-4 mm. long; midvein 
flat above or elevated in young leaves, hairy, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins 10-12 pairs, strongly ascending, somewhat impressed 
above, prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals and impressed like them, arched between them, 1-3 mm. from 



630 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

margin; leaves nearly concolorous, greenish brown both sides, egland- 
ular, the upper surface slightly lustrous; inflorescence a broad axillary 
or falsely terminal panicle 6-8 cm. long and almost as wide, 3 times 
compound, about 75-flowered, the flowers mostly aggregated near 
tips; bracteoles deciduous before anthesis, lanceolate, pointed, 1- 
1.5 mm. long; bracts probably similar, larger; buds 4 mm. long, the 
corolla concealed until anthesis, the hypanthium elongate, enlarg- 
ing distally, longitudinally about 10-ridged, the intervals between 
the narrow darker ridges densely yellow-hairy and contrasting in 
color; calyx-lobes 5, triangular, 1-1.5 mm. long and wide, glabrous 
within, the outer surface with tangled yellow hairs paler than those 
of the hypanthium; flowers not seen open; disk probably 2 mm. wide, 
long-hairy within and sunken about 1 mm., the style hairy half its 
length; stamens about 200; petals obovate, somewhat fleshy in bud, 
silky on the backs, 2-2.5 mm. long; fruit not seen. Univ. of Mich. 
Neg. 473. 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, in forest, November 7, 1929, L. Williams 
4706, 4737 (F, type). 

Myrcia atrorufa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 188. 1956. 

Shrub 2 meters high, pubescent to densely short-tomentulose on 
the branchlets, inflorescence and petioles, and sparingly pubescent 
on the leaves, with crisped rufous hairs up to 1 mm. long; leaves 
ovate, 4-6 cm. wide, 10-15 cm. long, 2-2.5 times as long as wide, 
broadly and bluntly acuminate or obtusely pointed, the base rounded 
or the extreme base pointed, the margins decurrent on the stout dis- 
tinct petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 8-12 mm. long; midvein impressed 
and hairy above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 12 pairs, 
slightly elevated above, prominulous beneath; marginal vein pro- 
minulous beneath, about equaling the laterals and arched between 
them, 3-6 mm. from margin; leaves drying brown, the upper surface 
smooth, rufous, eglandular, marked with a coarse reticulum of small 
veins; lower surface lustrous, greenish-brown, with prominent glands; 
inflorescence axillary, 2 or partly 3 times compound, about 30-flow- 
ered, 7-10 cm. long, the branches much flattened, the peduncle 3-7 
cm. long, up to 2.5 mm. wide below the first node; flowers aggregated 
in triads near the tips of the branches; bracteoles deciduous before 
anthesis, lanceolate, about 1.5 mm. long; buds 3 mm. long, turbi- 
nate, the obconic straight-sided base of the hypanthium densely 
red-woolly; calyx-lobes 5, rounded or bluntly triangular, about 2 mm. 
wide, 1.5-2 mm. long, woolly or sparingly pubescent without, ap- 
pressed-pubescent within; disk about 2.5-3 mm. across, hairy within, 



FLORA OF PERU 631 

the center sunken about 1 mm.; style glabrous except at base, prob- 
ably about 4 mm. long; stamens 125-150, up to 4 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.4 mm. long; petals greenish-white (Metcalf), suborbicu- 
lar, about 3 mm. long, hairy on the backs; fruit subglobose, about 
1 cm. in diameter. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 460. 

Huanuco: Between Hudnuco and Pampayacu, Jan. 30, 1927, 
R. Kanehira 17. Puno: Prov. Carabaya, trail from Santo Domingo 
to Chabuca mine, elev. 1,900 meters, moist open places with dense 
vegetation, much fog and rain, May 30-June 1, 1942, R. D. Metcalf 
30671 (US, type). 

Myrcia bracteata (Rich.) DC. Prodr. 3: 245. 1828. Eugenia, 
bracteata Rich. Act. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris 1: 110. 1792. E. hirsuta 
R. & P. Fl. Peruv. & Chil. 4: t. 417a, ined. [71802]; G. Don, Gen. 
Hist. 2: 865. 1832. M. lanceolata Camb. in St. Hil. Fl. Bras. Merid. 
2: 329. 1829. 

A shrub or small tree to 4 meters high, hirsute with lustrous pale 
yellowish flexuous erect or appressed hairs up to 2 mm. long; bases 
of hairs sometimes enlarged; leaves lanceolate or elliptic, 1.5-3 cm. 
wide, 5-9 cm. long, often 3 times as long as wide, gradually or some- 
times abruptly acuminate, the very tip blunt; blade almost sessile, 
the base narrowed, rounded or somewhat auriculate, the dark petiole 
flat, twisted, up to 2 mm. long and 1.5 mm. wide, expanded distally 
into a colored area at the base of the blade; mid vein on upper sur- 
face somewhat impressed, copiously stiff-hairy, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins inconspicuous, slender, 15-20 pairs; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals, 1-1.5 mm. from margin; blades lustrous and 
sparingly impressed-punctate above, brown-dotted beneath; inflo- 
rescence an axillary dichasium, much shorter than the leaves (or 
occasionally terminal and then longer), usually 2.5-4.5 cm. long, 
with 5, 7 or 11 flowers on pedicels up to 3 mm. long; nodes of dicha- 
sium conspicuously bracteate, the bracts surpassing the flowers, per- 
sistent, ovate, trough-shaped at base, blunt-pointed, glabrous within, 
4-6 mm. wide, 6-10 mm. long, sometimes minutely ciliate, usually 
with abundant brownish dots on the outer surface; bracteoles per- 
sistent, similar, smaller; perianth 5- (or 4-) parted, the petals white, 
suborbicular, 3 mm. long; calyx-lobes unequal, the largest like the 
bracts, 2-3 mm. wide, 2.5-4 mm. long; elongate base of hypanthium 
concealed by densely aggregated appressed yellowish hairs; disk seri- 
ceous or nearly glabrous within, distinctly sunken, about 3 mm. 
across; style 6 mm. long, sparingly pilose near base or more than 
half its length; stamens about 150, slightly exceeding the style; fruit 



632 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

not seen mature, probably hirsute, ellipsoid, about 1 cm. long. 
F.M. Neg. 39508. 

San Martin: Pongo de Cainarachi, King 2747. Tarapoto, Spruce 
4857 (herb. G). San Roque, Williams 7281, 7391Loreto: Balsa- 
puerto, Klug 2844- Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, Klug 3293. Sacha- 
choro, near Yurimaguas, Mexia 6087. Yurimaguas, Ferreyra 7845, 
Williams 3797, 4716. Pebas, Williams 1880. Huanuco: Chicoplaya, 
Ruiz & Pav6n. Bolivia to Colombia and the Guianas. "Napurshi" 
(Yahua, Williams) ; "Millua-mullaca" (Williams) ; "Rupifia" (Mexia) . 

Myrcia concava McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 189. 1956. 

Tree 6-8 meters high, the vegetative buds, inflorescence and 
petioles strigose with stiff pale yellowish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long 
on the buds, mostly shorter; leaves elliptic or ovate, 3-5.5 cm. wide, 
7-14 cm. long, 2.3-2.9 times as long as wide, acuminate, cuneate or 
rounded and subcuneate at base, the margins decurrent on the 
channeled petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 4-5 mm. long; midvein on the 
upper surface pubescent, plane distally, impressed near base and 
the impressed area shortly hispidulous; midvein prominent beneath; 
lateral veins 15-20 pairs, the number indefinite because of parallel 
intermediate veins, slightly raised above in drying, prominulous 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and little arched 
between them, 1-2 mm. from margin; blades somewhat darkening 
in drying, the upper surface smooth, lustrous, without apparent 
glands; lower surface paler, yellowish green or yellowish brown, 
sparingly appressed-hairy and minutely siliceous-verruculose, the 
glands usually apparent; inflorescence an axillary panicle shorter 
than the leaves, 7-11 cm. long, 3 to 4 times compound, the branches 
somewhat compressed and the axis up to 2 mm. wide below the 
first node; flowers numerous, nearly sessile, clustered near the tips; 
bracts and bracteoles deciduous before anthesis; buds about 3 mm. 
long, the hypanthium below the enlargement of the calyx 1.5-1.7 
mm. long, obconic with the base abruptly contracted to the pedicel 
(not attenuate), the surface covered but not obscured by silky 
whitish, closely appressed hairs about 0.2 mm. long, these diminish- 
ing in number distally; calyx lobes suborbicular, broadly rounded or 
bluntly triangular, 1.3-1.7 mm. wide, 1-1.3 mm. long, pubescent 
outside, appressed-pubescent within, conspicuously concave and 
spreading as the petals fall; disk 5-angled, 2-2.5 mm. wide, hairy, 
the center abruptly depressed; style 4.5 mm. long, hairy below the 
middle; stamens about 150, up to 5 mm. long, the anthers 0.3-0.4 
mm. long; petals suborbicular, concave, hairy outside, up to 3 mm. 



FLORA OF PERU 633 

wide and 2.5 mm. long; fruit not seen. This species is separated 
by no very obvious characters from those of the fallax-splendens 
alliance. It is unlike any of these, however, in its sparingly strigose 
and broad-based hypanthium, its conspicuous calyx-lobes pubes- 
cent within, and its short, stout inflorescence. Univ. of Mich. 
Neg. 459. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, 100 meters, forest, Klug 4&4> 
800 (type, US). 

Myrcia connata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 189. 1956. 

A shrub 5-6 meters high, the branchlets, leaf-buds and inflo- 
rescence (especially the calyx and hypanthium) strigose with 
straight yellowish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, at least the young 
leaves sparingly strigose beneath; leaves sessile, lanceolate, 3.5-5 
cm. wide, 9-16 cm. long, about 2.5^4 times as long as wide, acute or 
obscurely acuminate, blunt at very tip, cordate at base, the auricles 
of opposite pairs overlapping; mid vein impressed above, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins 12-15 pairs, slender, inconspicuous on both 
sides, more prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the 
laterals and arched between them, 3-5 mm. from the margin; small 
veins markedly reticulate in prevailingly right-angled patterns; 
blades somewhat lustrous above, paler and dull beneath, the glandu- 
lar dots scarcely apparent; inflorescence a panicle 4-7 cm. long, 
about 12-flowered, once or twice compound, the peduncle 2.5-4.5 
cm. long, 2 mm. wide below the first node; lower branches of the 
panicle up to 1.2 cm. long; flowers sessile; buds 4-6 mm. long, the 
hypanthium about 2 mm. long, heavily appressed-hairy; calyx-lobes 
5, broadly rounded, appressed-hairy on both sides, 1.3-1.5 mm. long, 
2.5 mm. wide; disk about 3 mm. wide, sunken, the hypanthium 
prolonged 1-1.5 mm. beyond the summit of the ovary; style prob- 
ably about 10 mm. long; stamens 150-200, 7-8 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.6 mm. long; petals hairy outside, about 7-8 mm. long and 
5 mm. wide; fruit fleshy, about 1 cm. in diameter, a little longer 
than wide. 

Peru (probably). Bolivia. 

Myrcia crassimarginata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 190. 
1956. 

Tree 5 meters high, puberulent on the branchlets, inflorescence 
and petioles with straight pale yellowish appressed or erect hairs 
up to 0.5 mm. long, and with a few longer appressed hairs on the 



634 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

lower leaf surfaces; young branchlets velutinous; leaves elliptic, 
7-8 cm. wide, 16-20 cm. long, 2-2.5 times as long as wide, abruptly 
rounded at tip to a slender acumen 1-1.5 cm. long, rounded at base, 
the margins prolonged and raised, forming an inclosure at the flat 
summit of the stout petiole 2.5 mm. thick, 3-6 mm. long; midvein 
on the upper surface elevated in a narrow, straight-sided ridge 1 mm. 
wide near base, the ridge impressed like the lateral and marginal 
veins; laterals about 20 pairs, prominent and raised beneath, much 
stronger than the intermediate veins; marginal vein equaling the 
laterals, nearly straight, 3-5 mm. from margin, with a weaker, 
arched submarginal vein beyond it; upper surface greenish brown in 
drying, smooth, lustrous, the lower pale brown, minutely verru- 
culose-siliceous; glands not apparent on either surface; inflorescence 
a broad axillary or falsely terminal panicle 15-23 cm. long and about 
as wide, rather regularly 4 times compound, many-flowered, the 
branches mostly opposite, nearly terete near base and 2-2.5 mm. 
thick, somewhat compressed distally, up to 3 mm. wide below the 
first node; flowers clustered near tips of branches, the lateral pair of 
the terminal triads often on pedicels 2-5 mm. long; bracts mostly 
persistent through anthesis, divaricate, boat-shaped, often broadest 
above the middle, blunt-tipped, the largest 7 mm. wide, 12 mm. 
long, the outermost 3 mm. wide, 5 mm. long; bracteoles similar, 
about 2 mm. wide, 4 mm. long; buds 5 mm. long, broadly obovoid, 
the densely strigose hypanthium-base conic and 1-1.5 mm. long, 
broadly expanded to the base of the calyx-lobes, which are broadly 
rounded, 3 mm. wide, 2.5 mm. long, pubescent outside, appressed- 
strigose within; disk 3-4 mm. wide, hairy, deeply sunken at center; 
style 6-8 mm. long, hairy at base; stamens about 300, the longest 
about as long as the style; petals probably about 4 mm. long, 
obovate, cream-color (Klug), appressed-pubescent outside; fruit 
not seen. A collection made by Tessmann (no. 4319) at the mouth 
of Rio Santiago, on high land, is apparently this species, but in the 
specimen seen (at NY) the leaves are appressed-pubescent and 
smooth (not verruculose) beneath. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 477. 

Loreto: Fortaleza, near Yurimaguas, alt. about 140 meters, 
forest, December, 1932, Klug 2821 (A, type). 

Myrcia deflexa (Poir.) DC. Prodr. 3: 244. 1828. Eugenia deflexa 
Poir. Suppl. 3: 124. 1813. 

A shrub or small tree to 10 meters high, ochraceous- or rusty- 
hirsute-pubescent with lustrous, flexuous, slender, erect or matted 
hairs up to 1 mm. long or more, these intermixed with very numer- 



FLORA OF PERU 635 

ous very short scurfy inflated hairs; leaves elliptic to ovate, 3-6 
(-10) cm. wide, 7.5-15 (-22) cm. long, 2.2-3 times as long as wide, 
acuminate (often slenderly so), rounded abruptly to base or sub- 
cuneate, the basal margins decurrent, prolonged and slightly ele- 
vated, forming a pocket-like furrow at the summit of the stout 
channeled petiole 1.5-2.5 mm. thick, 6-10 mm. long; midvein im- 
pressed above at least at base, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
15-20 (-25) pairs, sometimes impressed above, prominent beneath; 
marginal vein relatively close (1-2 mm.) to margin, prominent be- 
neath, sometimes impressed above, only slightly arched between the 
laterals; blades when dry pale green or brown above, lustrous, and 
glabrous or essentially so, without apparent glands at maturity but 
the small reticulate veins forming a fine pattern; lower surface dull, 
ochraceous, somewhat pubescent on the veins, eglandular, finely 
bullate, the raised areas corresponding to the spaces between the 
fine reticulations of the veins and obscuring these; inflorescence a 
broad axillary or falsely terminal panicle 6-12 cm. long and about 
as broad, irregularly 3 times compound, many-flowered, the branches 
opposite or subopposite, striate-angled, compressed (2-2.5 mm. wide 
below the first node), the flowers sessile or nearly so and aggregated 
toward the tips of the branches; bracts deciduous before anthesis, 
scarious, ovate, acute, 1.5 mm. wide, 3 mm. long; bractlets similar, 
smaller, deciduous at the same time; buds 3-4 mm. long, broadly 
obconic, the hypanthium densely hairy; calyx-lobes 5, broadly 
rounded, narrowed at base, imbricate, hairy on both sides, 2.5- 
4 mm. wide, 2-3 mm. long; disk 2.5^4 mm. wide, sunken, densely 
hairy; style 5-7 mm. long, hairy near base or up to two- thirds its 
length; stamens about 250, longer than the style, up to 8 mm. long, 
the anthers 0.5 mm. long; petals obovate, 5 mm. long; fruit ellip- 
soid, probably about 1 cm. thick and 1.5 cm. long when mature. 
Peruvian representatives of this species have slightly smaller flowers 
than some specimens from Venezuela and the Guianas, and rufous 
rather than ochraceous pubescence, but do not seem to differ in other 
respects. F.M. Neg. 39505. 

San Martin: Lamas, Williams 6389, 6434- Tarapoto, Williams 
6119. Amazonian Brazil to the Guianas, Venezuela and the Greater 
Antilles. 

Myrcia dichasialis McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 190. 1956. 

Shrub or tree to 10 meters high, with trunk diameter up to 25 cm., 
somewhat variably strigose with closely appressed yellowish hairs up 
to 0.5 mm. long, the leaf-buds and hypanthium densely strigose, the 



636 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

lower leaf-surface sparingly so with hairs usually 0.2-0.3 mm. long, 
the inflorescence often nearly glabrous; leaves ovate, 3-7 cm. wide, 
8-15 cm. long, 2-3 times as long as wide, short-acuminate, rounded 
at base, the margins decurrent on the stout dark petiole 1-2 mm. 
thick, 6-7 mm. long; midvein flat or sulcate above, prominent be- 
neath; lateral veins 10-12 (-15) pairs, somewhat prominent beneath, 
diminishing distally, not forming a definite marginal vein but re- 
curving 1-3 mm. from margin and joining the next vein 2.5-10 mm. 
from margin; upper surface when dry olive green, somewhat lustrous, 
with small reticulate veins, the lower duller, more yellowish; glands 
obscure below, barely apparent above; inflorescence a broad axillary 
or falsely terminal panicle 10-12 cm. long and about as broad, regu- 
larly 3 times compound, many-flowered, the branches divaricate and 
often at right angles to the axis, rather strictly opposite, enlarged 
and jointed at base, compressed (2-2.5 mm. wide below the first 
node), the flowers mostly in 3's near the tips of the branches, with 
the terminal flower sessile or nearly so, or sometimes abortive, the 
two lateral ones on pedicels 2-6 mm. long; bracts and bracteoles early 
deciduous; buds about 3 mm. long, broadly obconic; calyx-lobes 5, 
broadly rounded, 2-3 mm. wide, 1.5-2 mm. long, pubescent without, 
closely appressed-pubescent within; disk 3-4 mm. wide, sunken, hir- 
sute; style about 7 mm. long, hairy about half its length or near base 
only; stamens about 200, about as long as the style, up to 8 mm. long, 
the anthers 0.5 mm. long; petals white, pubescent without, about 
4-5 mm. long and wide; fruit dark red, subglobose, 8-10 mm. in 
diameter. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 469. 

Loreto: Iquitos, Mexia 6508. Gamitanacocha, Rio Mazan, 
Schunke 134 (F, type), 188. Stromgebiet des Ucayali von 10 S. 
bis zur Miindung, Tessmann 3411- Along Rio Itaya, Williams 91. 
Endemic. 

Myrcia directa McVaugh, sp. nov. 

Arbor, velutina, foliis petiolatis acuminatis 8-11 cm. longis; venis 
impressis; paniculis multifloris, validis, rachi compressa, usque ad 
1.7 mm. lata; calycis lobis utrinque pilosis, duplo triplove latioribus 
quam longioribus, 0.3-0.5 mm. longis; alabastris 2 mm. longis. 

A small tree 18 feet high (Spruce), the branchlets, young leaves, 
and inflorescence velutinous with stiff slender-pointed erect brown- 
ish red hairs 0.5-1 mm. long; leaves elliptic-ovate, 3.5-5.5 cm. wide, 
8-11 cm. long, 2-3 times as long as wide, gradually or abruptly acu- 
minate, rather broadly rounded at base, the margins passing abruptly 



FLORA OF PERU 637 

into the shallowly grooved and nearly terete petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 
8-12 mm. long; midvein on upper surface sunken and hirsute at base, 
passing distally into an elevated ridge, prominent beneath, raised 
from the lower surface by its own diameter (about 1.5 mm. near the 
base of the blade) ; lateral veins 12-15 pairs, impressed above, con- 
spicuous beneath and stronger than the intermediate ones, straight 
or nearly so (whence directa) and passing directly into the marginal 
vein which is impressed above, about equaling the laterals and some- 
what curved between them, 2-3 mm. from the margin; blades dark- 
ening in drying, glabrate and lustrous above, the lower surface per- 
sistently velutinous at least on the veins, finally glabrate and finely 
pebbled; glandular dots not apparent on either surface; inflorescence 
a relatively broad axillary or falsely terminal panicle, 3.5-7 cm. long 
and almost as wide, 3 times compound, 50- to 75-flowered, with the 
branchlets mostly at right angles, the flowers sessile in terminal clus- 
ters; peduncle compressed and markedly bicarinate, 1.5-1.7 mm. 
wide just below the lowest node; bracts and bracteoles deciduous 
before anthesis, the bracteoles linear, 0.6 mm. long; buds 2 mm. long 
or less; hypanthium hemispheric, about 1.5 mm. long and less than 
2 mm. wide, densely velutinous with hairs up to 0.3 mm. long; calyx- 
lobes 5, rounded, very short, about 1 mm. wide, 0.3-0.5 mm. long, 
fleshy at base, hairy on both sides but neither surface obscured by 
the hairs, the tips somewhat incurved and the calyx as a whole trun- 
cate and flaring out at the summit of the hypanthium; disk 2 mm. 
wide, strigose, concave, fleshy, lobulate, the lobes opposite the petals; 
style 2.5-3 mm. long; stamens about 30, 2.5 mm. long, the anthers 
0.3 mm. long; petals obovate, glabrous or strigose on the outer sur- 
face, 2-2.5 mm. long and wide; ovary bilocular, the ovules 2 in each 
locule, collateral; fruit not seen. Univ. of Mich. Negs. 1094, 1102. 
San Martin: "In fruticetis montis Campana, prope Tarapoto, 
alt. 4800 ft.," Dec., 1855, R. Spruce 4388 (herb. Kew ex herb. 
Benth., type; herb. Kew ex herb. Hook.). 

Myrcia dispar McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 191. 1956. 

A tree "45 feet" high (Krukoff), the branchlets, vegetative buds, 
petioles and inflorescences abundantly velutinous with soft appressed- 
ascending pale golden-yellow hairs 0.6-0.8 mm. long; leaves coria- 
ceous, elliptic to ovate or obovate, 4-7.5 cm. wide, 10-15 cm. long, 
about twice as long as wide, rounded or obtuse at apex and usually 
obscurely apiculate, acute at base, the margins decurrent on the sul- 
cate petiole 2 mm. thick, 7-10 mm. long; midvein hairy above when 
young, the distal two-thirds elevated in a narrow median ridge but 



638 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

the whole (including the ridge) impressed above and prominent be- 
neath; lateral veins 12-15 pairs, convex but somewhat impressed, 
prominent beneath; marginal vein narrower than the laterals, not 
impressed above, nearly straight between the laterals, 1-2.5 mm. 
from margin; blades dark and lustrous above, paler beneath and 
there somewhat strigose and minutely pale-verruculose; glandular 
dots not apparent in mature leaves; panicle 4-5 cm. long (much 
shorter than the leaves, whence the name dispar), stout, probably 
twice compound, the peduncle compressed, 2-3 cm. long, 2.5 mm. 
wide below the first node; flowers not seen, probably about 20 or 
fewer, nearly sessile; fruit globose, 1-1.5 cm. in diameter, gland- 
dotted, sparingly hairy, crowned by the erect calyx; calyx-lobes 5, 
rounded with tips incurved in fruit, 2-2.5 mm. long, 2.5-3 mm. wide, 
pubescent both sides (sparingly so within in fruit) ; disk 3 mm. wide, 
the hypanthium prolonged 1.5 mm. above the summit of the ovary, 
both disk and inner surface of the hypanthium densely hairy; seeds 
1 or 2, reniform, 1 cm. long, with lustrous cartilaginous testa and 
typical myrcioid embryo. Known only from the type, which is in 
fruit (Brazil, Terr, of Acre, upper Rio Jurupary, Krukoff 5232), but 
apparently distinct from all known species in the short, stout inflo- 
rescence, relatively large flowers, blunt, coarsely veined leaves and 
copious distinctive indument. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Myrcia egensis (Berg) McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 191. 1956. 
Aulomyrcia egensis Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 99. 1857. 
A. macrophylla Berg, in Mart. I.e. 

Tree 4 meters high, the branchlets, vegetative buds and petioles 
hirsutulous with stout straight ascending yellowish-white hairs up 
to 1 mm. long; inflorescence abundantly hirsutulous but the hairs 
shorter, of uneven lengths, and rufous in color; lower leaf-surface 
thinly appressed pubescent with pale yellow hairs about 0.5 mm. 
long; leaves ovate or elliptic, 4.5-11.5 cm. wide, 12-26 cm. long, 
2-2.7 times as long as wide, acuminate at tips, rounded at base, the 
margin often cuneately narrowed at very base and decurrent on the 
stout channeled petiole 2 mm. thick, 8-12 mm. long; mid vein sulcate 
above and hairy at least near base, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
10-15 pairs, distinctly marked above and very slightly impressed, 
prominulous beneath; marginal vein weaker than the laterals, some- 
what arched between them, 1-3 mm. from margin; leaves darkening 
in drying, the upper surface brown to black, lustrous, smooth, the 
lower yellowish- or grayish-brown because of the pubescence and the 



FLORA OF PERU 639 

loosely cellular structure of the pale irregular epidermis; glands not 
apparent on either surface; inflorescence a broad, usually axillary 
panicle 11-15 cm. long, irregularly 3 times compound, many-flow- 
ered, the branches often subopposite, compressed, 2.5-3 mm. wide 
below the first node, the flowers sessile and aggregated near the tips 
of the branches and mostly alternate along them; bracts and bracte- 
oles deciduous at or before anthesis, the bracteoles lanceolate, hir- 
sutulous, up to 1.5 mm. long; buds 3.0-3.5 mm. long, the hypanthium 
about half this length, obconic, densely rufous-hirsutulous, abruptly 
expanded at summit into the calyx; calyx-lobes 5, rounded, strongly 
unequal, the larger scarious-margined, up to 3 mm. wide, 2.3 mm. 
long, the smaller less than 1 mm. wide, 1.3 mm. long; disk 2-2.5 mm. 
wide, hairy, deeply sunken; style 6-7 mm. long, hairy below the 
middle; stamens about 100, up to 7 mm. long, the anthers very small, 
about 0.3 mm. long; petals obovate, cream-color (Klug), 3.5-4 mm. 
long; fruit probably globose and 1 cm. in diameter, not seen mature. 
The type of this species, Poeppig 2551, is from Ega, Brazil. F.M. 
Negs. 19818, 31521. 

San Martin: Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, 1,200-1,600 meters, 
Klug 3569. Amazonian Brazil. 

Myrcia fallax (Rich.) DC. Prodr. 3: 244. 1828. Eugenia fallax 
Rich. Act. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris 1: 110. 1792. Myrtus acuminata 
HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 141 (folio ed. p. 112). 1823. Myrtus com- 
plicata HBK. I.e. Myrcia acuminata (HBK.) DC. I.e. 256. Myrcia 
berberis DC. I.e. 254. Myrcia complicata (HBK.) DC. I.e. 255. 
Myrcia macrophylla DC. I.e. 248. Myrcia magnoliaefolia DC. I.e. 
Myrcia acuminata a genuina Berg, Linnaea 27: 94. 1855. Myrcia 
acuminata d peruviana Berg, I.e. Myrcia chilensis Berg, I.e. 99. 
Myrcia barrensis Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1 : 187. 1857. Myrcia 
berberis /3 angustifolia Berg, in Mart. I.e. 170. Myrcia brandami Berg, 
in Mart. I.e. 164. Myrcia hayneana /3 paraensis Berg, in Mart. I.e. 
187. Myrcia kegeliana longifolia Berg, in Mart. I.e. 168. Myrcia 
latifolia Berg, in Mart. I.e. 170. Myrcia negrensis Berg, in Mart. 
I.e. 187. Myrcia spruceana Berg, in Mart. I.e. 165. Myrcia sub- 
sessilis /3 ovalis Berg, Linnaea 31: 252. 71862. Myrcia dictyoneura 
Diels, Engl. Bot. Jahrb. 37: 594. 1906. 

A tree or large shrub up to 12 meters high, sparingly pubescent 
with lustrous yellowish-white hairs about 0.2 mm. long; hairs ap- 
pressed or in the inflorescence sometimes spreading, confined chiefly 
to the hypanthium, where always densely aggregated, and to the 
branches of the inflorescence, the calyx-lobes, the petioles and the 



640 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

lower leaf-surface; pubescence on mature plants sometimes almost 
none except on the hypanthium; leaves elliptic to ovate-lanceolate, 
2-6 cm. wide, 6-14 cm. long, (2-) 2.5-3 (-4.5) times as long as wide, 
the blades rather abruptly narrowed to both ends or more gradually 
narrowed to apex, prominently acuminate, the acumen blunt at very 
tip; base of blade cuneate or somewhat rounded, the margins slightly 
decurrent on the stout dark-colored ventrally grooved petiole which 
is 1-1.5 mm. thick, 5-7 mm. long; upper surface of blade smooth 
and lustrous, bright green or darkening in drying, the midvein im- 
pressed or sulcate at least near base, glabrous or nearly so except at 
base, the other veins when dry slightly raised and evidently retic- 
ulate; lower surface paler, dull green, the midvein prominently ele- 
vated, the about 15 pairs of lateral veins somewhat elevated and 
readily distinguished (more readily than on the upper surface) from 
the smaller intermediate veins; marginal vein about equaling the 
laterals, and arched between them, 1-1.5 (-3.5) mm. from the slightly 
revolute leaf -margins; glandular dots sometimes apparent on new 
leaves, rarely on mature leaves, never impressed on the upper sur- 
face; inflorescence axillary and (often) sub terminal, up to 12 cm. 
long, often about as long as the leaves, many-flowered, irregularly 
3 times compound, the branches opposite or subopposite, strongly 
flattened below the nodes (2-2.5 or even 3.5 mm. wide below the 
first node), the branchlets of the ultimate (usually third) order little 
elongated and the flowers thus nearly sessile and aggregated toward 
the tips of the branches; buds 2.2-2.5 mm. long just before anthesis, 
the hypanthium narrowly conic; calyx-lobes 5, drying dark, sparingly 
strigose to glabrous without, glabrous within, broadly rounded to 
occasionally triangular, about 1-1.5 mm. long and 1.5-1.8 mm. wide, 
often remaining loosely erect in post-anthesis and fruit; disk 1.3-2 
(-2.5) mm. wide, densely hairy, slightly sunken in the middle; style 
3-4 (-5) mm. long, glabrous except for a few hairs at base; petals 
white; stamens about 100-125, 4-5 mm. long; fruit oblong to nearly 
globose, 4.5-7 mm. thick, 6.5-10 mm. long; seed 2 mm. long or less. 
This species, as defined here, ranges from the Lesser Antilles and 
Panama through most of tropical South America, chiefly east of the 
Andes, at elevations from near sea level to about 2,800 meters. It 
is particularly abundant as a tree of clearings and forest edges, at 
elevations below 1,000 meters. It belongs to a group of species which 
are taxonomically among the least understood in the genus. From 
northern Peru to Colombia (Antioquia) and Venezuela (Me"rida) the 
principal representative of this species complex is Myrcia acuminata 
(HBK.) DC., which is distinguished from M. fallax chiefly by the 



FLORA OF PERU 641 

presence of soft rusty-brown hairs (up to almost 1 mm. long) in the 
inflorescence and on the young shoots and leaves; the lower leaf- 
surfaces more or less permanently short-pilose with similar, usually 
erect hairs, especially on the principal veins; calyx-lobes relatively 
longer than in M. fallax and in Colombian material often as long as 
wide; branches of the inflorescence somewhat less compressed than 
in M. fallax; disk 2-2.5 (-3) mm. wide; style 5 mm. long. F.M. 
Negs. 7917, 19758, 19760, 19802, 19817, 19819, 19828, 19865, 23436, 
23441, 23443, 23444, 31445, 31453, 36875. 

Cajamarca: Prov. Jaen, valley of the river Tabaconas, 900-1,000 
meters, Weberbauer 6168 (acuminata). East side of the cordillera 
east of Huancabamba, Weberbauer 6123 (acuminata). San Martin: 
Moyobamba, Mathews 1454- Loreto: Along Rio Itaya, Williams 95. 
Maquisapa, upper Rio Nanay, Wittiams 1194. Tarapoto, Williams 
5384, 5874, 5890, 6115, 6130, 6324, 6420. San Roque, Williams 7123. 
Huanuco: Chinchao, Sawada 82. Near Pampayacu, Kanehira 51. 
Monzon, Weberbauer 3547, isotype of M. dictyoneura (herb. USM). 
Cuchero, Poeppig 1652B [=Poeppig 138, =Poeppig Add. 60], type 
of M. chilensis. Rio Acre: Seringal S. Francisco, Ule 9662. Local- 
ity uncertain: Arenal, Jelski 334, Mar. 16, 1878 (herb. W). "Ahu- 
ashi yacu," "Yspi" (Williams). Bolivia and Amazonian Brazil to 
the West Indies and Panama. Berg erroneously supposed that a 
part of Poeppig's collection, to which the numbers 1652B and 138 
were assigned in some herbaria, had originated in Chile, and the 
name Myrcia chilensis was based upon these specimens. 

Myrcia complicata (HBK.) DC. also appears to be conspecific. 
The type is a flowering specimen, moderately pale-strigose as in 
Myrcia splendens, with rounded calyx-lobes as in M. acuminata, but 
with the long petioles, nearly smooth leaves and strongly flattened 
inflorescence-branches of M. fallax. F.M. Neg. 36883. 

Cajamarca: Prov. Jaen de Bracamoros, prope San Felipe, alt. 
980 hex., Bonpland (type of M. complicata). 

Myrcia platycaula Diels (Bot. Jahrb. 37: 595. 1906), from moun- 
tains near Monzon, 2,000-2,500 meters, Dept. Hudnuco, Weber- 
bauer 3531, is a member of the same species complex. It is known 
to me only from a fragmentary specimen preserved in USM. The 
inflorescence is partially developed and the flowers have not opened. 
It differs from M. mollis (M. huanocensis) , with which it was com- 
pared by Diels, in having the leaves and inflorescence sparingly ap- 
pressed-hairy instead of copiously hirsute. It differs from Peruvian 
representatives of the acuminata-fallax group in having the calyx 



642 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

abundantly appressed-silky within. Better material is needed before 
this species can be definitely placed. 

Myrcia fascia ta McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 192. 1956. 

A tree 12 meters high, the vegetative buds thickly appressed- 
strigose with lustrous yellowish-white stiff hairs up to 0.8 mm. long, 
a few similar hairs on the petioles, inflorescence and the veins of the 
lower leaf-surface, the hairs on the hypanthium numerous, dark red- 
dish brown; leaves lustrous, coriaceous (Steyermark), broadly ovate, 
4.5-9 cm. wide, 7-12 cm. long, mostly 1.3-1.5 times as long as wide, 
rounded or emarginate at apex, broadly rounded at base, the mar- 
gins shortly decurrent on the channeled petiole 1.5-3 mm. thick, 
7-12 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; lat- 
eral veins 8-10 pairs, impressed above, prominulous beneath; mar- 
ginal vein a little weaker than the laterals and strongly arched 
between them, inconspicuous above, prominulous beneath, 2-6 mm. 
from margin; leaves drying brownish green, paler beneath, lustrous 
on both surfaces, with scattered small glands, these impressed on 
the upper surface but often obscure at maturity; inflorescence axil- 
lary, to 10 cm. long, or consisting of shorter fertile branches arising 
laterally in the axils of small leaves (up to 2 cm. wide, 4 cm. long) 
near the base of new leafy shoots; branches and peduncle much flat- 
tened, the latter often equaling or exceeding in length the rest of the 
inflorescence, distally enlarged, up to 3-4 mm. wide and hardly 1 mm. 
thick; flowers about 25, sessile or in 3's on short lateral branches 
near the tips of the panicle; bracteoles deciduous at anthesis, lance- 
subulate, hairy, 2 mm. long; immature buds 2 mm. long, narrowly 
conic; flowers not seen open; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 1.5-1.7 
mm. wide, 1 mm. long or a little more, pubescent both sides; disk 
about 2.5 mm. wide, hairy, with sharply depressed center; fruit about 
1 cm. in diameter, subglobose, puberulent, 1- to 4-seeded. Known 
only from the two original collections from the Province of Azuay, 
Ecuador, Steyermark 52961 and 52969 (F, type). 

Peru (probably). Ecuador. 

Myrcia fascicularis Berg, Linnaea 27: 87. 1855. M. bangii 
Rusby, Mem. Torr. Bot. Club 6: 36. 1896. 

A shrub or tree to 8 meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence and 
lower leaf-surface short-hirsute with yellowish or brownish-yellow 
spreading or appressed hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves ovate to 
lanceolate, 4.5-9 cm. wide, 13-21 cm. long, 2-3 (-4.5) times as long 
as wide, gradually or abruptly acuminate, narrowed toward base 



FLORA OF PERU 643 

from below the middle and thus long-cuneate, or more abruptly 
rounded and shortly cuneate at base, the margins decurrent on the 
stout petiole 1-2 mm. thick, 6-7 mm. long; midvein slightly im- 
pressed above and short-pubescent at least toward base, prominent 
beneath (raised its own thickness above the surface); lateral veins 
(15-) 20-25 pairs, slightly elevated both sides, prominent beneath; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals, nearly straight, distinct 
and prominent beneath, 1-2 mm. from margin; blades above lus- 
trous, green or darkening in drying, glabrous, thickly impressed- 
puncticulate; lower surface duller, yellow-green, colored and often 
obscured by the numerous appressed or erect hairs, the glands not 
apparent; inflorescence a short-pedunculate much-branched axillary 
panicle up to 6 cm. long, the branches strongly flattened, ascending; 
main axis up to 1 cm. long, tangentially much flattened, 1-2 mm. 
wide, the lowest pair of branches often arising in the axil also, and 
the inflorescence appearing fasciculate; flowers sessile, clustered in 
3's near the tips of the branches, or solitary; bracts and bracteoles 
deciduous before anthesis, scarious, the bracteoles lanceolate, 1 mm. 
long; buds 2.5-3 mm. long, the hypanthium long-conic or nearly cy- 
lindric, somewhat angled or ridged, densely appressed-hairy, longer 
than and contrasting with the dark calyx-lobes; lobes broadly and 
bluntly triangular or rounded, more than 1 mm. wide, 1 mm. long, 
hairy and gland-dotted without, glabrous within; disk 2 mm. wide, 
sunken, hairy; style 5 mm. long, hairy more than half its length; 
stamens 80-100, about as long as the style, the anthers 0.3 mm. 
long; petals suborbicular, hairy on the back, about 2.5 mm. long; 
fruit unknown. The specimens collected by Klug and Williams have 
broader leaves than those of the type and most other known collec- 
tions, and the pubescence is more closely appressed. F.M. Neg. 
23445. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 6732. Loreto: Mishuyacu, 
Klug 705, 886. Huanuco: Cuchero, Poeppig 1652 [=141], type. 
Bolivia. Reported from Chile by Berg, who erroneously supposed a 
part of Poeppig's original collection to have come from that country. 

Myrcia fenestrata DC. Prodr. 3: 251. 1828. 

A shrub or small tree to 5 meters high, the inflorescence sparingly 
hispidulous with sharp, slender, erect pale yellowish hairs up to 0.6 
mm. long (usually shorter) ; vegetative buds and hypanthium densely 
appressed-strigose with similar hairs; petioles and base of midvein 
below with a few somewhat stouter golden hairs up to 2 mm. long; 
leaves finely hispidulous above; branchlets, including those of the 



644 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

inflorescence, strongly compressed; leaves ovate or lanceolate, 2.5- 
4.5 cm. wide, 7-13 cm. long, 2.5-4 times as long as wide, rather 
long-acuminate, rounded at base and the margins there strongly de- 
curved but raised above the very short petiole 1-2 mm. thick, 1.5- 

2 mm. long; midvein and the 15-20 pairs of lateral veins impressed 
above, the areas between the latter raised in convex elongate parallel 
areas which are similarly concave beneath and the veins correspond- 
ingly elevated and markedly ladder-like, the midvein raised more 
than its diameter above the lower surface; marginal vein obscure on 
both sides, about equaling the laterals and somewhat arched between 
them, 1-1.5 mm. from margin; blades lustrous and polished above, 
green or darkened, the lower surface somewhat lustrous, yellowish 
brown or green, appearing thinly silicified and minutely verruculose; 
surfaces obscurely and sparsely gland-dotted, or no glands apparent; 
stipuloid processes conspicuous, 2-2.5 mm. long; inflorescence a 
short-pedunculate axillary panicle much shorter than the leaves, the 
branches gland-dotted, the primary axis strongly flattened, 2-6 (-11) 
mm. long and 2 mm. wide, its lowest branches somewhat ascending, 
4-6 cm. long, irregularly twice compound, the numerous flowers 
nearly sessile along the secondary branches or in triads near the tips; 
bracts deciduous at early anthesis, the larger ovate, pointed, up to 

3 mm. wide and 5 mm. long, hairy outside; bracteoles similarly de- 
ciduous, lanceolate, 1-2.5 mm. long; buds 2-2.5 mm. long, nearly 
globose, the hypanthium broadly obconic; calyx-lobes 5, pubescent 
both sides, broadly rounded, about 1.5 mm. wide and 1 mm. long; 
disk hairy, slightly depressed in center, 1.5-2 mm. wide; style 4-5 
mm. long, hairy about half its length; stamens about 150, as long as 
the style, the anthers about 0.3 mm. long; petals suborbicular, 2- 
2.5 mm. long; fruit subglobose, about 5 mm. in diameter. F.M. 
Neg. 19786. First collected by Martius, near Ega, Brazil, this spe- 
cies is well known in the vicinity of Manaus and at other localities 
in the upper Amazon Basin. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Myrcia huallagae McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 192. 1956. 
M. lanceolata y grandifolia Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 155. 
1857. 

A shrub or woody vine up to 3-4 meters high, hirsute with lus- 
trous red-brown erect stiff or flexuous hairs up to 3.5 mm. long; 
leaves elliptic-lanceolate, 3-4 cm. wide, 8-12 cm. long, often 3 times 
as long as wide, acute or rather abruptly acuminate, the very tip 
blunt; petiole enlarged and dark in color, 4-5 mm. long, 1 mm. thick, 



FLORA OF PERU 645 

abruptly contracted at the summit and appearing to be attached to 
the lower surface of the blade, the base of the blade prolonged 1-2 
mm. on each side into an auricle; mid vein on upper surface scarcely 
impressed, short-hairy, the hairs paler and more slender than those 
elsewhere on the plant; lateral veins inconspicuous, slender, 15-20 
pairs (4-6 mm. apart); marginal vein equaling the laterals, 1 mm. 
from margin; blades sparingly impressed-punctate above, not visibly 
punctate beneath; stipuloid processes acicular, 2.5 mm. long; inflo- 
rescence axillary, racemoid, few-flowered, much shorter than the 
leaves, up to 4 cm. long, conspicuously bibracteate at the 1-3 nodes, 
the bracts surpassing the flowers, persistent, ovate, trough-shaped at 
base, acutely pointed, glabrous within, 5 mm. wide, 9-12 mm. long, 
sparingly dark-dotted, finely ciliate, with evident mid vein; bracte- 
oles similar, smaller; flowers solitary on the branches, or in 3's at the 
tips of the lowest branches and the tip of the axis; perianth 4-parted, 
the petals white, roundish, about 5 mm. long, the sepals in 2 unequal 
pairs, foliaceous, the larger pair like the bracts, 3 mm. wide, 6 mm. 
long, the smaller similar, narrower, 5 mm. long; hypanthium with 
elongate base 1 mm. thick, 2 mm. long, this concealed by the thickly 
aggregated appressed reddish hairs; disk thickly hairy, distinctly 
sunken, 3.5 mm. across; style 6 mm. long, hirsute at base for two- 
thirds its length; stamens slightly exceeding the style; fruit ellipsoid, 
hirsute, 10 mm. thick, 13 mm. long, crowned with the ascending 
sepals. Univ. of Mich. Negs. 1019, 1032. 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, Kittip & Smith 27976, 28188, Williams 
3837, 3888, 4715. "In sylvis ad Huallagam," Feb., 1831, Poeppig 
2267 (type, herb W). Endemic. 

Myrcia madida McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 192. 1956. 

A tree up to 12 meters high, nearly glabrous but the inflorescence, 
petioles, vegetative buds, lower leaf-surfaces, and young shoots bear- 
ing very small appressed pale hairs 0.1-0.3 mm. long, these often 
wanting or nearly so except on the strongly whitened leaf buds and 
the hypanthium, where densely aggregated and somewhat felted to- 
gether in drying as if moistened (madida, drenched, sodden) ; leaves 
lustrous and coriaceous, elliptic to ovate or obovate, (4-) 6-9 cm. 
wide, (9-) 18-23 cm. long, 2.3-3.5 times as long as wide, prominently 
and slenderly acuminate, the base rounded but the basal margins 
often inrolled and the whole appearing subcuneate, the margins de- 
current on the stout dark channeled petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 8-11 
mm. long; midvein channeled above near base, distally plane or 
finally somewhat raised in a narrow ridge, prominent beneath; lat- 



646 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

eral veins 15-18 pairs, evident above, prominulous beneath; mar- 
ginal vein about equaling the laterals, somewhat arched between 
them, 1.5-3 mm. from margin; leaves olive green or somewhat brown- 
ing in drying, smooth and lustrous above with finely reticulate small 
veins, dull and pale brown or subglaucous beneath, very finely and 
rather thinly appressed-strigose, the surface very minutely roughened 
by the loosely arranged epidermis; glands not apparent in mature 
leaves; inflorescence a somewhat irregularly 3 to 4 times compound 
axillary (or terminal) panicle, 12-17 cm. long and about as wide, the 
branches strongly flattened, enlarged and jointed at base, the main 
axis up to 3.5 mm. wide below the first node; flowers numerous, 
aggregated mostly in threes on short peduncles near the tips of the 
branches, the individual flowers on pedicels about 0.7 mm. thick and 
up to 1 mm. long; bracts and bracteoles deciduous before anthesis; 
buds 4-4.5 mm. long, broadly obconic, the hypanthium about as 
long as the calyx-lobes, its felted pubescence diminishing distally; 
calyx-lobes broadly rounded, imbricated, unequal, 2-3 mm. wide, 
1.5-2.5 mm. long, appressed-pubescent within, sparingly strigose 
without; disk 2.5-3 mm. wide, hairy, the center depressed; style 
about 6 mm. long, hairy near base; stamens about 125, longer than 
the style (up to 7-9 mm. long), the anthers 0.5-0.6 mm. long; petals 
obovate, pubescent outside, about 4 mm. long; fruit black, ellipsoid, 
7-9 mm. thick, 10-13 mm. long. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 492. 

Loreto: Rio Napo near Mazan, alt. 110 meters, overhanging river, 
Jan. 27, 1932, Mexia 6448 (F, type). Manfinfa, upper Rio Nanay, 
Williams 1088. 

Myrcia mathewsiana (Berg) McVaugh, comb. nov. Aulo- 
myrcia mathewsiana Berg, Linnaea 27: 45. 1855. 

A shrub or tree, darkening in drying; young branchlets, young 
leaves, and inflorescence appressed-puberulent with slender, flexuous 
rufous hairs (their bases copper-colored, the tips white) up to 0.5 mm. 
long; leaves lanceolate to ovate or elliptic, glabrous except the thinly 
strigose midvein and petiole, 2.7-6 cm. wide, 7-12.5 cm. long, (1.5-) 
2.5-3 times as long as wide, the tip caudate-acuminate to acute, the 
very tip blunt; base rounded; petiole black in drying, 1.5-2 mm. 
thick, 5-6 mm. long; midvein impressed above; lateral veins 10-15 
pairs and some intermediate ones, reticulate, slightly raised on both 
sides; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, arcuate between 
them, 2-4 mm. from margin; blades when dry often black above, 
reddish-brown beneath; glandular dots not apparent in dried speci- 
mens; inflorescence many-flowered, irregularly 4 to 5 times com- 



FLORA OF PERU 647 

pound, 10-15 (-20) cm. long, the branches compressed below the 
nodes, the middle nodes sometimes leaf-bearing; hypanthium 1.5 
mm. long in anthesis, turbinate, densely appressed-puberulent with 
hairs like those of the inflorescence branches; calyx-lobes strigose 
(often sparingly so) or nearly glabrous, deltoid, about 0.8 mm. wide 
and long, reflexed after anthesis; disk 1.5 mm. wide; style 3-3.5 mm. 
long; petals 1.5 mm. long; stamens 40-50; fruit (not seen mature) 
probably globose, about 5-6 mm. in diameter. F.M. Neg. 23331. 

Loreto: Prov. of Moyobamba, 800-900 meters, Weberbauer 4473, 
Prov. of Moyobamba, Mathews s.n., Mathews 1453. The type (herb. 
W, not seen) is Mathews s.n., "in provincia Chachopayos Peruviae." 
Bolivia and Amazonian Brazil. 

Myrcia mollis (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 256. 1828. Myrtus mollis 
HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 141 (folio ed. 112). 1823. Myrcia huano- 
censis Berg, Linnaea 31: 250. 71862. Eugenia boliviensis Rusby, 
Mem. Torr. Bot. Club 3, pt. 3: 28. 1893. 

Shrub or small tree 1-5 meters high, the inflorescence, branchlets 
and lower surface of the leaves loosely hirsutulous, with spreading 
or ascending soft tawny yellow or brownish hairs up to 0.5 or 1 mm. 
long; leaves ovate, 4-6 cm. wide, 8-14 cm. long, 2-2.3 (-2.5) times 
as long as wide, broadly and bluntly (or occasionally narrowly) acu- 
minate, rounded at base, the margins abruptly decurrent on the stout 
channeled petiole 1.5-2.5 mm. thick, 2-4 (-6) mm. long; midvein 
somewhat impressed and pubescent above, prominent beneath; lat- 
eral veins 10 (-15) pairs, evident and usually impressed above, pro- 
minulous beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and 
rather strongly arched between them, 1-4 mm. from margin; leaves 
mostly drying green, the upper surface lustrous and nearly glabrous, 
marked with the reticulate pattern of the small veins, obscurely 
glandular with mostly impressed dots when young, the glands not 
apparent at maturity; lower surface hirsutulous at least on the veins, 
yellowish- or brownish-green, without apparent glands; inflorescence 
a broadly axillary or falsely terminal panicle, rather regularly 3 times 
compound, the many flowers mostly sessile in 3's near the tips, or 
the lateral pair of the terminal triad on pedicels up to 5 mm. long; 
branches of the panicle flattened, up to 2.5 mm. wide below the first 
node; bracts and bracteoles deciduous at anthesis, the latter elliptic 
or ovate, bluntly pointed, 1-2 mm. wide, 2-2.5 mm. long; buds 
about 4 mm. long, the hypanthium obconic, conspicuously tawny- or 
rufous-hirsute, expanded distally into the calyx; calyx-lobes broadly 



648 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

rounded, 5, somewhat unequal, 2.5-3 mm. wide, 2-2.5 mm. long, 
soft-hairy both sides; disk 3-3.5 mm. wide, hairy, the center de- 
pressed; style (5-) 6.5-7 mm. long, hairy half its length; stamens 
about 150, as long as the style or up to 10 mm. long, the anthers 
0.5-0.6 mm. long; petals obovate, hairy outside, white, about 4 mm. 
long; fruit not seen. Still to be worked out is the taxonomy of the 
several species of Myrcia of this alliance, described by Kunth from 
the collections of Bonpland. The species, all described in the genus 
Myrtus and later transferred by DeCandolle to Myrcia, include M. 
acuminata, M. complicata, M. polyantha and M. mollis. These spe- 
cies all belong to the same general group to which M. fallax also 
belongs; these have small flowers and relatively coarse panicle- 
branches, the hypanthium densely strigose even if the rest of the 
inflorescence is glabrous, and the fruit usually ellipsoid. As I under- 
stand M. fallax, that species has the panicle sparingly appressed- 
hairy or nearly glabrous, and the leaves appressed-pubescent; the 
calyx-lobes are short, and glabrous on the inner surface. In M. acu- 
minata, which I regard for the purposes of this Flora as synonymous 
with M. fallax, the pubescence is more copious, the hairs are some- 
what more erect, and the calyx-lobes are often as long as wide or a 
little longer. Peruvian specimens with the panicle hirsutulous but 
the calyx-lobes glabrous within, and the disk about 2 mm. broad, 
have been referred to M. fallax. Typical M. mollis, of Colombia, 
has flowers about the same size (disk 2 or as much as 3 mm. broad, 
style about 5 mm. long) as those of M . acuminata; the plant is gener- 
ally soft-hirsute, and the calyx-lobes are appressed-pubescent within. 
The Peruvian specimens referred to M. mollis have larger flowers 
than most Colombian specimens, but the collection from Lam- 
bayeque (Esposto s.n.} seems otherwise indistinguishable from typ- 
ical mollis. The hairs of the panicle rarely exceed 0.5 mm. in length, 
the style is about 5 mm. long, the petioles are well-marked, 4-6 mm. 
long, and the flowers are crowded near the tips of the branchlets. 
Ule's no. 9659 belongs to a well-marked entity of the trans-Andean 
lowlands of Bolivia and Peru which perhaps represents a distinct 
species, marked by its nearly sessile leaves, greater length of the 
hairs and the style, and a tendency for the terminal flowers to be 
pedicellate. F.M. Negs. 19793, 36897. 

Lambayeque: Monte Seco, quebrada del Rio Zafia, N. Esposto 
(USM). Huanuco: Without locality, Haenke (herb. M, type of M. 
huanocensis) . Rio Acre: Seringal Auristella, Ule 9659. Bolivia to 
Colombia and Venezuela. 



FLORA OF, PERU 649 

Myrcia multiflora (Lam.) DC. Prodr. 3: 244. 1828. Eugenia 
multiflora Lam. Encyc. 3: 302. 1789. M. sphaerocarpa DC. I.e. 251. 
Aulomyrcia multiflora (Lam.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 47. 1855. A. sphae- 
rocarpa (DC.) Berg, I.e. 51. A. sphaerocarpa f complicata Berg, in 
Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 86. 1857. A. laruotteana i\ peruviana Berg, 
in Mart. I.e. 91. Myrtus fragrans [Ruiz] Herb. Flor. Peruvian., ex 
Berg, I.e. 

A shrub or small tree, nearly glabrous, the leaf-buds and young 
branchlets, and the inner surface of the calyx-lobes, bearing silvery- 
or yellowish-white hairs up to 0.4 mm. long; leaves not darkening in 
drying, ovate, or varying toward elliptic, (1.3-) 2-3 cm. wide, (3-) 
5-8 cm. long, often 2.5 times as long as wide, the tip prolonged into 
a conspicuous blunt curved acumen, the base rounded; petiole less 
than 1 mm. thick, 3-5 mm. long; mid vein moderately or scarcely 
impressed above, prominent beneath; veins strongly reticulate on 
both surfaces, the laterals about 10 pairs, with numerous interme- 
diates; marginal vein strongly arched between the laterals, (1-) 2-4 
mm. from margin; light brown glandular dots abundant and con- 
spicuous on both surfaces; inflorescence axillary or falsely terminal, 
up to 12 cm. long, often exceeding the leaves, 3 to 5 times compound, 
many-flowered, its branches nearly terete, the axis about 1 'mm. in 
diameter; upper branches often alternate and the ultimate dichasia 
racemiform, and even the terminal flower pedicellate; lateral pedi- 
cels 2-3 mm. long; hypanthium turbinate, 1 mm. long; calyx 2-4 mm. 
across at post-anthesis, the lobes rounded-triangular, about 1 mm. 
long, ciliate; style (3-) 4 mm. long; petals 1.5 mm. long; stamens 
about 50, the anthers 0.2 mm. long. Fruit globose, about 6 mm. in 
diameter. This plant is best known from eastern Amazonian Brazil 
to the Guianas and Trinidad. Similar and probably conspecific taxa 
occur in southeastern Brazil. The Ruiz collection, at Berlin, referred 
by Berg to a variety of the South-Brazilian Aulomyrcia laruotteana, 
has presumably been destroyed, but a specimen of "Myrtus fragrans" 
from Pavon's herbarium (G) agrees with his description of [var.] 
peruviana. It is less prominently glandular than most specimens of 
A. multiflora, but in other respects, including the distinctive raceme- 
like tips of the panicles, it agrees well with this species. The slightly 
compressed panicle-branches are found in other examples of A. multi- 
flora, e.g. in Gardner 1616, the type of A. sphaerocarpa [var.] compli- 
cata. F.M. Neg. 19863; Univ. of Mich. Neg. 434. 

Huanuco: Macora ["Macoxa"], Ruiz. Carpish Divide, 8,500 feet, 
Sandeman 5216. Junin: Huacapistana, Sandeman Jf.39^. Entre 



650 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Tarma y San Ramon, debajo de Huacapistana, 1,800-2,200 meters, 
Ferreyra 11171, 11222, 11406. Rio Acre: Near mouth of Rio Ma- 
cauhan, Krukoff 5581 . Trinidad to (probably) southeastern Brazil, 
and Bolivia. "Cocacoca" (Ruiz). 

Myrcia myrtillifolia DC. Prodr. 3: 250. 1828. Aulomyrcia 
myrtillifolia (DC.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 36. 1855. 

A small shrub to 1 meter high, nearly glabrous, the leaf-buds, 
young petioles and immature branchlets thinly strigose with reddish 
or yellowish hairs. Leaves small, broadly elliptic to obovate, 8-15 
mm. wide, 9-27 mm. long, 1.5-2 times as long as wide; blades 
rounded, retuse, or blunt-pointed at tip, cuneate or somewhat 
rounded at base and attenuate to a ventrally grooved petiole 0.7 
mm. thick by 4 mm. long; veins 10-15 principal pairs, the interme- 
diate ones similar and parallel, in young leaves often forming a con- 
spicuous pattern of parallel veins about 1 mm. apart, all veins nearly 
straight, not decreasing distally; marginal vein about equal to the 
laterals, sinuous, less than 1 mm. from margin; glandular dots appar- 
ent in young leaves, much less so at maturity; inflorescence axillary, 
3-4 cm. long, mostly exceeding the leaves, once or twice compound; 
pedicels 4-7 mm. long; flowers usually 11 or fewer, glabrous except 
the strigose inner surface of the calyx-lobes; bracts and bracteoles 
1-1.5 mm. long, lanceolate, deciduous as the flowers open; hypan- 
thium turbinate, 1.5 mm. high in flower; calyx 3.5 mm. across in 
flower, the lobes 5, broadly rounded, finely ciliate, about 0.7 mm. 
long, 1.5 mm. wide; style 4 mm. long; anthers 0.3 mm. long; fruit 
globose, 5-6 mm. in diameter; ovary 3-locular. This plant belongs 
to a species complex which seems to be absent from the lower Ama- 
zon Valley, but is well represented in southeastern Brazil from Bahia 
southward. The Klug specimen cited below appears to be a close 
match for the type of Myrcia myrtillifolia (Bahia, Martins; seen at M, 
1954), and for authentic material of Aulomyrcia buxifolia var. ovalis 
Berg, A. caerulescens Berg, A. obovata Berg, and A. ramulosa (DC.) 
Berg. Of these species all except one are stated by Berg to have a 
bilocular ovary; the exception is A. obovata, which is described and 
illustrated (Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 122. pi. 19. 1857) as having a 
trilocular ovary. The importance of this character in species differ- 
entiation is not sufficiently understood. F.M. Neg. 19825. 

San Martin: Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, 1,200-1,600 meters, 
mountain forest, Klug 3289. Tarapoto, Williams 5961, 5990. 
Bolivia; southeastern Brazil. 



FLORA OF PERU 651 

Myrcia neesiana DC. Prodr. 3: 249. 1828. Aulomyrcia neesiana 
(DC.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 36. 1855. A. holosericea Berg, in Mart. Fl. 
Bras. 14, pt. 1:99. 1857. 

A tree, strigose to densely hirsutulous with stiff lustrous grayish- 
or yellowish-brown hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, these abundant on the 
branchlets, inflorescence, petiole, and hypanthium, and less abun- 
dant or sparse on the corolla and the lower surface of the leaves; 
leaves elliptic to ovate or obovate, 3.5-7 cm. wide, 12-21 cm. long, 
or smaller and narrower in the inflorescence, usually 2.7-3.4 times as 
long as wide, acuminate (often abruptly so), gradually narrowed to 
base where cuneate or abruptly rounded, the usually strigose-ciliate 
margin decurrent on the stout petiole 1-2.5 mm. thick, (4-) 6-10 
mm. long; midvein sulcate and usually narrowly impressed above, 
stiff-hairy or nearly or quite glabrous, prominent beneath; lateral 
veins (10-) 15-20 pairs, flat or very minutely impressed above, prom- 
inent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, and some- 
what arched between them, 1-3 mm. from margin (more strongly 
arched and often 5-7 mm. from margin in some Brazilian and Boli- 
vian plants with broad leaves) ; leaves darkening in drying, the upper 
surface often nearly black, somewhat lustrous, nearly glabrous, the 
veins reddish, the glands usually not apparent; lower surface dark 
brown, very minutely siliceo-verruculose, sparingly strigose or his- 
pidulous, with some dark glands; inflorescence an axillary or falsely 
terminal panicle up to 10-13 cm. long, rather regularly 2 to 3 times 
compound, the branches opposite or nearly so, strongly compressed, 
1.5-3 mm. wide below the first node; flowers large, up to about 70; 
bracteoles scarious, darkening and deciduous before anthesis, ovate, 
pointed, up to 2.5 mm. long; buds nearly glabrous, 4-5 mm. long, 
the calyx and hypanthium together forming a hemisphere, which is 
truncated by the nearly straight margins of the lobes, which sur- 
round loosely the low globe of the petals; calyx-lobes much broader 
than long, 2.5-3 mm. wide, 1.3-1.5 mm. long, appressed-pubescent 
within, strongly imbricated, rounded at the sides, the distal margin 
very slightly curved and the lobe usually appearing truncate; disk 
4 mm. wide, hairy, sunken, the cavity 2 mm. deep; style probably 
about 6 mm. long, glabrous except at base; stamens about 200, up 
to 6 mm. long, the anthers about 0.6 mm. long; petals probably sub- 
rotund, 4-5 mm. long; fruit subglobose, about 1 cm. in diameter. 
This assemblage of Amazonian species, referred by Berg to Aulo- 
myrcia because of the deeply sunken disk, is probably best regarded 
as a single species, characterized by the large, nearly globose and 



652 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

densely strigose buds, the truncate calyx and the deeply sunken disk. 
The type of Aulomyrcia holosericea, and also a topotype, Williams 
4851, are hirsutulous, with leaves mostly 15-20 cm. long, the lateral 
veins 15-20 pairs, the inflorescence 10-13 cm. long and up to 70- 
flowered. The type of M. neesiana, and also certain Peruvian and 
other Brazilian collections (e.g. Tessmann 3472), however, are thinly 
or closely strigose, the leaves shorter and broader, often 10-15 cm. 
long with 10-15 pairs of veins, the inflorescence 4-8 cm. long, with 
30 flowers or as few as 9. Possibly these should be regarded as sub- 
specifically, or even specifically different, but the many features 
which they have in common seem to preclude the adoption of such 
a classification, at least until better flowering and fruiting material 
is available. Rather numerous Bolivian collections made by Buch- 
tien are here regarded as comprising a part of the inclusive M. neesi- 
ana also, although they are even more strongly hirsutulous than 
A. holosericea. F.M. Negs. 19826, 23327. 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, Poeppig 2217, type of A. holosericea; Wil- 
liams 4851 . Stromgebiet des Ucayali von 10 S. bis zur Miindung, 
Tessmann 3472. 

A specimen collected by Macbride at Hacienda Schunke, La 
Merced, Junin? (no. 5621) is perhaps an extraordinarily vigorous 
example of this species. The leaf-blades are 8-10 cm. wide, 15-22 
cm. long, and the petioles 2.5-3.5 cm. long; the lower leaf-surfaces 
are strongly hirsute, and the veins are more prominent than in other 
collections of this species. The fruit, said to be red, is globose and 
up to about 1 cm. in diameter. This may represent an undescribed 
species, but the specimen has the aspect of a watersprout, and is 
said by the collector to be "branchless, about 6 feet high." 

Myrcia obumbrans (Berg) McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 193. 
1956. Rubachia obumbrans Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 28. 
1857. Marlierea obumbrans (Berg) Niedz. in Natiirl. Pflanzenfam. 
Ill, pt. 7: 76. 1893. 

A shrub or tree, the branchlets, vegetative buds, branches of the 
inflorescence and hypanthium densely silky-strigose with minute pale 
yellowish-white hairs, the longest up to 0.5 mm. long; bracts and 
upper surface of the leaves sparingly pubescent with similar hairs; 
leaves very large, sessile, broadly elliptic or ovate, 13-17 cm. wide, 
25-32 cm. long, 1.7-2 times as long as wide, abruptly and about 
equally rounded to the narrow acumen 1-1.5 cm. long and to the 
cordate base; midvein impressed above, sulcate near base but ele- 



FLORA OF PERU 653 

vated in a narrow ridge near tip, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
15-20 pairs, impressed above, prominent beneath; marginal vein 
about equaling the laterals and arched between them, 5-9 mm. from 
margin, with a weaker submarginal vein outside it; upper surface of 
blade darkening in drying, lustrous, reticulate with small raised veins, 
somewhat impressed-punctate; lower surface glabrous to minutely 
hispidulous, dull and pale, without apparent glands; stipuloid proc- 
esses conspicuous, 3-4 mm. long; inflorescence a stout panicle, 3 to 4 
times compound, up to 20 cm. long; flowers clustered in 3's near the 
tips of the branches, sessile; bracts leafy and conspicuous in the 
young inflorescence, deciduous at or before anthesis, the larger boat- 
shaped, obtuse, 8 mm. wide, 16 mm. long; bracteoles similar, elliptic, 
obtuse, about 1.7 mm. wide, 2-3 mm. long; opening buds 7 mm. long, 
narrowly obconic, the hypanthium about 8-ridged, the perianth 
folded nearly at right angles across the end; calyx-lobes broadly 
rounded, 5, hairy both sides, the larger 6 mm. wide, 3 mm. long; 
disk less than 3 mm. in diameter in bud, hirsute within and sunken 
1.5 mm. in bud; style glabrous, or hairy at base, 12 mm. long (ex 
Berg); stamens about 200; petals five, 12 mm. long (ex Berg), fleshy 
in the bud, hairy on the outer surface. F.M. Neg. 31508. 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, Kittip & Smith 28180; Poeppig 2210, type; 
Williams 4581 . 

Myrcia paivae Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 179. 1857. 
M. frontinensis Hieron. Bot. Jahrb. 20, Beibl. 49: 63. 1895. 

A large shrub, or a tree up to 12 meters high, closely similar to 
M. sylvatica, but the leaves larger, usually cuneate and slender- 
petiolate at base; pubescence variable, like that of M. sylvatica, or 
of very short appressed hairs intermixed with longer appressed hairs, 
or mostly of longer and softer hairs, or almost none except on the 
hypanthium and vegetative buds; leaves lanceolate or ovate, or often 
elliptic and narrowed about equally to both ends; blades 2-4 cm. 
wide, 5.5-12 cm. long, often 2.5-3 times as long as wide, prominently 
and usually narrowly acuminate at apex, cuneate or sometimes 
rounded at base, the margins decurrent on the petiole which is 
(3.5-) 4-6 mm. long; upper surface of leaves with impressed glands, 
these sometimes inconspicuous in old leaves; venation more con- 
spicuous than in M. sylvatica, but the lateral veins usually obscure 
above; inflorescence up to 8 cm. long, like that of M. sylvatica except 
for the variation in pubescence; disk about 1.5 mm. across, with de- 
pressed center; fruit apparently varying from nearly globose to ob- 



654 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

long, 5-6 mm. broad, 6-8 mm. long, deep purple to black. F.M. 
Neg. 19835. 

San Martin: Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, Klug 3267. San 
Roque, Williams 6983. Loreto: Lower Rio Nanay, Williams 621. 
Iquitos, Williams 7987; Killip & Smith 26982. Venezuela (Isla de 
El Raton, Amazonas), Colombia (Antioquia), Amazonian Brazil, 
Bolivia. "Orno pichana" (Williams). 

A plant collected by Krukoff (no. 5582) near mouth of Rio Ma- 
cauhan, Terr. Acre, Aug. 21, 1933 (US), suggests M. paivae by its 
leaf-shape and the presence of numerous, although hardly impressed, 
glands. The specimen, however, is almost completely glabrous and 
may represent an undescribed species, but additional material is 
needed. 

In eastern Peru the species of Myrcia in this group are highly 
variable and scarcely separable. The pattern of variation suggests 
a history of complex hybridization and subsequent introgression. 
The original taxa appear to have been at least three, namely: (1) A 
species with short petioles, short slender inflorescence and small 
flowers, ample and more or less appressed pubescence, and lance- 
ovate leaves with evident venation but lacking impressed glands on 
the upper surface. This is Myrcia splendens. (2) A species like the 
first, with smaller leaves with impressed glands, but the venation 
scarcely or not at all apparent on the upper surface; pubescence am- 
ple but often minute and tending to be erect rather than appressed; 
leaves lanceolate. This is Myrcia sylvatica. (3) A coarser species 
with longer petioles, larger flowers, larger and more compressed in- 
florescence, sparingly or not at all pubescent, the often elliptic rather 
than lanceolate or ovate leaves rather prominently veined but with- 
out impressed glands. This is Myrcia fallax. 

All three of the above species occur in the Guianas. Two of 
them, sylvatica and fallax, are well known farther south in Brazil, 
and through most of the Amazon Basin. The third species, splen- 
dens, as far as I am aware, does not range far southward in eastern 
South America; it is well known in the West Indies and apparently 
ranges southward along the lowlands east of the Andes as far as 
Bolivia. Plants which I cannot distinguish from West Indian speci- 
mens occur in Peru and Bolivia, and a related but small-leaved and 
rather heavily strigose taxon (Myrcia saxicola) is found in Peru and 
Ecuador. Similar, often abundantly pubescent plants are found at 
various localities in Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela. 



FLORA OF PERU 655 

In eastern Peru and Bolivia and adjacent Brazil, and as far north 
and east as Antioquia, Colombia, and central Venezuela (Isla de El 
Raton), there is a so-called species, Myrcia paivae Berg, which has 
the long petioles and leaf-shape of M. fallax but the inconspicuous 
veins, the impressed glands and the small, slender and finely pubes- 
cent inflorescence of M. sylvatica. 

Similar intermediate forms occur in Peru, Colombia and Vene- 
zuela. These have mostly lance-ovate leaves with inconspicuous 
veins, impressed glands, and short petioles. The specimens suggest 
a condition intermediate between M. splendens and M. sylvatica. 

Finally may be mentioned a series of specimens from northern 
Bolivia. These have the aspect of M. paivae but lack the impressed 
glands on the leaves and have relatively prominent veins. These 
specimens suggest intermediates between fallax and a plant like 
paivae. 

Peruvian specimens of paivae, although consistently slender-peti- 
olate, vary in leaf-shape from elliptic or elliptic-lanceolate with long- 
tapering base (as in the type of the species), to nearly ovate with 
somewhat rounded base. Variation of this kind can be explained, if 
the hybrid origin of M . paivae be indeed a fact, on the basis of the 
presence of varying numbers of genes derived from the sylvatica an- 
cestor. There appears also to be a correlation between leaf-shape 
and opacity, i.e. leaves which tend toward a lanceolate or ovate 
shape tend also to have the lateral veins less apparent on the upper 
surface; this last correlation is highly subjective, however, and is 
based upon small numbers of specimens. 

Myrcia pentagona McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 193. 1956. 

Tree 5 meters high, the branchlets, buds, inflorescence and espe- 
cially the hypanthium whitened with straight soft appressed hairs 
up to 0.5 mm. long, these often collapsing and matted together in 
drying, to give a felted appearance; leaves elliptic, 5-7.5 cm. wide, 
20-30 cm. long, 3-4 times as long as wide, gradually or abruptly 
acuminate, rounded to the base but the margins strongly inrolled for 
1-5 cm. above the base (making the leaf appear subcuneate at base) 
and somewhat prolonged and decurrent on the stout, deeply chan- 
neled petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 6-8 mm. long; prolonged basal mar- 
gins raised above the general surface, appearing as two auricles or 
as the ends of two tubes formed by the inrolled portions; midvein 
sulcate above, elevated beneath more than its diameter; lateral veins 
impressed above and prominulous beneath, with 18-25 pairs much 



656 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

stronger than the intermediates, the marginal vein about equaling 
the laterals, nearly straight, 2-3 mm. from the margin; upper surface 
dark green or brown and lustrous, nearly glabrous, smootb, with 
minutely reticulate vein-pattern, the lower surface obscurely ver- 
ruculose, sparingly appressed-pubescent, pale brown; glands not 
apparent on either surface; inflorescence a stout axillary or falsely 
terminal many-flowered panicle 12-15 cm. long and about as wide, 
irregularly 3 times compound, the principal branches opposite and 
much flattened, the peduncle 2-4 cm. long, up to 4 mm. wide below 
the first node; flowers aggregated toward the tips of the branches, 
sessile and often alternate along the somewhat 4-angled ultimate 
branchlets, or in triads at the tips; bracts and bracteoles scarious, 
dark, deciduous before anthesis, the bracteoles ovate, acute, up to 
2 mm. long; buds 3.5-4.5 mm. long, the hypanthium obconic, when 
dry with 5 prominent ridges opposite the calyx-lobes, the latter 
rounded or bluntly (or in the outer acutely) triangular, unequal, 
hairy inside, 1.5-2 mm. wide, 1-1.5 mm. long; disk 3^4 mm. wide, 
hairy, deeply sunken; style 6-7 mm. long, hairy more than half its 
length; stamens up to 8 mm. long, about as long as the style, about 
150, the anthers 0.5 mm. long; petals white, ovate to suborbicular, 
about 3.5-4 mm. long, hairy outside. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 487. 

Loreto: Florida, Rio Putumayo, mouth of Rio Zubineta, alt. 180 
meters, forest, May-July, 1931, G. King 2152 (type, F). "Choy-ey" 
(Huitoto, Klug). 

Myrcia pertusa DC. Prodr. 3: 251. 1828. Aulomyrcia pertusa 
(DC.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 47. 1855. 

A small tree to 4 meters high, pubescent in the inflorescence and 
on the principal veins of the lower leaf-surface with sharp slender 
yellowish-white hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, these thickly aggregated 
and appressed on the vegetative buds and on the narrow base of the 
hypanthium; leaves lanceolate, elliptic or obovate, 2.5-6.5 cm. wide, 
7-17 cm. long, usually nearly 3 times as long as wide, acuminate, 
the base rounded or subcordate, its margins produced and raised or 
undulate at the junction with the flattened petiole 2 mm. long and 
nearly as wide; stipular processes 1.5 mm. long, conspicuous; mid- 
vein strongly impressed above or nearly flat near base, prominent 
beneath and elevated about its own thickness; lateral veins 15-20 
pairs, impressed above, prominent beneath; marginal vein similar to 
laterals but often stronger, 1-3 mm. from margin; blades lustrous 
and polished above, green, with 5-8 large raised glandular dots per 



FLORA OF PERU 657 

square mm.; lower surface green, dull, the glandular dots inconspic- 
uous; inflorescence a broad axillary panicle 8-10 cm. long and almost 
as wide, irregularly 3 times compound, many-flowered, the branches 
opposite or subopposite, compressed, 2-2.5 mm. wide below the first 
node; flowers aggregated near the tips of the branches, sessile but 
with a narrow pseudostalk 1-1.5 mm. long, this densely hairy, 
abruptly expanded into the broadly funnelform, nearly glabrous 
hypanthium; buds about 3 mm. long; bracts and bracteoles linear 
or lanceolate and up to 5 mm. long or more (in the type-collection), 
deciduous before full anthesis; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 2 mm. 
wide, 1.5 mm. long, ciliate, strigose without, glabrous within, strongly 
gland-dotted; disk about 2 mm. wide, hairy, sunken; style 4.5 mm. 
long, hairy near base; stamens 250-300, about 6 mm. long; petals 
suborbicular, about 2.5 mm. long and wide; fruit not known. 
F.M. Neg. 19839. 

Loreto: Florida, at mouth of Rio Zubineta, Klug 2065. Ama- 
zonian Brazil, the type from Ega. 

Myrcia poeppigiana Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 157. 

1857. 

A slender shrub up to 3 meters high, or possibly vine-like, hirsute 
with lustrous brownish-yellow erect or flexuous hairs up to 1.5 mm. 
long; leaves elliptic or lanceolate, (1.5-) 2.5-3.5 cm. wide, (4-) 6- 
11 cm. long, often 3 times as long as wide, bluntly pointed or acumi- 
nate, the upper surface dark and glabrous except the impressed and 
closely fine-hairy mid vein; blade nearly sessile, rounded at base, the 
dark petiole about 1 mm. thick, 3-5 mm. long, abruptly contracted 
at summit into the midvein, about half its length under the basal 
portion of the blade; lateral veins 7-12 pairs, impressed above in age, 
raised and evident beneath; marginal vein diminishing from vein to 
vein toward apex of leaf, 1-2 mm. from margin between veins, 2-4 
mm. at junction with veins; blades not visibly gland-dotted by re- 
flected light; stipuloid processes 1.5-2 mm. long; inflorescence 3-6 
(-10) cm. long, slender, axillary, 7- to 10- (20-) flowered, the axis 
1 mm. or less in diameter, terete; pedicels 3-5 mm. long; bracts and 
bracteoles unknown, probably deciduous as the inflorescence ex- 
pands; corolla and stamens unknown; calyx-lobes 5, equal, broadly 
rounded, about 1.7 mm. wide, 1 mm. long, glabrous or silky-strigose 
on the inner surface; hypanthium densely appressed-hirsute; disk 
densely short-hirsute, apparently flat or nearly so, about 2.5 mm. 
across; style 6 mm. long, hairy half its length; fruit oblong, 6-7 mm. 



658 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

thick, 8-9 mm. long. First collected at Ega, Brazil, in 1831, by 
Poeppig (no. 2577). A recent collection is Krukoff's no. 6995 from 
the upper Rio Madeira, Amazonas, Brazil. The general morphology 
of this species seems to suggest its close relationships to M. bracteata 
and M. huallagae, from both of which it is readily distinguished by 
the slender bractless inflorescence. F.M. Neg. 23463. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Myrcia salicifolia DC. Prodr. 3: 246. 1828. Aulomyrcia salici- 
folia (DC.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 78. 1855. 

A shrub or small tree to 10 meters high, nearly glabrous, or the 
young shoots, leaf-buds and ventral surface of the petiole strigose 
with reddish or dark brown hairs; leaves narrowly elliptic or oblance- 
olate, 5-12 mm. wide, 2.5-7 cm. long, (3-) 5-6 (-9) times as long as 
wide, tapering to a slender blunt tip (or in oblanceolate leaves the 
tip rounded), attenuate to a short petiolar base 2-3 mm. long; mid- 
vein convex above and below, about equally prominent on the two 
surfaces; lateral veins inconspicuous, 10-12 pairs, the smaller veins 
reticulate; marginal vein nearly straight, inconspicuous, about 1 mm. 
from margin; blades smooth and lustrous above, paler beneath, 
gland-dotted on both sides; inflorescence glabrous, 2-6 cm. long, 1- 
to 7-flowered, bearing in addition to the terminal flower 1-3 pairs of 
slender divaricate 1-flowered branches 5-15 mm. long; peduncle 1.5- 
2 cm. long, 0.5 mm. thick; bracts linear, glabrous, 3-5 mm. long, 
deciduous at or before anthesis; bracteoles similar, 1.5 mm. long; 
buds 3-4 mm. long, turbinate or obovoid, the hypanthium 1-1.5 mm. 
long; calyx-lobes 4 (less often 5), broadly rounded, up to 1 mm. long 
and 1.8 mm. wide, thickly pubescent on the inner surface (and some- 
times in the sinuses on the outer surface) with very short flaccid 
ochraceous broad-based hairs; hypanthium glabrous within, pro- 
longed about 1 mm. beyond the summit of the ovary, the orifice 
2-3 mm. across; style 4 mm. long; stamens about 50, about as long 
as the style; petals white, about 2 mm. wide, 3 mm. long; fruit gla- 
brous, apparently black, globose, pyriform, or oblate, 7-10 mm. 
across, 7-12 mm. high; seeds about 3, lunate, 6 mm. long. A dis- 
tinctive species, well known from recent collections on the Rio Apa- 
poris as well as from older collections on the Rio Vaupe"s; occurs 
also as near to the borders of Peru as the Rio Caqueta, Colombia 
(Schultes & Cabrera 16364}, and the Rio Japura, Brazil (Martins). 
F.M. Neg. 19857. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil and Colombia. 



FLORA OF PERU 659 

Myrcia splendens (Sw.) DC. Prodr. 3: 244. 1828. 1 Myrtus 
splendens Sw. Prodr. 79. 1788. Myrcia sororia DC. I.e. 243. M. 
saxicola Berg, Linnaea 27: 92. 1855. M. sericea Berg, I.e. 114. 
(?)M. saxicola ft grandifolia Berg, Linnaea 29: 219. 1858. M. 
brachylopadia Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 595. 1906. M. lamprosericea 
Diels, I.e. 596. M. coroicensis Rusby, Bull. N. Y. Bot. Gard. 4: 
354. 1907. 

1. Myrcia splendens (Sw.) DC., var. splendens. 

A shrub or small tree up to 5-6 meters high, abundantly pubes- 
cent with lustrous yellowish- or brownish-white hairs up to 1 mm. 
long on the leaves, 0.5 mm. long in the inflorescence; hairs appressed 
or strongly ascending, the hypanthium, inflorescence-branches and 
dorsal surface of the midvein closely silky-strigose or somewhat 
shaggy; calyx-lobes and dorsal (lower) leaf-surface sparingly or 
closely strigose; leaves subsessile, ovate, ovate-lanceolate or some- 
times elliptic, (1-) 2-3 (-4) cm. wide, (2-) 5-7 (-11) cm. long, 2-3 
times as long as wide; blades abruptly narrowed at tip to a blunt 
point or, usually, broadly or narrowly acuminate; base of blade 
rounded and often somewhat cordate-auriculate; petiole stout, ven- 
trally grooved, about 1 mm. thick and up to 3 (-4) mm. long; sur- 
face features and venation of blades as in M. fallax except that the 
midvein bears a line of stiff, often erect hairs most of its length on 
the upper surface; marginal vein usually less than 1 mm. from mar- 
gin; inflorescence axillary and subterminal, 2-4 (-6) cm. long, with 
up to 50 flowers (usually fewer), 3 times compound, the branches 
opposite or nearly so, terete or but slightly flattened below the nodes 
(1-1.5 mm. wide below the first node) ; flowers aggregated toward the 
tips of the branches; buds 2.2-2.5 mm. long before anthesis, the 
hypanthium narrowly turbinate; calyx-lobes 5, drying dark, glabrous 
on the inner surface, bluntly deltoid or broadly rounded, 1-1.2 mm. 
long, about 1.5 mm. wide, often reflexed in post-anthesis; disk about 
2 mm. wide, densely hairy, the center slightly or markedly depressed; 
style 3.5-4.5 mm. long, hairy near base or below the middle; petals 

1 This has long been the accepted name for this species. According to Kuntze, 
however, Swartz himself recognized the priority of Jacquin's Collectanea ad Botani- 
cam. . . spectantia (vol. 2, 1788) over Swartz' Prodromus, in which the name Myrtus 
splendens was published (Kuntze, Rev. Gen. 1: cxxxi, cxliv. 1891). Eugenia peri- 
plocifolia Jacq. (Coll. 2: 108. U. 1788), according to DeCandolle (Prodr. 3: 244. 
1828), Berg (Linnaea 27: 105. 1855) and Urban (Bot. Jahrb. 19: 583. 1895), is 
identical with Myrtus splendens Swartz; if such actually be the case, Jacquin's 
name, being the earlier, is to be transferred to Myrcia to replace Myrcia splendens 
(Sw.) DC. I have not been able to form any conclusions as to the identity of 
Eugenia periploci folia, and prefer not to make the necessary new combination. 



660 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

white, about 2 mm. long; stamens white, about 75-85, 3-3.5 mm. 
long; fruit oblong, about 6 mm. thick, 7-8 mm. long. Closely simu- 
lating M. fallax, but smaller in most of its parts than that species, 
from which it is distinguished by the abundant appressed pubes- 
cence, which often has a grayish appearance, shorter petioles, more 
ovate leaves, and short slender inflorescence in which the branches 
are hardly or not at all flattened. F.M. Negs. 23469, 31461, 33486; 
U. S. Nat. Herb. Negs. 4463, 4468. 

I am quite unable to find any morphological distinction between 
typical West Indian material of this species, and some of the Peru- 
vian specimens cited below (e.g. Klug 702, Klug 3346). Much of 
the Peruvian material, however, and some from southern Ecuador, 
is of the type exemplified by Poeppig's no. 1755 (the type of Myrcia 
saxicola), and Weberbauer's no. 4508 (the type of M. lamprosericea) . 
These have the leaves small (often 4 cm. long or less) and relatively 
broad; the silky-strigose pubescence covers the inflorescence branches 
so abundantly as to give them often a shaggy appearance; the hairs 
also extend in abundance to the lower surfaces of the leaves and to 
the hypanthium and calyx-lobes. 

An extreme in which the long and abundant silky pubescence 
covers the young growth and the young leaves is M. sericea Berg 
(Poeppig's no. 1675). The type is in very young bud, but as far as 
can be ascertained it differs from M. splendens only by the appressed 
pale hairs. Of this same general description is M. coroicensis Rusby 
(Bang 2276} . An even more remarkable extreme, in which the lus- 
trous, silky reddish-yellow hairs are longer than the calyx-lobes, is 
var. chrysocoma (see below). 

In contrast to the small-leaved specimens of the saxicola-lampro- 
sericea type, may be cited certain collections made by Klug (nos. 
2181, 2342) at Florida. These seem to represent extraordinarily 
vigorous individuals, which differ from ordinary splendens in having 
elliptic leaves 4.5-6.5 cm. wide and 12-16 cm. long, and a much- 
branched inflorescence up to 15 cm. long. 

A doubtful specimen, which may represent an undescribed spe- 
cies, was collected near the mouth of Rio Macauhan, Rio Acre, by 
Krukoff (no. 5582). The inflorescence is very slender and relatively 
few-flowered, the disk is 2.5 mm. wide, and the whole plant is gla- 
brous except the hypanthium and disk, the calyx-lobes (both sides), 
and the petals. 

San Martin : Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, Klug 3346. Province 
of Moyobamba, Mathews. Moyobamba, 800-900 meters, Weber- 






FLORA OF PERU 661 

bauer 4508, isotype of M. lamprosericea (herb. USM). Tarapoto, 
Williams 5434, 5789, 5804, 5872, 6089, 6283, 6296, 6413, 6429. San 
Roque, Williams 7685. Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, Klug 702. 
Florida, Klug 2182, 2342. Manfinfa, upper Rio Nanay, Williams 
1146. Tierra Doble, Rio Nanay, Williams 908. Iquitos, Killip & 
Smith 27034; Tessmann 3604, 5337; Williams 8038. Huanuco: 
Pampayacu, Kanehira 15. Mufia, about 7,000 feet, 3924. Cuchero, 
Poeppig 1675 [= Poeppig 58, = Poeppig 143], type of M. sericea. 
Rupes ad Cassapi, Poeppig 1755, type of M. saxicola. Cassapi, 
Mathews 1958. Monzon, 2,000-2,500 meters, Weberbauer 3526 
(herb. USM). Junin: Huacapistana between Tarma and San Ra- 
mon, Ferreyra 273. Near Huacapistana, Weberbauer 2100, isotype 
of M. brachylopadia (herb. USM). Ayacucho: Ccarrapa, Killip & 
Smith 22474- Aina, Killip & Smith 22530. Cuzco: Choquello- 
huanca(?), Vargas C. 8187. Marcapata Valley between Chaupi- 
chaca and Tio, 1,900 meters, Weberbauer 7853. Callanga, Woyt- 
kowski 389. Locality uncertain: Corapacho, Ruiz & Pavdn, lecto- 
type of M. acuminata 6 peruviana (herb. F, G). "Puchcu-huaiu," 
"Pampa-Ore'gano," "Vicho caspi" (Williams); "Choi-ey" (Huitoto 
language, Klug); "Ucucha-huasi" (Williams). Bolivia to the West 
Indies. 

2. Myrcia splendens (Sw.) DC., var. chrysocoma McVaugh, 
Fieldiana Bot. 29: 193. 1956. 

A tree, with the general aspect of Myrcia splendens var. splen- 
dens, but hirsute, the pubescence dense, consisting of appressed or 
ascending, lustrous, silky, reddish yellow or yellowish hairs up to 
1 mm. long or a little more, the hairs surpassing the calyx-lobes. 
Univ. of Mich. Neg. 457. 

San Martin: Pongo de Cainarachi, Rio Cainarachi, alt. 230 me- 
ters, in forest, Sept.-Oct., 1932, Klug 2622 (type, US). 

Myrcia subglabra McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 194. 1956. 

A tree 6 meters high, with strongly flattened branchlets, nearly 
completely glabrous except that the petals are hairy outside and the 
vegetative buds are densely appressed pubescent with straight lus- 
trous yellowish white hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves elliptic-lanceo- 
late or narrowly ovate, 2-6 cm. wide, 8-20 cm. long, variable on each 
plant, 2.4-4 times as long as wide, gradually acuminate and often 
attenuate at tip, rounded toward base and at very base usually cune- 
ate, the margins long-decurrent on the petiole up to 1.5 mm. thick, 
5-8 mm. long; midvein impressed above except near tip, pubescent 



662 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

except near base, prominent beneath; lateral veins 15-18 pairs, some- 
what elevated above in drying, prominulous beneath, the parallel 
intermediate veins less conspicuous than small irregular transverse 
veins which produce an angular reticulate pattern on both surfaces; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals, strongly arched between 
them, 1-6 mm. from margin, with a weaker submarginal vein out- 
side it; leaves in drying nearly concolorous, green or light brown, 
both surfaces lustrous and bearing elevated large dark circular glands, 
these up to 0.3 mm. wide, 1-2 per square mm.; inflorescence a many- 
flowered broad panicle, 3 to 4 times compound, the branches oppo- 
site or subopposite, flattened, the axis about 2 mm. wide below the 
first node; flowers mostly pedicellate, solitary or in 3's near the tips 
of the branches; bracts and bracteoles deciduous at anthesis, the 
former foliaceous, elliptic, less than 1 cm. long, the bracteoles linear, 
acute, ciliate, 1-1.5 mm. long; buds 3-4 mm. long, subglobose even 
when young, the hypanthium completely glabrous or with a very 
few hairs on the narrow pseudostalk which is 1 mm. long or less; 
calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 1.5-2 mm. wide, 1-1.3 mm. long, ciliate 
but glabrous on both surfaces; disk 2.5-3 mm. wide, deeply sunken, 
white-hairy; style 6-7 mm. long, hairy at base only; stamens about 
200, the longest about equaling the style; anthers 0.6 mm. long; 
petals probably obovate, 4 mm. long, hairy outside; fruit ellipsoid- 
oblong, 5-7 mm. in diameter, about 1 cm. long, the hypanthium 
prolonged into a cylindrical neck 3^4 mm. thick, 2 mm. long. One 
of the most distinctive species of Myrcia, thus far known only from 
the Mapiri region of northern Bolivia, where collected several times 
in the subtropical forested areas, at elevations of 570-850 meters. 

Peru (probably). Bolivia. 

Myrcia sylvatica 1 (Mey.) DC. Prodr. 3: 244. 1828. Myrtus syl- 
vaticus Mey. Prim. Fl. Esseq. 191. 1818. Myrcia ambigua DC. I.e. 
252. M. ambigua a dives and multiflora Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, 
pt. 1: 180. 1857. 

A shrub or small tree up to 4 (-6) meters high, finely pubescent 
on the inflorescence and young growth; hairs of two types, the inflo- 
rescence and vegetative branchlets densely hispidulous with minute 
upright or ascending hairs about 0.1 mm. long, and beset also, espe- 
cially at nodes and on the hypanthium, with appressed lustrous 

1 The name of this species is probably a later synonym of Myrtus lucida L. 
Syst. Nat. ed. 10: 1056. 1759. The type, which I examined in the Linnaean Her- 
barium in 1954 (Specimen no. 637-9), resembles M. sylvatica closely except that 
the leaves are not noticeably impressed-puncticulate. 



FLORA OF PERU 663 

yellowish white hairs up to more than 0.5 mm. long; leaves lanceo- 
late to narrowly ovate, 1-2 (-2.8) cm. wide, 4.5-7 cm. long, 2.5-3.5 
(-5) times as long as wide, strigose beneath especially on the promi- 
nent midvein; blades prominently and often narrowly acuminate, 
blunt at very tip, rounded at base; petiole stout, often twisted, more 
than 0.5 mm. thick, 2-2.5 (-3) mm. long; upper surface of blade 
bright green and lustrous, abundantly impressed-dotted, the mid- 
vein impressed, the lateral veins scarcely or not apparent when dry; 
lower surface dull and paler, the lateral veins inconspicuous, about 
15 pairs sometimes slightly raised, or these about equaling inter- 
mediate veins and the leaf having up to 40 parallel lateral veins on 
each side; small veins between the laterals inconspicuous, the vena- 
tion thus not appearing reticulate; marginal vein about equaling the 
laterals, and arched slightly between the larger ones, about 0.5 mm. 
from margin; inflorescence axillary or sub terminal, up to 6 cm. long, 
3 to 4 times compound, the branches opposite or subopposite, terete 
or nearly so, the axis less than 1 mm. in diameter below the first node, 
the flowers aggregated in 3's near the tips of the branches; buds 1.5- 
2 mm. long just before anthesis, the hypanthium narrowly turbinate; 
calyx-lobes 5, drying dark, strigose without, glabrous within, bluntly 
triangular, about 0.5 mm. long and a little more in width, mostly 
erect in post-anthesis and in fruit; disk 1-1.5 mm. wide, densely 
hairy, the middle slightly depressed; style 2.5-3.5 (-4) mm. long, 
hairy at base; petals white, about 1.5 mm. long; stamens about 50- 
75, 2.5-3.5 mm. long; fruit oblong, black, 3.5-4 mm. thick, 5-6 mm. 
long. The Peruvian specimens cited below have lanceolate leaves 
which are considerably larger than usual in this species (2-2.5 cm. 
wide, 5.5-9.5 cm. long, the petioles often 4 mm. long). The inflores- 
cence is often 4 times compound and somewhat more silky than 
usual, and the buds may be 2-2.5 mm. long. These variations may 
be related to the presence of other species in eastern Peru (see dis- 
cussion under Myrcia paivae). 

Loreto: Iquitos, Killip & Smith 27044- Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, 
King 106, 453, 540, 563, 565. Bolivia and Amazonian Brazil to the 
Guianas. 

Narrow-leaved extremes are: Loreto: Lower Rio Nanay, Wil- 
liams 656. San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 6003. 

Myrcia yungasensis Rusby, Mem. Torr. Bot. Club 3, pt. 3: 27. 
1893. Aulomyrcia poeppigiana Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 
123. 1857, not Myrcia poeppigiana Berg, 1857. 



664 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

A shrub or small tree, nearly glabrous, the antrorsely appressed 
short rufous pubescence dense on bracts, buds and very young leaves, 
a few hairs persisting at leaf-maturity on the petiole and the mid- 
vein; leaves elliptic, 2-4 cm. wide, 4.5-8.5 cm. long, often twice as 
long as wide; blades narrowed about equally to both ends, the tip 
blunt or rounded or with a broad blunt acumen, the base rounded 
to obtuse or sometimes cuneate; petiole stout, 3-5 mm. long, 1-1.5 
mm. thick; mid vein flat or convex above, or sulcate near base; lateral 
veins 15-20 pairs; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and little 
arched between them, 1-1.5 (-2) mm. from margin; glandular dots 
apparent on lower surface, scarcely so on upper; inflorescence axil- 
lary or falsely terminal, 5-11 cm. long, often about equaling the 
leaves, 2 or 3 (rarely 4) times compound, the branches opposite to 
subopposite or irregularly alternate, the whole often more or less 
irregularly flowered by abortion and reduced to a series of raceme- 
like branches; flowers sessile, but the fruit often appearing to termi- 
nate pedicels 2-5 mm. long (two flowers of the ultimate dichasium 
having aborted) ; flowers glabrous except the glistening-strigose inner 
surface of the calyx-lobes; hypanthium 2-2.5 (-3.5) mm. long in bud, 
turbinate, the rim prolonged about 1 mm. above the ovary in post- 
anthesis; calyx-lobes 5, rounded, slightly unequal, about 1 mm. long, 
1.5-2 mm. wide; style 4 mm. long, deciduous shortly after stamens 
and corolla; stamens 100-200, in about 3 rows; fruit globose, about 
4 mm. in diameter. This is the Peruvian representative of a species 
complex which is well represented in Amazonian Brazil and which 
extends into Colombia and the Guianas. The Amazonian species 
which appear to belong to this complex are listed above, in the sy- 
nonymy of Myrcia amazonica. Apparently Aulomyrcia uaupensis 
Berg, from the Rio Vaupe"s, also belongs to this alliance, and A. in- 
aequiloba (DC.) Amsh. (A. pirarensis Berg), of the Guianas, is very 
closely similar. Plants from Amazonian Brazil (i.e. Myrcia ama- 
zonica as understood in the present Flora] may ordinarily be dis- 
tinguished from M. yungasensis by the leaves, which blacken in 
drying and which may be somewhat prominently acuminate. The 
inflorescence in M. amazonica usually seems rather more slender than 
in M. yungasensis, and is often markedly rufous-pubescent. The 
flowers in the Peruvian plant are slightly larger than in most speci- 
mens from the lower Amazon. These differences are perhaps incon- 
sequential, but as they seem to be rather consistently correlated with 
geographical distribution the present species may well be maintained 
pending a general revision of the whole amazonica complex. F.M. 
Neg. 23337 (not type, which is Poeppig's no. 2834). 



FLORA OF PERU 665 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 5613, 5870, 6111, 6297, 6320, 
6329, 6667Loreto: Yurimaguas, Williams 3840, 4543, 7826. Rio 
Acre: Seringal Auristella, Ule 9654- Amazonian Brazil; Bolivia. A 
specimen from Mishuyacu, Klug 44$, is slightly more pubescent and 
has some much larger and acuminate leaves up to 6 cm. wide, 15 cm. 
long, and style 8 mm. long, but seems otherwise indistinguishable. 

DOUBTFUL SPECIES 

Myrcia elattophylla Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 595. 1906. Peru: ad 
viam a Sandia ad Chunchusmayo ducentem inter Ichubamba et 
Yumcacoya, in fruticetis 1800-2600 m.s.m., flor. m. Jun. 1902, 
Weberbauer 1101 (herb. Berol., type). Not seen; I have not been 
able to find a specimen of this number, nor of the type numbers of 
M. heliandina and M. stenocymbia, at any herbarium in the United 
States. In 1954 I searched for these specimens without success at 
Geneva, Kew, Paris and Munich. Dr. Ferreyra, at my request, 
searched for them but equally without success, among the Weber- 
bauer collections at Lima. 

The description of M. elattophylla suggests a species related to 
M. splendens, M. mollis, or M. ambivalens. 

Myrcia heliandina Diels, I.e. 594. Peru: Dep. Amazonas a Cha- 
chapoyas orientem versus pr. Molinopampa in sclerophylletis cum 
arboribus parvis turn fruticibus variis compositis 2000-2300 m.s.m., 
flor. m. Jul., 1904, Weberbauer 4338 (herb. Berol., type). Not seen; 
see note above. Compared by Diels with M. acuminata (M. fallax) . 

Myrcia stenocymbia Diels, I.e. 596. Peru: Dep. Junin, prov. 
Tarma in valle Chanchamayo pr. La Merced in silvis apertis, 1000 
m.s.m., flor. Decemb. 1902, Weberbauer 1884 (herb. Berol., type). 
Not seen; see note above. Compared tentatively by Diels with 
M. poeppigiana. 

Subtribe EUGENIINAE Berg 

Trees or shrubs, with the flowers in Peruvian species solitary, or 
in dichasia or racemes (the latter including species with "glomerate" 
or "subumbellate" flowers). Calyx-lobes usually 4 and distinct. 
Cotyledons large, fleshy and plano-convex, or the embryo undivided 
and appearing monocotyledonous. Radicle very short or up to 
about one-half the length of the cotyledons, or in the species with 
undivided embryo not discernible in the seed. Ovary 2 (-3) -1 ocu- 
lar, the ovules in each locule numerous, or 2 and collateral, affixed 
to the central axis. 



666 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

4. EUGENIA L. 

Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 140-306. 1856; and in Mart. PI. 
Bras. 14, pt. 1: 214-326. 1857. 

Calyx-lobes 4, distinct and imbricated in bud and in anthesis, 
and usually persistent on the fruit (in some species loosely coherent 
below the tips until anthesis). Hypanthium little or not at all pro- 
longed beyond the summit of the ovary. Petals as many as the 
calyx-lobes, usually conspicuous. Ovary usually bilocular, the ovules 
numerous (or as few as 3) in each locule, usually in a subcapitate 
group attached near the middle of the central dissepiment. Seeds 
one or two, the ovary as far as known undivided, pseudomonocoty- 
ledonous, the separate structures of cotyledon, radicle and plumule 
not discernible. Inflorescence fundamentally a raceme, i.e. the 
branches (in E. stipitata) or individual flowers (in all other Peruvian 
species) in decussate pairs; terminal flower of the axis usually want- 
ing; axis sometimes extremely shortened, the flowers then appearing 
as if in axillary fascicles, umbels or glomerules; flowers, if occasion- 
ally solitary, arising from the basal bracteate nodes of new branches 
which are leafy above, or from the bracteate nodes of abortive axil- 
lary buds; bracteoles at base of flower often broad and persistent, 
sometimes connate. 

One of the very large genera of flowering plants; the American 
species, according to an estimate made by Berg in 1859, number 537. 
The actual number is probably considerably smaller than this: ac- 
cording to Bentham the whole genus includes no more than about 
500 good species. According to Merrill and Perry (Mem. Am. Acad. 
18, pt. 3: 136. 1939) about 2500 species in the New and the Old 
World have been described in, or transferred to, Eugenia. The 
limits of the inclusive genus Eugenia have been the subject of much 
controversy. Many modern authors prefer to segregate the very 
numerous species of southeastern Asia as a distinct genus, Syzygium 
Gaertn. American authors generally have been reluctant to recog- 
nize all the segregate genera described by Berg, e.g. Stenocalyx, 
Phyllocalyx, Siphoneugena, and Myrciaria. 

Plinia L., which was not recognized by 19th and 20th century 
authors before the work of Urban (Repert. Sp. Nov. 15: 412-413. 
1919), appears to be a distinct taxon, as do Myrciaria Berg and 
Myrcianthes Berg. 

Leaves ternate, or opposite at some nodes, 2 cm. long or less; flowers 
solitary, axillary; Cajamarca, north to Colombia. 

(see E. triquetra, under Myrcianthes, p. 774) 



FLORA OF PERU 667 

Leaves opposite, or occasionally subopposite. 

Flowers large, 7-8 cm. across the spreading stamens, the style 3.5- 
4 cm. long; inflorescence a stout terminal raceme with 2-4 
pairs of flowers; plant glabrous, with long, tapering leaves, 
mostly in cultivation E. jambos 

Flowers much smaller, the style 1.5 cm. long or less, the stamens 
about as long as the style or shorter; inflorescence axillary or 
falsely terminal; plants various, at least the inflorescence usu- 
ally pubescent. 

Racemes irregularly compound, the individual branches cy- 
mosely 3- (or rarely 7-) flowered or 1-flowered; hypanthium 
on a slender stipe (pseudostalk) often longer than itself, 
the linear deciduous bracteoles thus well below the flower, 
and the central flower of the cymose clusters apparently 
pedicellate E. stipitata 

Leaves ovate or broadly elliptic, 5-6 cm. wide, 1.8-2.3 times 
as long as wide; veins impressed above, the lower leaf- 
surface thickly covered with erect acute hairs up to 0.5 
mm. long; pedicels usually bibracteolate about the mid- 
dle or below; style 7-8.5 mm. long, glabrous; calyx-lobes 
4-5 mm. long E. stipitata subsp. stipitata 

Leaves elliptic, 2.5-4.5 cm. wide, 2.2-3.3 times as long as wide; 
veins scarcely apparent above, not impressed; lower leaf- 
surface glabrous at maturity, or hispidulous on the veins, 
or covered with minute hairs 0.1 mm. long; pedicels 
bibracteolate 3-5 mm. below the hypanthium; style 5- 
6.5 mm. long, pilose at base; calyx-lobes 2.5-3 mm. long. 

E. stipitata subsp. sororia 

Racemes simple, the primary branches (pedicels) 1-flowered; 
rarely the racemes racemosely compound, or with 2-3 
flowers arising together from a node of the axis, or with 
1-2 additional, subordinate racemes arising from the low- 
est nodes of the primary one; hypanthium not slender- 
stipitate, the bracteoles close to and often surrounding the 
base of the flower Key A 

A (See also second A, p. 671). Axis of the raceme relatively slender 
and elongate, 3-5 cm. long or more; if shorter, then the inter- 
nodes much longer than the diameter of the axis and some or 
all of them 5 mm. long or more. 



668 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Axis of the raceme 1.5 cm. long or less, the ascending slender 
pedicels often as long as, or longer than, the axis; inflores- 
cence appressed-strigose or -silky. 

Calyx-lobes 2.5 mm. long or less, not foliaceous; leaves less than 
10 cm. long, impressed-punctate above, the lateral veins 
not at all or scarcely apparent. 

Leaves acuminate and prominently mucronate, very variable 
in size and shape, the blades usually lanceolate but vary- 
ing from ovate to linear E. biflora 

Leaves cuneate-obovate, 4 cm. long or less, rounded or bluntly 
pointed at apex E. inundata 

Calyx-lobes 7-16 mm. long, foliaceous; leaves 9-18 cm. long, 
not impressed-punctate, normally veiny E. macrocalyx 

Axis of the raceme 2 cm. long or more or, if shorter, the pedicels 
4-7 mm. long, widely spreading and much shorter than the 
axis; pubescence and foliage various, the leaves neither mucro- 
nate nor small, and obovate-cuneate. 

Hypanthium glabrous without, the plants nearly glabrous, usu- 
ally finely pubescent in the inflorescence; small-flowered 
species with slender, loosely flowered racemes. 

Lateral veins of the leaves 12-15 or more pairs, wide-spread- 
ing and nearly straight, the marginal vein nearly straight 
between the laterals and amply distinct from them, 2-4 
mm. from the margin; inflorescence closely appressed- 
pubescent, the calyx-lobes and bracteoles fimbriate- 
ciliate E. calva 

Lateral veins 10 pairs or fewer, curved and ascending, at least 
the basal ones diminishing distally and not forming a 
definite marginal nerve; inflorescence glabrous, finely 
hispidulous, or with minute appressed dibrachiate hairs; 
calyx-lobes and bracteoles sparsely short-ciliate. 

E. florida 

Hypanthium, at least the base, thickly strigose or pubescent 
without; plants variously pubescent, the inflorescence usu- 
ally markedly so; flowers and racemes various. 
Leaves rounded or obtuse at tips, broadly elliptic-ovate, 7 cm. 
long or less; plants densely ferruginous-tomentose; flow- 
ers up to 4 pairs in a stout raceme 2 cm. long, or some 
flowers solitary near the base of new leafy shoots. 

E. racemiflora 



FLORA OF PERU 669 

Leaves usually markedly acuminate, relatively narrow and 
more than 7 cm. long; plants various, not ferruginous- 
tomentose (in E. atroracemosa rufous-velutinous) ; flowers 
all racemose. 

Bracts, bracteoles and calyx-lobes thickly beset with dark 
raised rounded glands, but inconspicuously if at all 
pubescent. 

Pubescence of appressed reddish-brown, partly dibrachi- 
ate hairs, intermixed with shorter erect hairs; con- 
nate bracteoles forming an involucre-like cupule 2.5 
mm. across; larger calyx-lobes 2.5 mm. long; style 
5-6 mm. long; stamens about 100; coastal Ecuador 
(and Peru?) E. pustulescens 

Pubescence of appressed grayish-white hairs; cupule 4 
mm. across; calyx-lobes 4 mm. long; style 8 mm. 
long; stamens 250-300; Amazonian Peru. 

E. polyadena 

Bracts, bracteoles and calyx-lobes not at all glandular or 
inconspicuously so, but at least the calyx variously 
and often conspicuously pubescent. 

Mid vein elevated above in a narrow median line; inflo- 
rescence slender, the axis mostly not more than 
1 mm. thick, closely appressed-pubescent with red- 
dish brown, mostly dibrachiate hairs . . E. dibrachiata 

Midvein impressed; inflorescence various. 

Calyx-lobes 8-9 mm. long; bracteoles 6 mm. wide, 
3-4 mm. long E. ulei 

Calyx-lobes 4.5 mm. long or less. 

Bracteoles orbicular or wider than long, 5-6 mm. 
wide, 4-5 mm. long, membranous, glabrous, en- 
veloping and concealing most of the bud; axis 
of the raceme 1 mm. wide; disk 4 mm. wide; 
calyx-lobes 4 mm. long E. ependytes 

Bracteoles ovate or deltoid, 3 mm. long and wide or 
often smaller, much shorter than the bud. 

Axis of the raceme slender, 0.5-1 mm. thick (meas- 
ured just below the lowest node); leaves 
mostly less than 10 cm. long; flowers small, 
the disk 2 mm. wide or less. 



670 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Leaves tomentose beneath, sub-vernicose and 
rough above, with many glandular dots. 

E. curvipilosa 

Leaves glabrous or essentially so at maturity, 
the upper surface smooth, rather dull, 
eglandular E. limbosa 

Axis of the raceme stouter, 1-2 mm. thick or more 
(measured just below the lowest node) ; leaves 
mostly more than 10 cm. long; flowers larger, 
the disk 2.5 mm. wide or more. 

Lateral and marginal veins impressed above, 

prominent beneath. 

Lateral veins 8-12 pairs; leaves caudate- 
acuminate; disk 6 mm. wide; veins of 
the lower leaf-surface appressed-pubes- 
cent with tawny hairs . . . .E. longicuspis 

Lateral veins about 15-20 pairs; leaves mod- 
erately acuminate; disk 3-3.5 mm. wide; 
veins of the lower leaf -surface velutinous 
with erect rufous hairs . . E. atroracemosa 

Lateral and marginal veins elevated slightly on 
the upper surface when dry, inconspicuous 
or scarcely apparent beneath; lower leaf- 
surface glabrous or with very short, closely 
appressed colorless hairs. 
Leaves glabrous beneath, rigidly coriaceous 
with involute margins, 1.6-2.2 times as 
long as wide; lower leaf-surface almost 
featureless, the veins scarcely apparent; 
pedicels stout, 3.5-6 mm. long; bracteoles 
2.5 mm. long and wide; calyx-lobes 3.5- 
4.5 mm. long and wide; disk 4 mm. wide. 

E. discors 

Leaves minutely appressed-pubescent beneath 
with hairs 0.1-0.2 mm. long; blades flat, 
2-3.5 times as long as wide; veins appar- 
ent but inconspicuous beneath; pedicels 
up to 8-12 mm. long, or the upper ones 
only 2-4 mm. long; bracteoles 1.5 mm. 



FLORA OF PERU 671 

long and wide; calyx-lobes 2.5-3 mm. 
long and wide; disk 2.5-3 mm. wide. 

E. riparia 

A (See also first A, p. 667). Axis of the raceme much abbreviated, 
2 cm. long or usually much less; if more than 1 cm. long the 
nodes approximate and the internodes 3 mm. long or less, and 
hardly longer than the thickness of the stout angled rachis; 
flowers often glomerate, sometimes solitary at the lowest nodes 
of new leafy branchlets, and in axillary clusters or short racemes 
on the same plant. 

Leaves markedly bullate, large and broad (5-10 cm. wide), elliptic 
to obovate; racemes mostly 10-18 mm. long, the axis quad- 
rangular, with up to 8-13 pairs of slender-pedicelled flowers. 

E. tetrasticha 

Leaves flat, or the principal veins impressed above; blades vari- 
ously shaped. 

Outer corky layers of the petiole irregularly loosening and flak- 
ing off, the whole much roughened and appearing 3-5 mm. 
thick; leaves large, 20-35 cm. long, 3-5 times as long as 
wide; flowers clustered on old wood, the axis 4 mm. long 
or less. 

Leaves mostly oblanceolate, cordate-auriculate and subsessile 
(petiole 3-5 mm. long and about as thick) ; lateral veins 
about 15 pairs; midvein impressed above; calyx-lobes 

4-5 mm. long E. multirimosa 

Leaves elliptic-oblong, rounded at base, the petiole 10-18 mm. 
long and 3-4 mm. thick; lateral veins 20-30 pairs; mid- 
vein convex above; calyx-lobes 6-8 mm. long. 

E. tumulescens 

Petiole smooth or wrinkled, not thick and exfoliating, rarely 
more than 2 mm. thick; leaves and flowers various. 

Large-leaved, large-flowered, coarse species (leaves 23-35 cm. 
long or more; petioles 2-4 mm. thick; buds 1-2 cm. long; 
anthers 1-1.8 mm. long). 

Lateral veins 25-30 pairs; marginal vein about as strong as 
the laterals; leaves about 4 times as long as wide; buds 
probably 2 cm. long, the suborbicular calyx-lobes up to 
15 mm. long; bracteoles elliptic, probably deciduous. 

E. scalariformis 



672 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Lateral veins 9-12 pairs, prominent and ascending but 
diminishing distally and scarcely forming a marginal 
vein; leaves 2.3-3 times as long as wide; buds about 
1 cm. long, the triangular or oblong calyx-lobes 4- 
6 mm. long; bracteoles obovate, enveloping the bud, 
their narrow connate bases forming a collar about 
the pedicel E. myrobalana 

Leaves usually smaller, or with a definite marginal vein; 
flowers various, the buds mostly less than 1 cm. long; 
bracteoles usually small and persistent. 

Calyx-lobes foliaceous, elongate, erect, 7-9 mm. long at 
an thesis, separated by broad rounded sinuses; leaves 
9-18 cm. long, with about 10 pairs of veins; anthers 
0.3 mm. long E. macrocalyx 

Calyx-lobes not or scarcely foliaceous, mostly broad, con- 
cave and imbricate; if more than 6 mm. long the mar- 
gins variously connate or overlapping, and the anthers 
1-1.5 mm. long; leaves various. 

Leaves with a glabrous cartilaginous margin (visible from 
above), this formed by a heavy convex vein about 
twice as thick as the lateral veins; blades elliptic- 
oblong, 6-8.5 cm. wide, 12-14 cm. long; plants velu- 
tinous with coarse reddish-brown hairs; flowers in 
sessile glomerules E. percincta 

Leaves without a heavy vein at the margin; plants not 
coarsely rufous- velutinous; flowers various. 

Calyx-lobes large (the larger ones 5-8 mm. long or 
more), often as broad as long, much imbricated 
but distinct from the first, glabrous within; flow- 
ers probably always in sessile clusters on old wood. 
Inflorescence minutely appressed-pubescent with 
glistening brown hairs; leaves papillose-rough- 
ened above; style 9-10 mm. long. 

E. tenuimarginata 

Plants glabrous except the ciliate margins of the peri- 
anth-lobes and bracteoles; leaves smooth above; 
style 15 mm. long or more. 

Leaves 8-14 cm. wide and about 1.5 times as long; 
disk 4-5 mm. wide; anthers 2-2.3 mm. long. 

E. chartacea 



FLORA OF PERU 673 

Leaves 4-7.5 cm. wide and 3-3.5 times as long; 
disk 6-7 mm. wide; anthers 1-1.3 mm. long. 

E. illepida 

Calyx-lobes smaller (the larger ones 6 mm. long or less) 
or if longer (up to 9-10 mm. long) then oblong, 
usually hooded at tips and loosely connate in the 
bud; inner surface of calyx-lobes glabrous or pu- 
bescent; flowers various. 

Bracteoles early deciduous (just before, or usually 
much before anthesis) or wanting (unknown in 
E. quebradensis), subulate or linear or some- 
times lanceolate to ovate, narrowed at base, 
not connate. 

Inflorescence, especially the hypanthium, heavily 
pubescent or tomentose with gray, white, or 
light yellowish hairs. 

Branchlets and inflorescence tomentose with 
crisped, matted hairs; flowers sessile in 
small clusters; leaves lanceolate, 0.8-1.5 
cm. wide and 5-6 times as long; Lam- 
bayeque E. quebradensis 

Branchlets and inflorescence strigose or veluti- 
nous, the hairs mostly straight and ascend- 
ing; flowers pedicellate; leaves ovate to 
elliptic or oblong. 

Leaves 2-6 cm. long; flowers mostly 1-2 pairs, 
often from the lowest axils of new leafy 
branches. 

Bracteoles ovate or lanceolate, blunt; pedi- 
cels, hypanthium and calyx velutinous; 
Junfn E. barbata 

Bracteoles subulate; hypanthium closely 
strigose, the pedicel sparsely so, the 
calyx glabrate; Bolivia. . .E. mandonii 

Leaves 8-24 cm. long; flowers up to 6 pairs 
in axillary racemes; bracteoles subulate; 
Amazon basin E. prosoneura 

Hairs of the inflorescence red or copper color or 
dark purplish-brown. 



674 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Hairs coarse, dark purplish-brown; leaves nar- 
rowly elliptic, 14-24 cm. long. 

E. gomesiana 

Hairs slender, reddish or pale copper color; 
leaves broader, mostly less than 15 cm. 
long. 

Bracts 1 mm. long, broadly rounded at tips 
and convex on the backs, inconspicuous; 
calyx-lobes 2.5 mm. long, pubescent ex- 
cept at tips, triangular, the long points 
longer than the corolla in bud . . E. aerosa 
Bracts elongate, 1.5-7 mm. long, delicate, 
loosely imbricated in 4 ranks at the bases 
of racemes and new shoots; calyx-lobes 
short and broadly rounded, 1.5 mm. long, 
glabrous both sides, much shorter than 

the corolla in bud E. patrisii 

Bracteoles persistent, usually until after the fruit 
falls, lanceolate or broader, broad-based, often 
connate and involucre-like. 

Calyx-lobes oblong or elliptic, longer than the 
petals in bud, hooded and thickened at tips, 
connate in bud below the middle but separat- 
ing and reflexed at an thesis, glabrous within; 
anthers 1-1.5 mm. long. 

Buds 12-15 mm. long; calyx-lobes 8-10 mm. 
long in flower; stamens 300 or more. 

E. schunkei 

Buds 9 mm. long or less; calyx-lobes 3-5 mm. 
long in flower (up to 9 mm. long in fruit) ; 
stamens 75-175. 

Lateral veins about 20 pairs; buds 6 mm. 
long, closed at the tip; pedicels 8-20 
mm. long E. hexovulata 

Lateral veins 6-15 pairs; calyx-lobes distinct 
in bud at least distally; pedicels 2-8 mm. 
long (or a little longer in fruit). 
Buds 4.5-5 mm. long; calyx-lobes 3-3.5 
mm. long; style 6-7 mm. long. 

E. cuspidifolia 



FLORA OF PERU 675 

Buds 6-9 mm. long; calyx-lobes 3.5-6 mm. 
long (to 9 mm. long in fruit); style 
(unknown in E. acrensis} 10 mm. long. 
Calyx permanently velutinous; lateral 
veins 12-15 pairs, the basal not 
strongly ascending; leaves with nu- 
merous small convex glands above. 

E. acrensis 

Calyx glabrescent; lateral veins 6-10 
pairs, the basal ones often strongly 
ascending and not forming a defi- 
nite marginal vein; leaves very 
smooth and eglandular above. 

E. feijoi 

Calyx-lobes various, not hooded or thickened at 
the tips nor connate below the middle; an- 
thers usually less than 1 mm. long Key B 

B (See also second B, p. 676). Inflorescence, including the hypan- 
thium, appressed-pubescent, velutinous or tomentose with red- 
dish or reddish-brown hairs. 
Bracteoles ovate, 1.5 mm. long, not connate. 
Calyx-lobes 3-4 mm. long, concave, deciduous after an thesis; 
buds 4 mm. long; inflorescence and branchlets closely and 
finely tomentose with very small dark red-brown hairs; 
leaves 16-24 cm. long, the arcuate-ascending lateral veins 
scarcely forming a marginal vein E. curvivenia 

Calyx-lobes 4-6 mm. long, flattened or cucullate and reflexed or 
spreading after anthesis; hairs appressed-ascending or 
spreading, lustrous, coppery or pale red, up to 0.5 mm. 
long; marginal veins about as strong as the laterals. 

Leaves 4.5-8 cm. long, with 7-10 pairs of lateral veins; calyx- 
lobes flat and spreading after anthesis, the inner pair 
truncate, obovate E. crucicalyx 

Leaves 15-21 cm. long, with 12-15 pairs of lateral veins; calyx- 
lobes reflexed and cucullate after anthesis . . . .E. acrensis 
Bracteoles broadly ovate to rotund, fused by the basal margins 
and forming an involucre-like cupule beneath the bud and 
flower. 

Veins impressed above, elevated and conspicuous beneath; leaves 
pale and smooth or appressed-pubescent beneath; inflores- 



676 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

cence softly rufous- tomentose; margins of the bracteoles 
and calyx-lobes delicate and fracturing even in the bud. 

E. macrophylla 

Veins slightly convex on both surfaces, not conspicuous on either; 
lower leaf-surface glistening, irregularly honeycombed or 
obscured by tiny hairs; inflorescence puberulent with short 
crisped hairs; bracteoles and calyx relatively tough and un- 
broken even in age. 

Calyx-lobes 6 mm. long; leaves 12-19 cm. long with 12-15 
pairs of lateral veins, appearing loosely cellular-honey- 
combed beneath E. heterochroma 

Calyx-lobes 1.5-2 mm. long; leaves 6-13 cm. long with 6-10 
pairs of lateral veins, the lower surface obscured by tiny 
glistening hairs E. versicolor 

B (See also first B, p. 675). Inflorescence, particularly the hypan- 
thium, glabrous or pubescent with pale white or yellowish hairs 
(hairs of young vegetative parts sometimes reddish). 

Leaves coarsely impressed-punctate and dark above, the lateral 
veins not at all or scarcely apparent; inflorescence usually 
with some elongate internodes, appressed-pubescent with pale 
hairs; blades 10 cm. long or less. 

Leaves acuminate and prominently mucronate, very variable in 
size and shape, the blades usually lanceolate but varying 
from ovate to linear E. biflora 

Leaves cuneate-obovate, 4 cm. long or less, rounded or bluntly 
pointed at apex E. inundata 

Leaves not impressed-punctate, the lateral veins usually apparent 
above, the blades usually larger; axis of raceme with approxi- 
mate nodes. 

Mid vein elevated above in a sharply defined pubescent ridge; 
leaves 7 cm. long or less; pedicels filiform, mostly 15-30 mm. 
long, with 4-ranked scarious deciduous bracts (1-3.5 mm. 

long) at base E. subterminalis 

Mid vein impressed to convex above; leaves various; pedicels 
mostly 10 mm. long or less, the bracts inconspicuous or 
sometimes persistent. 

Flowers usually 2, one from each side of the axillary bud, 
slender-pedicellate; leaves mostly obovate or oblanceo- 
late, 3-6 cm. long, obtuse E. punicifolia 



FLORA OF PERU 677 

Flowers fasciculate or in approximate pairs in short racemes, 

usually 4 or more; leaves mostly larger and acuminate. 
Inflorescence, including hypanthium, densely hispidulous 
with erect pale hairs about 0.1 mm. long; raceme up 
to 8 mm. long with 2-5 pairs of flowers on pedicels 2-4 
mm. long; leaves elliptic, 4-7 cm. long, subcaudate- 
acuminate E. micranthoides 

Inflorescence, at least the hypanthium, glabrous or spar- 
ingly strigose or pilose; leaves and inflorescence various. 

Branchlets, petioles and inflorescence somewhat strigose 
with white appressed hairs; flowers middle-sized, the 
buds 5-10 mm. long, the disk 3-4 mm. wide; leaves 
9-18 cm. long, 2.5-3 times as long as wide. 

Buds 7-10 mm. long; marginal vein evident, 2-3 mm. 
from margin; petiole heavily strigose with hairs 
up to 0.5-0.8 mm. long, spirally longitudinally fur- 
rowed and transversely wrinkled; hypanthium with 
a few long hairs E. spruceana 

Buds 5-6 mm. long; marginal vein not distinct from 
the laterals; petiole nearly glabrous, merely irreg- 
ularly wrinkled in drying; hypanthium with numer- 
ous very fine short hairs E. atrosquamata 

Branchlets, petioles and inflorescence glabrous, or pubes- 
cent with very small dibrachiate hairs or minute erect 
hairs, or sparse stiff and ascending reddish or pale 
hairs, in one species tawny-hirsutulous; flowers smaller, 
the buds 5 mm. long or less, the disk 1-2.5 mm. wide. 

Flowers sessile or nearly so, in clusters on the stems; 
pedicels 2 mm. long or less (up to 4 mm. in fruit). 

Plants glabrous or nearly so; leaves very stiff and 
coriaceous, the mid vein concave above; style (as 
far as known) 10 mm. long or more; stamens 
probably always more than 50 and the hypan- 
thium obconic E. nigra 

Plants tawny-hirsutulous (the hypanthium orbicu- 
lar, sparingly pilose); leaves membranous, the 
persistently hirsutulous midvein narrowly im- 
pressed above; style 6.5 mm. long; stamens about 
35-50; flowers very small, the calyx-lobes 1.3 
mm. long, the disk 1.3 mm. wide . . E. origanoides 



678 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Flowers on definite slender pedicels mostly 4-10 mm. 
long; style mostly less than 10 mm. long; hypan- 
thium mostly campanulate. 

Leaves elliptic-ovate, 5-6 cm. long or less; plants 
sparingly strigose with reddish or yellowish hairs 
up to 0.5 mm. long, the hypanthium glabrous; 
midvein flat above; flowers tiny, the calyx-lobes 
1 mm. long, the disk 1 mm. wide; stamens 36 or 

fewer E. malpighioides 

Leaves usually more than 5 cm. long, rarely ovate; 
pubescence not as above; flowers larger; stamens 
60-75 or more. 

Midvein on upper surface of leaf flat or convex 
(then sometimes with a shallow median fur- 
row near base), never narrowly impressed. 
Foliage and flowers drying light yellow or yel- 
low-green; leaves relatively narrow, mostly 
less than 10 cm. long; flowers usually 2 pairs 

from an axis 1 mm. long E. flavescens 

Foliage and flowers darkening in drying; leaves 

and flowers various. 

Petioles 10-15 mm. long; flowers 1 or 2 pairs, 
from an axis 1-2 mm. long. . E. dittocrepis 
Petioles 3-6 mm. long; axis of raceme 2-6 (-17) 
mm. long, bearing 2-8 approximate de- 
cussate pairs of flowers. 
Leaves narrow, 2-4.5 cm. wide, 2.5-3.5 times 
as long, the lower surface with numer- 
ous and conspicuous glandular dots. 

E. egensis 

Leaves broader, 4-6 cm. wide, twice as long, 
the lower surface sparingly dotted. 

E. ochrophloea 

Midvein impressed on the upper surface, the ac- 
tual vein narrow and often obscured in the 
bottom of a deep fold or furrow. 
Axis of raceme up to 5 mm. long. 

(see E. maculata under E. schomburgkii} 
Axis of raceme 2.5 mm. long or usually less, the 
flowers in 1-5 approximate pairs. 



FLORA OF PERU 679 

Leaves mostly elliptic-lanceolate, long-pointed, 
very smooth and glabrous above; lateral 
veins inconspicuous, sometimes reddish; 
plant nearly glabrous, the branchlets and 
pedicels sometimes minutely and sparsely 

hispidulous E. schomburgkii 

Leaves elliptic to obovate, shortly and often 
bluntly acuminate, the veins usually 
somewhat elevated and forming an evi- 
dent reticulum on the upper surface; 
pubescence various. 

Inflorescence glabrous or minutely pubes- 
cent with pale erect hairs; leaves ellip- 
tic, blunt-pointed or obscurely acumi- 
nate E. tapacumensis 

Inflorescence more or less appressed-puber- 
ulent with minute and partly dibrachi- 
ate hairs. 

Leaves oblanceolate or obovate, 14-18 cm. 
long, coarsely veiny-reticulate. 

E. discreta 

Leaves elliptic, 7-11 cm. long, finely veiny- 
reticulate E. quadrijuga 

Eugenia acrensis McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 202. 1956. 

A shrub 3.5 meters high, the vegetative buds and inflorescence 
velutinous with somewhat appressed lustrous coppery-red hairs up 
to 0.5 mm. long, the plant otherwise glabrous except for a few sessile 
and mostly dibrachiate dark appressed hairs up to 0.3 mm. long, 
on the lower leaf-surface; leaves elliptic, 5-8 cm. wide, 15-22 cm. 
long, 2.5-3 times as long as wide, narrowly acuminate, acute at base, 
the margins decurrent on the channeled petiole 2 mm. thick, 10 mm. 
long; mid vein sulcate above (or impressed near base), elevated dis- 
tally in a narrow central line, prominent beneath; lateral veins 12- 
15 pairs, convex above but somewhat impressed, prominent beneath; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals and strongly arched be- 
tween them, 3-6 mm. from margin; upper surface of blade lustrous 
with small convex reticulated veins and scattered convex glandular 
dots, the latter about 4 per square mm.; lower surface dull and paler, 
very minutely verruculose, the glandular dots apparent; racemes 
abbreviated, 5 mm. long, bearing 1-3 approximate decussate pairs 



680 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

of flowers on stout pedicels 1 mm. thick, 2-5 mm. long (or a little 
longer in fruit) ; bracts not seen; bracteoles persistent, ovate, 1.5 mm. 
long; buds about 7 mm. long, the hypanthium 2-2.5 mm. long, 
rounded to base; calyx-lobes not or scarcely coherent but covering 
the corolla almost to the time of opening, strongly imbricated, gla- 
brous inside, 4 mm. wide, 6 mm. long, membranous-margined except 
at the tip, strongly reflexed but with cucullate tips in anthesis, finally 
separating by longitudinal slits in the sinuses, the slits 1.5-2 mm. 
long and extending down to the margins of the staminal ring; disk 
2.5 mm. wide, glabrous except for a few long hairs at the base of the 
style; style not seen; stamens probably about 200; anthers 1.2 mm. 
long in bud; petals glabrous, not seen expanded; ovary bilocular, 
the ovules 12-15 in each locule, radiating from a centrally attached 
placenta; fruit long-ellipsoid, 1 cm. in diameter, 2 cm. long, glabres- 
cent; seed one, 1.5 cm. long, the cotyledons apparently distinct. 
Known only from the type, Krukoff 5619, from near mouth of Rio 
Macauhan, Terr, of Acre, Brazil. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia aerosa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 203. 1956. 

Tree up to 7 (-15) meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence and 
vegetative buds densely covered, and the lower leaf -surface sparingly 
beset, with appressed lustrous straight pale copper-colored hairs up 
to 0.5 mm. long; leaves elliptic-oblong, 5.5-6.5 cm. wide, 13-15 cm. 
long, about 2.3-3 times as long as wide, about equally narrowed to 
the narrowly or caudately acuminate tip and to the rounded or con- 
vexly acute base, the margins decurrent on the deeply channeled 
petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 7-10 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 8-10 pairs in addition to some in- 
termediates, somewhat elevated above, elevated and prominulous 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lateral ones and arched 
between them, 3-5 mm. from margin, a weak submarginal vein be- 
yond it at the very edge of the blade; blades nearly concolorous, 
olive green when dry, without apparent glands even when young, 
the upper surface smooth and lustrous, the lower dull and strigose; 
flowers from the lowest 2-3 nodes of a new leafy branch, or the inflo- 
rescence an abbreviated axillary raceme, the axis 4-angled, 1 mm. 
thick, up to 6 mm. long, bearing up to 6 decussate, approximate 
pairs of flowers on slender compressed pedicels 1 mm. thick, 10-18 
mm. long; bracts broad, rounded on the backs, nearly glabrous, 
1 mm. long; bracteoles subulate or lanceolate and folded, silky, 
ascending, 1.3-2.8 mm. long, deciduous after anthesis; buds about 



FLORA OF PERU 681 

6 mm. long, narrowly pyriform, the long-pointed calyx-lobes exceed- 
ing the globe of the petals until anthesis; hypanthium narrowly 
campanulate, 2 mm. long; calyx-lobes 3 mm. wide, about 2.5 mm. 
long, deltoid, apparently valvate, pubescent inside except the tips, 
reflexed at anthesis; disk 3.5 mm. wide, glabrous; style 10 mm. long; 
stamens about 100, about as long as the style, the anthers 0.3 mm. 
long or less, broader than long; petals obovate, about 4 mm. wide, 
4-5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 30 in each locule, 
radiating from a short, centrally affixed placenta; fruit ellipsoid, 
somewhat attenuate at base, 1.3 cm. in diameter, 2.3 cm. long. 
The single fruiting specimen, probably belonging to this species, is 
Krukoff's no. 6870, from Livramento, Amazonas, Brazil. Univ. of 
Mich. Neg. 467. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, alt. 100 meters, forest, May, 
June, 1930, G. King 1535 (F, type). Iquitos, Aug., 1925, G. Tess- 
mann 5355. 

Eugenia atroracemosa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 203. 1956. 

A tree 4 meters high, the inflorescence, branchlets and veins of 
the lower leaf-surface velutinous with crowded erect sharp slender 
lustrous hairs 0.5 mm. long (or up to 1 mm. long on vegetative buds 
and bracts), the hairs reddish brown on the leaves and branchlets, 
in the inflorescence from dark reddish brown to dark brown or almost 
black; leaves coriaceous, oblong to ovate or oblanceolate, 5-8 cm. 
wide, 11-18 cm. long, (1.5-) 2-3 times as long as wide, the tip 
abruptly or sometimes slenderly acuminate, the base rounded or 
obtusely narrowed, the margins abruptly decurrent on the stout 
petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 8-10 mm. long; mid vein glabrous to hir- 
sutulous above, impressed, prominent beneath; lateral veins 15-20 
pairs in addition to some intermediate ones, narrowly impressed 
above, prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals, impressed, little arched between them, 2-5 mm. from margin; 
leaves nearly concolorous, smooth and glabrescent above, impressed- 
puncticulate, the lower surface dull and hirsutulous, with small often 
obscure gland-dots; inflorescence a stout axillary raceme 5-7.5 cm. 
long, the axis up to 2 mm. thick at base, with 6-8 pairs of flowers 
on divaricate pedicels 1.5 mm. thick, 4-8 mm. long in flower; bracts 
and bracteoles glabrous inside, the former ovate-deltoid, pointed, 
broad-based, deciduous, 3-4 mm. long; bracteoles broadly ovate- 
deltoid, a little narrowed at base and not connate, persistent, about 
3 mm. wide, 2-2.5 mm. long; buds about 7 mm. long, the hypan- 
thium campanulate-oblong, 2-3 mm. long; calyx-lobes broadly 



682 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

rounded or oblong, finely appressed-pubescent inside except at base, 
2.5-3 mm. long, 3-4 mm. wide, the outer pair a little shorter; disk 
3-3.5 (-6) mm. wide, the center 1.5-2 mm. wide, hirsute; style gla- 
brous, 6-8 mm. long; stamens 125-150, about as long as the style, 
the anthers about 0.5 mm. long; petals elliptic, 2.5-4 mm. wide, 
6 mm. long, appressed-silky on the back, the thin margins fimbriate- 
ciliate; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 7 in each locule, radiating 
from a centrally attached placenta; flowers cream color (Klug); fruit 
globose, hard, 2 cm. in diameter. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 476. 

San Martin: Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, alt. 1100-1200 meters, 
forest, Oct.-Nov., 1933, G. Klug 3368 (F, type). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia atrosquamata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 204. 1956. 

Shrub or tree, the branchlets, petioles, inflorescence (especially 
the hypanthium) and lower leaf-surface appressed-pubescent with 
small white hairs up to 0.2 mm. long; leaves elliptic, 4-6 cm. wide, 
9-15 cm. long, about 2.5 times as long as wide, the tip decurved and 
bluntly acuminate, the base acute or convexly acute, the margins 
decurrent on the petioles 1-2 mm. thick, 6-10 mm. long; midvein 
flat or concave above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, 
flat or convex above, prominent beneath, ascending and diminishing 
distally, not forming a definite marginal vein along most of the blade, 
but recurving about 3 mm. from margin to form loops joining the 
next succeeding vein about 8 mm. from margin; blades dark green 
and smooth, with few or no glandular dots above, the lower surface 
dull, paler, strigose, finely dark-dotted; inflorescence an abbreviated 
axillary raceme, the axis 1-3 mm. long, bearing 4-6 approximate 
decussate pairs of flowers on pedicels 1 mm. thick, 3-12 mm. long; 
bracts dark, glabrous, imbricate, gland-dotted, rounded on the back, 
2 mm. long, the tips rounded and erose-ciliate; bracteoles ovate, 
1.5 mm. long and wide, persistent, not connate, thin-margined, dark 
and glabrous and contrasting with the pale-strigose pedicel and hy- 
panthium; buds 5-6 mm. long, pyriform, the hypanthium campan- 
ulate, 2 mm. long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded or bluntly triangular, 
glabrous inside, gland-dotted, unequal, the smaller 2-2.5 mm. long 
and wide, the larger pair 4 mm. wide, 3.5 mm. long; disk 3 mm. wide, 
glabrous; style 5-7 mm. long; stamens about 100, to 8 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.8 mm. long; petals concave, obovate, 4-4.5 mm. wide, 
6-7 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 15 in each locule, 
radiating from a short, centrally affixed placenta. Univ. of Mich. 
Neg. 439. 



FLORA OF PERU 683 

Loreto: Iquitos, anno 1924, G. Tessmann 5130 (G, type). Ama- 
zonian Colombia. 

Eugenia barbata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 204. 1956. 

Probably a shrub, 4-8 meters high, the branchlets and young 
leaves hispidulous with erect stiff sordid hairs up to 0.3-0.5 mm. 
long, the inflorescence conspicuously gray-velutinous with similar 
but paler and longer, often somewhat appressed hairs; leaves rather 
broadly elliptic, 1.5-3.5 cm. wide, 3-5 cm. long, 1.3-2 (-2.4) times 
as long as wide, acutely pointed or sometimes blunt, acute to some- 
what rounded at base, the somewhat cartilaginous margins only very 
shortly decurrent on the petiole up to 1 mm. thick, 2.5-5 mm. long; 
midvein above hispid, somewhat sulcate and slightly impressed at 
least near base, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 10 pairs, 
inconspicuous above, prominulous beneath, not much larger than 
the intermediate veins; marginal vein a little weaker than the lat- 
erals and markedly arched between them, 1-3 mm. from margin; 
leaves lustrous above and minutely muriculate from the enlarged 
hair-bases, especially along the midvein near the base; lower surface 
dull and paler, hairy; inflorescence axillary and sometimes also ter- 
minal, the axillary axis abortive at tip, 1 mm. long or elongate and 
leafy, the flowers usually 2, opposite and solitary from the lowest 
node, or sometimes an additional pair from the next node; flowers 
sometimes also in 1 or 2 decussate pairs on short new terminal leaf- 
less shoots; bracts and bracteoles hairy, ovate or lanceolate, bluntly 
pointed, deciduous at about anthesis, 2-3.5 mm. long, the bracteoles 
sometimes with abortive flower-buds in the axils; pedicels 2-5 (-15) 
mm. long, and up to 1 mm. thick (appearing thicker because of the 
heavy coating of hairs) ; buds 9-10 mm. long, broadly obovoid, the 
hypanthium campanulate; calyx-lobes in 2 nearly equal pairs, sub- 
orbicular, concave, loosely hairy without, ciliate-fringed, finely ap- 
pressed-pubescent within, 4-5 mm. long and wide; disk hairy, about 
4 mm. wide; style 9-10 mm. long, hairy near base; stamens about 250, 
up to 12 mm. long, the anthers about 0.4 mm. long; petals white, 
minutely ciliate, otherwise glabrous except a few hairs on the back, 
suborbicular or obovate, erose-margined, 5-7 mm. wide, 6-8 mm. 
long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 20 in each locule in a pendent 
head-like cluster. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 441. 

Junin : Lado derecho del valle del Rio San Bernardo, 2200-2300 m., 
en monte bajo, abierto, compuesto de arbustos, Apr. 2, 1913, A. 
Weberbauer 6558 (US, type) ; Abajo de Pariahuanca, 1800 m., bosque 
compuesto de arboles y arbustos, Apr. 8, 1913, Weberbauer 6594. 



684 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Eugenia biflora (L.) DC. Prodr. 3: 276. 1828. Myrtus biflora 
L. Syst. Nat. ed. 10: 1056. 1759. E. xylopifolia DC. I.e. 279. E. 
racemosa DC. I.e. 281. E. sericiflora Benth. Bot. Voy. Sulph. 89. 
1844. Myrcia erythroxylon virescens Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, 
pt. 1: 173. 1857. E. freireana Berg, in Mart. I.e. 305. E. hoffmann- 
seggii Berg, in Mart. I.e. 315. E. acuminatissima Berg, in Mart. I.e., 
not of Miquel. E. loretensis Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 597. 1906. E. 
leptophlebia Diels, Verb. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 192. 1907. Myrcia 
paivae var. gracilis Lingelsh. Fedde Repert. Sp. Nov. 7: 243. 1909. 
E. amanuensis Steyermark, Fieldiana Bot. 28: 1010. 1957. E. cau- 
rensis Steyermark, I.e. 

Shrub or small tree up to 4 meters high, pubescent, often with 
conspicuous pale appressed silvery-silky pubescence on the inflores- 
cence and young growth, the hairs up to 1 mm. long; leaves usually 
lanceolate, varying to ovate or to very narrowly lance-linear, (0.5-) 
1-1.5 (-3) cm. wide, 5-8 (-10) cm. long, 3-4 times as long as wide 
(twice as long as wide in ovate-leaved forms, and up to 15 times in 
very narrow-leaved forms) ; blades flat and silky or glabrous beneath, 
the upper surface with numerous impressed glands, occasionally gla- 
brous, usually sparingly beset with white cobwebby hairs up to 1 mm. 
long; blades prominently long-acuminate, almost caudate, the acu- 
men often slender and curved, normally prominently mucronate, 
base of blade rounded or cuneate; petiole channeled above, stout, 
2.5-^4 mm. long; midvein impressed above, prominently raised be- 
neath; lateral veins very slender, 12-20 pairs, often not apparent in 
dried material or evident on the lower surface only; marginal vein 
about as conspicuous as the laterals and little arched between them, 
1 mm. or less from margin; inflorescence axillary, usually short and 
racemoid, the axis 0.5-1.5 (-3) cm. long, about 6-flowered, the ter- 
minal flower usually aborting; 1 pedicels 4.5-12 mm. long, 0.5 mm. 
thick, often longer than the axis, appressed or ascending in flower, 
spreading in fruit; bracts somewhat persistent, paired, narrowly tri- 
angular, acute, 2-3 mm. long; bracteoles like the bracts but broader 
and connate-perfoliate, forming a boat-shaped cup about 1 mm. high 

1 The inflorescence in this species is extremely plastic. It may be regarded as 
an axillary branch which may at one extreme be so much reduced that the axis is 
not readily apparent and the "raceme" appears as a solitary axillary flower. At 
the other extreme the "raceme" may bear one or two pairs of flowers at the base 
and continue above this as a leafy vegetative branch. The inflorescence may be 
strictly "racemose," that is, with 2-5 pairs of opposite, decussate flowers; in slightly 
more expanded variants, the upper nodes may bear 2 flowers each, or the lower- 
most node may bear 2 short racemes instead of 2 solitary flowers; in this latter case 
the lowermost node is actually in the axil of the leaf, and the inflorescence appears 
as 3 racemes, one above another in the axil. 



FLORA OF PERU 685 

and 3.5-4.5 mm. long, which is persistent until after the fruit ma- 
tures; margins of the bracteoles often scarious, glabrous; calyx-lobes 
4, oblong with rounded tip, silky on both sides, at maturity 2 mm. 
wide, 2-2.5 mm. long; disk flat, strongly 4-angled, about 2 mm. wide, 
somewhat pubescent or the center glabrous; style 4-6 mm. long, 
glabrous; petals white, elliptic, about 3 mm. wide, 5 mm. long, ciliate- 
f ringed at tip; stamens about 50, 4-7 mm. long; fruit oblong or sub- 
globose, glandular-verruculose, about 6 mm. long and nearly as thick. 
-F.M. Negs. 7951, 19914, 19946, 19953, 19989, 23555, 23556; Univ. 
of Mich. Neg. 584. 

San Martin: Lamas, Ferreyra 4665, 4674. Tarapoto, Ule 6363; 
Mathews 1449 (herb. Kew); Williams 5404, 5625, 6432; San Roque, 
Williams 7078. Moyobamba, 2800 feet, Sandeman 108; Moyobamba, 
Mathews in 1835; Osgood & Anderson 41, 42; Woytkowski (USM 
15438}; Weberbauer 4486, type of E. loretensis. Loreto: Mouth of 
Rio Santiago above Pongo de Manseriche, Mexia 61 61 . Balsapuerto, 
Sandeman s.n. Masisea, Tessmann 3119. Locality uncertain: Col- 
lector unknown, no. 717, ex herb. Miers. West Indies; lowlands of 
northern South America to eastern Bolivia. 

In Peru, and probably throughout the range of the species, the 
most common and most readily recognized form is one with ovate- 
lanceolate, caudate-acuminate leaves with thick, opaque blades in 
which the veins are scarcely apparent, width of the blade 1-2.5 cm., 
and the length 2.5-4 times the width. The species is a most variable 
one, however; Urban, for example, recognized in the West Indies no 
fewer than 5 varieties. In Peru, and adjacent Bolivia, the most 
common variants are those involving the stoutness of the inflores- 
cence and the shape of the leaves. The inflorescence may become 
much attenuated and the pedicels filiform; the most extreme example 
of this that has come to my attention was the plant described as 
Myrcia paivae var. gracilis Lingelsh., Buchtien's no. 1744, from 
northern Bolivia (Fedde Repert. Sp. Nov. 7: 243. 1909). Leaves 
which seem otherwise typical may be as much as 7 cm. long and 
less than 7 mm. wide (e.g. as in Mexia's no. 6161). In a collection 
from Juanjui, San Martin, Klug's no. 3811, the leaves are as much 
as 10 cm. long and only 5-6 mm. wide; these retain the characteristic 
mucronate tips, but the blades are thin in texture and the lateral and 
marginal veins are evident on the lower surface. Finally, in certain 
collections (e.g. Klug's no. 4055, from Chazuta, San Martin, and 
Tessmann's no. 4048, from Pongo de Manseriche) the leaves are thin 
and veiny, narrow and willow-like, 5-10 mm. wide and 3-6 cm. long, 



686 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

and the blades are blunt-tipped or merely sharp-pointed, but lack- 
ing mucronate tips. Superficially these look very different from 
other specimens of E. biflora, but in characters of the inflorescence 
and in the general features of the foliage and pubescence they agree 
perfectly with that species. These specimens with blunt-tipped 
leaves have been referred by some authors to Eugenia chiquitensis 
Berg, a somewhat closely related plant of eastern Bolivia; in E. chi- 
quitensis, however, the inflorescence and hypanthium are nearly 
glabrous. 

An exceptionally tomentose plant with somewhat larger and more 
numerous flowers than E. biflora, but of the same general affinity, 
has been collected in northern Bolivia (Williams, nos. 101, 1499). 
This has been referred to the Colombian species E. albida Humb. & 
Bonpl. (E. dysantha Benth.) but probably represents an undescribed 
species. It is thus far unknown from Peru. 

Eugenia calva McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 205. 1956. 

A tree 6 meters high, the inflorescence (except the flowers), veg- 
etative buds and youngest growth covered with closely appressed 
lustrous pale grayish-brown hairs 0.2 mm. long, the foliage and 
branchlets soon glabrescent; leaves lance-ovate or elliptic, 3.5-6 cm. 
wide, 9-15 cm. long, 2.5-3 times as long as wide, acute and slenderly 
acuminate at tip, rounded or subacute at base, the margins cuneately 
decurrent on the inner angles of the deeply channeled petiole 1 mm. 
thick, 10 mm. long; midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins 12-15 pairs in addition to some intermediate ones, 
slightly elevated above, prominulous beneath; marginal vein about 
equaling the lateral ones and slightly arched between them, 2-4 mm. 
from margin; blades dark green, lustrous and impressed-puncticu- 
late above, paler, dull and finely dark-dotted beneath; inflorescence 
(seen in immature bud only) an axillary raceme 4.5-5.5 cm. long, 
the axis bearing 7 pairs of flowers on pedicels 2-3 mm. long, each 
axil bearing apparently a second and shorter raceme (with 6 pairs of 
flowers) at the base of the first, this shorter raceme actually the low- 
est (tangential) branch of the other; immature buds 2-3 mm. long, 
glabrous except the fringed calyx-lobes; bracts ovate, pointed, broad- 
based, divaricate or somewhat reflexed, 1 mm. long; bracteoles 
broadly rounded or blunt-pointed, connate into a boat-shaped in- 
volucre 2 mm. long; hypanthium campanulate, 1-1.5 mm. long; 
calyx-lobes imbricate, broadly rounded, finely appressed-pubescent 
inside, in unequal pairs, the larger (inner) pair 1.5 mm. long, 1.8 mm. 
wide, the smaller pair 1 mm. long, 1.5 mm. wide; disk glabrous; style 



FLORA OF PERU 687 

glabrous, not seen expanded; stamens about 100; petals white, sub- 
orbicular, ciliate, 2 mm. or more long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 
about 10 in each locule, radiating in one plane from the margin of 
a flat, centrally affixed placenta. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 475. 

Loreto: Florida, Rio Putumayo, mouth of Rio Zubineta, alt. 180 
meters, forest, May-July, 1931, G. King 2146 (F, type). "Choj-ey," 
"Muy-ey" (Huitoto, Klug). 

Eugenia chartacea McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 206. 1956. 

Tree 15 meters high, completely glabrous except the staminal 
ring and the minutely ciliate petals and calyx-lobes; leaves ovate or 
broadly elliptic, 8-14 cm. wide, 11-21 cm. long, about 1.5 times as 
long as wide, bluntly deltoid-acuminate, rounded at base, the mar- 
gins decurrent on the inner wing-like angles of the deeply channeled 
petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 10 mm. long; midvein elevated above in a 
narrow median ridge, this often somewhat impressed, the vein prom- 
inent beneath; lateral veins 7-8 pairs, often somewhat elevated above 
but sulcate, prominulous beneath; marginal vein about equaling the 
laterals and arched somewhat between them, 5-15 mm. from margin; 
lowest lateral vein often ending in a slender submarginal vein 1-5 
mm. from margin; leaves nearly concolorous, smooth and lustrous 
especially above, with a few small elevated glandular dots on both 
surfaces; inflorescence on old wood, in clustered sessile abbreviated 
racemes, each with 1-2 approximate decussate pairs of flowers, on 
pedicels 1-1.5 mm. thick, 10-15 mm. long; bracts minute; bracteoles 
cartilaginous, spreading, persistent, triangular, 0.7 mm. long, 1.5 mm. 
wide; bud 12-18 mm. long, globose above the fleshy urceolate hypan- 
thium 5 mm. long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded or obovate, concave, 
when dry rigid, chartaceous and stramineous, imbricate, 8-10 mm. 
wide, 10-12 mm. long, spreading-reflexed after anthesis, the inner 
thin-margined laterally; disk quadrangular, 4-5 mm. wide, the stam- 
inal ring 1.5 mm. wide, the glabrous center depressed; style 12-15 
mm. long or more, with a few hairs at base; stamens 250-300, prob- 
ably as long as the style, the anthers 2-2.3 mm. long, erect in bud; 
petals fleshy, drying chartaceous, concave, ovate, 12 mm. wide and 
a little longer than this; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 20 in each 
locule, radiating from a short placenta on the central axis. Known 
only from the type, Krukoff 4951, from basin of Rio Jurua, Ama- 
zonas, Brazil. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 



688 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Eugenia crucicalyx McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 206. 1956. 

A shrub, the branchlets, vegetative buds and inflorescence cov- 
ered with appressed-ascending, straight, pale reddish hairs up to 
about 0.5 mm. long; a few minute, pale, appressed, partly dibrachi- 
ate hairs 0.1-0.2 mm. long persisting on the leaves, especially beneath; 
leaves elliptic, 1.8-4 cm. wide, 4.5-8 cm. long, a little more than twice 
as long as wide, short-acuminate, narrowed about equally to base 
and apex, the margins decurrent on the petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 6-8 
mm. long; mid vein convex above or channeled when young, prom- 
inent beneath; lateral veins 7-10 pairs, pale and elevated both sides; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched between them, 
1.5-4 mm. from margin, with a network of small submarginal veins 
beyond it; blades concolorous, lustrous, drying pale ashy brown, 
gland-dotted but the dots becoming obscure at maturity; inflores- 
cence an abbreviated axillary raceme, the axis 8 mm. long or usually 
less, 1-1.5 mm. thick, with 1-3 decussate pairs of flowers on pedicels 
up to 1.5 mm. long; bracts lanceolate, acute, 1-3 mm. long; brac- 
teoles ovate, pointed, 1.5 mm. long; buds 7-8 mm. long, pyriform, 
closely sessile in the bracteoles; hypanthium campanulate, some- 
what 4- or 8-angled, 2-2.5 mm. long, heavily rufous- velutinous; 
calyx-lobes 2-3 times as long as the hypanthium, in unequal pairs, 
the outer ovate-triangular, concave, broad at base, bluntly pointed, 
about 4 mm. wide, 5 mm. long; inner pair obovate, flat after anthe- 
sis, narrowed to the base, truncate at apex, 4-5 mm. wide, 6 mm. 
long; calyx completely glabrous within, widely spreading at anthe- 
sis; disk 2-2.5 mm. wide, flat, appearing wider because of the broad 
petal-scars; style glabrous, sparingly verruculose, about 8 mm. long; 
stamens 200-250, about as long as the style; petals elliptic, glabrous, 
5 mm. wide, 8 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 15 in 
each locule, radially arranged on a short placenta attached to the 
central axis. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 466. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, 360-900 meters, forest, Dec. 4, 1929, 
Williams 6216 (F, type). 

Eugenia curvipilosa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 206. 1956. 

Shrub 3 meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence and lower sur- 
face of the leaves covered by mostly flexuous or curved pale brown 
hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, or longer at the nodes and on bracts and 
buds. Leaves elliptic-ovate, subcoriaceous, 1.7-4 cm. wide, 4-7 cm. 
long, 1.5-2 times as long as wide, shortly and broadly acuminate, 
rounded or obtuse at base, the margins abruptly decurrent on the 



FLORA OF PERU 689 

blunt inner angles of the channeled petiole 1 mm. thick, 5 mm. long; 
mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 
10 pairs in addition to some intermediates, obscurely and narrowly 
impressed above, elevated beneath, inconspicuous on both sides; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals and somewhat arched be- 
tween them, 2-3.5 mm. from margin; blades probably darker green 
above, sub-vernicose and somewhat rough, essentially glabrous ex- 
cept the mid vein, with numerous small, often impressed dots; dots 
in the type collection black, probably from the action of a fungus; 
lower surface paler, permanently sub-tomentose, without apparent 
glandular dots; inflorescence an axillary raceme, the axis 1-2 cm. 
long, compressed and up to 1 mm. wide, bearing 3-6 decussate pairs 
of flowers on slender pedicels 0.5 mm. thick, 4-6 mm. long; bracts 
ovate, blunt, probably deciduous, 1-1.5 mm. long; bracteoles ovate, 
glabrescent, blunt-tipped, 2 mm. long and 2.5 mm. wide, connate, the 
involucre 0.5 mm. high, persistent; buds 4 mm. long, pyriform, the 
hypanthium campanulate, 1-1.5 mm. long, densely pale-strigose; 
calyx-lobes broadly rounded, closely appressed-pubescent inside, un- 
equal, the shorter pair 1 mm. long, the larger 1.5-2 mm. wide, 1.5 
mm. long; disk 1.5-2 mm. wide, the staminal ring hairy; style about 
4(?) mm. long; stamens 50-60, up to more than 5 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.6 mm. long; petals white, obovate-elliptic, ciliate, 3-4 mm. 
wide, 5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 5 in each locule, 
radiating from the margin of a centrally affixed placenta. Univ. of 
Mich. Neg. 447. 

Cajamarca: Valley of the Rio Llaucan, near Pion, alt. 1700-1800 
meters, June, 1915, Weberbauer 7137 (F, type). 

Eugenia curvivenia McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 207. 1956. 

A shrub 6 meters high, the branchlets, petioles, midvein on the 
lower leaf -surface, and the inflorescence closely and finely tomentose 
with very small dark red-brown hairs, the leaves soon glabrous, 
finely appressed-pubescent with pale hairs beneath; leaves broadly 
elliptic-ovate, coriaceous, 8-12.5 cm. wide, 16-24 cm. long, 2-2.5 
times as long as wide, abruptly short-acuminate, the tip decurved; 
base rounded, the margins decurrent on the petiole 4 mm. thick, 
15 mm. long; midvein elevated in a narrow median ridge most of its 
length above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 10 pairs, con- 
spicuous and strongly arcuate-ascending, convex but impressed 
above, prominent beneath, diminishing distally to a point 1-2 mm. 
from margin, those toward the tip of the blades forming strong mar- 
ginal arches; blades dark green, smooth and lustrous above with a 



690 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

few large elevated glands especially near base, the lower surface pale 
brown and duller, gland-dotted; inflorescence on old wood, usually 
several abbreviated racemes clustered in the axils on short spurs, 
the axis 1-2 mm. long, stout, bearing 1-3 approximate decussate 
pairs of flowers on compressed pedicels 1 mm. thick, 2-3.5 mm. long; 
bracts not seen; bracteoles persistent, broad-based, ovate, obtuse, 
not connate, 0.8-1.5 mm. long; buds pyriform, 4 mm. long; hypan- 
thium campanulate, 2 mm. long, angled in drying; disk 2 mm. across, 
hairy except the center; calyx-lobes minutely ciliate, imbricate, 
a little fleshy, suborbicular to oblong, glabrous inside, deciduous 
after anthesis, 3 mm. wide, 3-4 mm. long, the inner pair longer 
and with thin lateral margins; style 5 mm. long, glabrous; stamens 
50-60, 5 mm. long, the anthers 1 mm. long; petals elliptic, minutely 
ciliate but otherwise glabrous, 3 mm. wide, 6 mm. long; ovary biloc- 
ular, the ovules about 15 in each locule, radiating from a short pla- 
centa on the central axis. Known only from the type, Krukoff 5045, 
from the basin of the Rio Jurua, Amazonas, Brazil. 
Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia cuspidifolia DC. Prodr. 3: 279. 1828. 

A tree 6 meters high, the branchlets and young vegetative growth 
(sparsely) and the inflorescence (densely) appressed-pubescent with 
lustrous, rufous, partly dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves 
sometimes trough-shaped, mostly glabrous, elliptic or elliptic-ovate, 
2.5-3.5 cm. wide, 5-9 cm. long, about 2.3-3 times as long as wide, 
cuspidate-acuminate with linear blunt tips, acute to cuneate at base 
with the margins decurrent on the inner angles of the channeled 
petiole 1 mm. thick, 4-6 mm. long; mid vein on upper surface with 
narrow elevated median ridge, prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 
pairs, usually somewhat impressed above, prominulous beneath; mar- 
ginal vein about equaling the laterals, arched between them, 2-6 mm. 
from margin, with an outer, weaker, submarginal vein connected to 
it by small veinlets at right angles; blades smooth, lustrous and dark 
above, dull reddish-brown and gland-dotted beneath; inflorescence 
an abbreviated axillary raceme (or several from the same axil), the 
axis 2-6 mm. long or less, with up to 5 approximate decussate pairs 
of flowers on slender but slightly compressed pedicels 0.5 mm. thick, 
4-8 mm. long; bracts ovate, scarious, deciduous, about 1-1.5 mm. 
long; bracteoles 1-2 mm. long, persistent, ovate, pointed, not pro- 
longed or fused at the basal margins; buds pyriform, 4.5-5 mm. long, 
the hypanthium urceolate, 2 mm. long, longitudinally ridged; calyx- 
lobes 4, oblong, hooded, 2 mm. wide, 3-3.5 mm. long, thickened near 



FLORA OF PERU 691 

the tips, the thickenings apparent in the bud; lobes imbricate, united 
about half their length in the bud, and at anthesis splitting nearly 
to the summit of the ovary and finally reflexed, glabrous within or 
with a very few appressed hairs; disk 2.5 mm. wide, hairy and with 
an annular thickening about the base of the style; style glabrous, 
6-7 mm. long; stamens about 75, 6 mm. long, the anthers lanceolate, 
apiculate, 1-1.4 mm. long; petals ciliate, elliptic, 3 mm. wide, 5 mm. 
long; fruit unknown. This species belongs to a group with hooded 
and partially or almost completely connate calyx-lobes, which, ac- 
cording to Amshoff (Rec. Trav. bot. nee>l. 42: 21. 1949), and in 
Pulle (Flora of Suriname 3, pt. 2: 58, 105. 1951), should be segre- 
gated as the genus Catinga Aubl. Recent collections from the upper 
Amazon basin indicate that the species of this affinity are abundant 
there, and that their systematic positions are in need of study and 
clarification. The above description is based upon Peruvian mate- 
rial and in part upon the type specimen, collected by Martius on the 
Rio Negro. This species is apparently distinct from all related ones 
because of its considerably smaller flowers. F.M. Neg. 19932. 

Loreto: Florida, Rio Putumayo at mouth of Rio Zubineta, Klug 
2132. Amazonian Brazil. "Moifo-ey" (Huitoto, Klug). 

Eugenia dibrachiata 1 McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 207. 1956. 

Tall forest tree, the inflorescence, petioles, and youngest growth 
sparingly to densely appressed-pubescent with lustrous rufous hairs 
up to 0.5 mm. long; dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long numerous 
on the inflorescence and usually present in small numbers on the 
lower leaf-surface; leaves glabrous or with some appressed pale hairs, 
elliptic, 3-5.5 cm. wide, (6-) 8.5-14 cm. long, 2-3 times as long as 
wide, about equally rounded to the narrow acumen and the sub- 
cuneate base; margins decurrent on the petiole which is up to 1 mm. 
thick and 5-10 mm. long; blades pale green and smooth both sides, 
not evidently lustrous, not darkening in drying; upper surface spar- 
ingly and often obscurely impressed-punctate, the lower with incon- 
spicuous raised dots; mid vein prominent beneath, and also elevated 
in a narrow median ridge on the upper surface, the ridge often in a 
shallow channel; lateral veins inconspicuous, about 10-15 pairs; 
marginal vein 1-1.5 mm. from the margin, about equaling the lat- 
erals or a little smaller, often not continuous but broken when a 
lateral arches strongly and joins the next succeeding one; inflores- 
cence an axillary raceme 3-6 cm. long, with 4-7 decussate pairs of 

Erroneously spelled "dibranchiata" in the original publication. 



692 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

flowers, or seldom with the basal node (in the axil) bearing two short 
racemes; axis of raceme compressed, 1-1.5 mm. wide at the lowest 
node; pedicels stiff, divaricate, up to 0.6 mm. thick and 4-9 mm. 
long, the lower longer; bracts deciduous after anthesis, ovate, blunt- 
tipped, 1-1.5 mm. long; bracteoles ovate, as broad as long, round- 
tipped, sparingly strigose or merely ciliate, forming a cup 2.5-3 mm. 
long, persistent beneath the flower; calyx-lobes 4, broadly rounded, 
about 2 mm. long and 2.5 mm. wide, somewhat reflexed after anthe- 
sis, pubescent on both sides; disk 2.5-3 mm. wide, somewhat 4-an- 
gled, pubescent except the glabrous depressed center; style glabrous, 
about 7 mm. long; stamens 60-75, up to 10 mm. long; petals probably 
white, elliptic, 4.5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 4 in each 
locule, collateral, pendent; fruit unknown. The leaves suggest in 
color and texture those of Eugenia florida, but the marginal vein is 
more uniformly developed than in that species, which also is nearly 
glabrous. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 463. 

Loreto: Caballo-Cocha, Williams 2415, 2416, 2449 (type, F). 
La Victoria, Williams 2984. Leticia, Wittiams 3145. 

Specimens suggesting intermediate stages between this species 
and Eugenia florida have been collected not far from the Peruvian 
border, near Palmares, Mun. Sao Paulo de Olivenca, Brazil (Kru- 
koff 8322}, and at Zepelacio, near Moyobamba, San Martin, Peru, 
Klug 3304. These specimens have the pubescence, rather well- 
developed marginal vein, and floral characters nearly as in E. di- 
brachiata (except that the hypanthium is glabrous in Klug's col- 
lection), but the midvein is impressed on the upper leaf-surface as 
in florida, and the young leaves are scurfy-pubescent along the 
midvein. 

Eugenia discors McVaugh, sp. nov. 

Arbor vel frutex, racemis exceptis glaber, calyce hypanthioque 
dense pilis appressis sordidis obtectis; foliis rigide coriaceis, involutis, 
7-16 cm. longis, breviter acuminatis; nervo medio supra impresso; 
venis utroque latere 10-15, supra convexis; racemis validis; pedicellis 
crassis, 3.5-6 mm. longis; calycis lobis 3.5-4.5 mm. longis latisque. 

A shrub or tree with pale bark, glabrous as far as known except 
in the inflorescence; raceme axis minutely appressed-puberulent at 
least toward the apex, the pedicels and especially the hypanthium 
and calyx much more densely appressed-pubescent with grayish- 
white hairs up to about 0.3 mm. long; leaves rigidly coriaceous, 
elliptic or ovate, 4-10 cm. wide, 7-16 cm. long, 1.6-2.2 times as 



FLORA OF PERU 693 

long as wide, shortly acuminate, rounded to the base; margins 
strongly involute in dried specimens, acutely narrowed at base and 
decurrent on the inner angles of the short channeled petiole 1.7- 
2.7 mm. thick, 7-11 mm. long; midvein impressed above, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins 10-15 principal pairs with some intermediate 
ones, somewhat raised above when dry, scarcely apparent beneath; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched between them, 
2-5 mm. from the margin; blades hard and glossy as if varnished 
above, dull and paler and nearly featureless beneath, obscurely 
gland-dotted; inflorescence an axillary or falsely terminal raceme 
3-8 cm. long with 5-6 pairs of opposite and decussate flowers; axis 
of raceme compressed, up to 3 mm. wide just below the lowest node; 
pedicels 1 mm. thick or a little more, 3.5-6 mm. long, somewhat 
compressed; bracts not seen, deciduous before anthesis; bracteoles 
ovate, glabrous, about 2.5 mm. long and wide, not connate, together 
forming a persistent didymous boat-shaped involucre; buds 3.5-5 
mm. long, obovoid, the broadly funnelform, densely pubescent hy- 
panthium less than one- third the length of the entire bud; calyx- 
lobes 4, rounded, 3.5-4.5 mm. long and wide, densely pubescent 
both sides or the distal half glabrous without; disk about 4 mm. 
wide, pubescent; style 6-7 mm. long; stamens about 150, up to 8- 
9 mm. long, the anthers 0.6-0.7 mm. long; petals obovate, up to 
7 mm. long, pubescent near the tip; ovary bilocular, the ovules 4 in 
each locule, collateral; fruit unknown. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 1096. 
San Martin: Lamas, A. Mathews 1451 (K; herb. Hook., type; 
herb. Benth.). 

Eugenia discreta McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 208. 1956. 

Tree 11 meters high, the inflorescence and young growth spar- 
ingly puberulent with minute appressed mostly dibrachiate hairs 
0.2 mm. long, the foliage glabrescent; leaves oblanceolate, obovate, 
or on shoots elliptic, 5-8 cm. wide, 14-18 cm. long, 2.5-3 times as 
long as wide, shortly rounded to the decurved, acuminate tip, nar- 
rowed from the middle or above to the convexly acute base, the 
margins decurrent on the inner angles of the petiole 2 mm. thick, 
6-10 mm. long; midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; lat- 
eral veins 10-15 pairs, elevated above, more prominent beneath, the 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals and angularly arched be- 
tween them, 2-10 mm. from margin, a weaker submarginal vein 
1-3 mm. from margin, connected to the inner vein in a series of 
oblong or angled elliptic areoles; blades above drying olive green, 
lustrous and very smooth except the raised reticulum of veins, the 



694 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

raised glandular dots scarcely apparent at maturity; lower surface 
drying dull greenish brown, papillose, with small dark dots or these 
obscure at maturity; flowers in axillary umbel-like clusters, darken- 
ing in drying, the inflorescence an abbreviated raceme (or 2-3 ra- 
cemes in each axil), bearing 2-3 approximate decussate pairs of 
flowers on slightly compressed pedicels up to 1 mm. wide, 5-10 mm. 
long; bracts broadly rounded or pointed, 1 mm. long; bracteoles 
broadly ovate, rounded to obtuse at tip, connate for about 0.5 mm. 
at base, persistent, 2.5 mm. long and wide; buds about 5 mm. long, 
pyriform; hypanthium campanulate, glabrous or nearly so, 2 mm. 
long; calyx-lobes unequal, oblong or suborbicular, 1.5-2 mm. wide, 
1-2.5 mm. long; disk 2 mm. wide, glabrous; style 7-9 mm. long; 
stamens about 75, up to 7-9 mm. long, the anthers about 1 mm. 
long; petals white, elliptic, 2-3 mm. wide, 4.5 mm. long; ovary bi- 
locular, the ovules about 15 in each locule, radially spreading from 
a short, centrally affixed placenta; fruit globose, 1 cm. in diameter 
(?immature), said to be yellow. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 455. 

Loreto: Gamitanacocha, Rio Mazan, on river bank, Jan. 15, 1935, 
J. M. Schunke 40 (US, type). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia dittocrepis Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 292. 1857. 
E. congestissima Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 190. 1907. 

A large shrub or small tree up to 5 meters high, with stout pale 
compressed branchlets, glabrous except the ciliate bracteoles and 
calyx-lobes; leaves elliptic or obovate, 3.5-6 cm. wide, 9-16 cm. 
long, 2.2-2.7 times as long as wide, acuminate, the tip small and 
deltoid or more slender, the base gradually rounded and finally 
cuneate, the margins decurrent on the stout but relatively long 
petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 10-15 mm. long; mid vein flat or convex 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 10-15 pairs, somewhat ele- 
vated on both surfaces in drying, more conspicuous beneath; mar- 
ginal vein 2-8 mm. from margin, somewhat arched between the 
laterals, with a network of small veins between it and the margin; 
leaves coriaceous, drying green above, pale or dark reddish-brown 
beneath, the glands inconspicuous; flowers in small clusters on old 
wood, the twigs often 3 mm. thick in the intervals between flowering 
nodes; inflorescence an axillary raceme, the axis much reduced, up 
to 1-2 mm. long, the flowers 1 or 2 decussate pairs; pedicels (in the 
type) slender, in bud 10 mm. long, less than 1 mm. thick, or (in fruit) 
4 mm. long, 1.5 mm. thick; bracteoles persistent, appressed to the 
hypanthium, ovate, acute, 1.5 mm. long; bud (before calyx-lobes 
separate) 4 mm. long; calyx-lobes rounded, 2.5 mm. across, 2 mm. 



FLORA OF PERU 695 

long; fruit globose, about 1.5 cm. in diameter. Under this name 
I have included glabrous plants with large coriaceous leaves not hav- 
ing the midvein impressed above, the flowers in short-pedicelled 
small axillary clusters, and the fruit probably globose. Other spe- 
cies in eastern Brazil (e.g. Eugenia glomerata Spring) are similar to 
the present one, and a revision of the group, in the light of much 
more material than is now available, is needed. The Peruvian speci- 
mens cited below are only doubtfully conspecific, and their relation- 
ships with the type, Poeppig's no. 3109, from Ega, Brazil, are 
similarly in doubt. F.M. Negs. 23528, 23536. 

Loreto: Tarapoto, Ule 6362, type of E. congestissima. La Vic- 
toria, Williams 2814- Amazonian Brazil, Bolivia. 

Eugenia egensis DC. Prodr. 3: 281. 1828. E. egensis y grandi- 
folia Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 296. 1857. 

A shrub or small tree up to 10 meters high, completely glabrous 
except for the ciliate margins of the bracts, bracteoles and calyx- 
lobes and the hispidulous staminal disk (rarely the young vegetative 
parts sparingly pale rufous-strigose, as in Williams 2614, 2794), often 
darkening in drying; leaves (1.5-) 2-4 (-4.5) cm. wide, 6-10 (-12.5) 
cm. long, (2-) 2.5-3.5 times as long as wide, elliptic to ovate-lanceo- 
late, prominently acuminate, rounded or cuneate at base and the 
margins somewhat decurrent on the stout channeled petiole 3-4 (-6) 
mm. long, about 1 mm. thick; midvein prominent beneath, sunken 
above but flat or channeled, not sharply impressed; lateral veins 10- 
15 pairs, slender, about equally apparent on both surfaces and slightly 
raised on both; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, slightly 
arched between them, 0.5-1.5 mm. from the margin; upper surface 
of blade dark and somewhat lustrous when dry, often appearing as 
if waxed, the glands usually not apparent in mature leaves; lower 
surface dull, usually pale yellowish brown when dry, with conspicu- 
ous abundant glandular dots, these often dark and somewhat raised; 
inflorescence a short axillary raceme (or occasionally 2 or 3 super- 
posed racemes in a single axil), the axis somewhat 4-angled, (1-) 
3-6 (-17) mm. long, with 4-6 (-8) opposite, decussate pairs of flow- 
ers; terminal flower usually aborting; pedicels filiform, straight, (5-) 
8-12 (-22) mm. long, widely spreading; bracts somewhat persistent, 
rounded, ovate to reniform, broad-based and often nearly concealing 
the base of the pedicel, nearly 1 mm. wide and almost as long; brac- 
teoles arising from the expanded end of the pedicel and hardly delim- 
ited from it, ovate to narrowly triangular, acute, often connate by 
the basal margins and forming a boat-shaped cup 1.5-2.5 mm. long 



696 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

which persists until the pedicel falls; calyx-lobes 4, rounded, about 
2 mm. wide and almost as long, reflexed after anthesis and spreading 
in fruit; disk flat, somewhat 4-angled, about 2 mm. wide, with gla- 
brous center and minutely hispidulous staminal ring; style about 
6 mm. long; stamens about 75, about 6 mm. long; petals white, 
elliptic, about 4 mm. long; fruit ellipsoid to subglobose, glandular- 
verruculose, up to about 10 mm. long, brown or black at maturity. 
-F.M. Neg. 19939. 

San Martin: Rioja, 800-900 meters, Weberbauer 4703 (USM) . 
Loreto: Iquitos, Killip & Smith 27277. Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, 
King 1167. Florida, mouth of Rio Zubineta, King 1992. Yurima- 
guas, Poeppig, type of var. grandifolia. Gamitanacocha, Rio Mazan, 
Schunke 59. Pongo de Manseriche, Tessmann 3644- Punchana, 
near Iquitos, Williams 1339. La Victoria, Williams 2614, 2794. 
Junin: Huacapistana, 6,000 feet, Sandeman 4438. Guianas to Co- 
lombia, south to eastern Bolivia. 

Eugenia ependytes McVaugh, sp. nov. 

Arbor parva, pilis appressis pallidis, usque ad 1 mm. longis, prae- 
dita; foliis 5-10 cm. longis acuminatis, venis utroque latere circiter 
10; nervo medio supra impresso; racemis 2-3 cm. longis tenuibus; 
calycis lobis 4 mm. longis, utrinque sericeis; bracteolis suborbiculari- 
bus, glabris, 5-6 mm. latis. 

A small tree, the youngest twigs (sparingly) and the inflorescence 
(densely) covered with soft appressed evanescent yellowish- or brown- 
ish-white hairs up to 1 mm. long or more; leaves elliptic to oblong or 
ovate, 2.5-3.7 cm. wide, 5-10 cm. long, (2-) 2.5-3 times as long as 
wide, prominently acuminate, rounded or acute at base, the margins 
passing abruptly into the pubescent grooved petiole up to 1 mm. 
thick and 4-5 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent be- 
neath; lateral veins about 10 pairs, indefinite in number with some 
intermediates, hardly apparent above, slightly elevated beneath 
when dry; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, somewhat 
arched between them, 1-2 mm. from the margin; blades apparently 
dull and nearly concolorous, obscurely if at all glandular-dotted ; in- 
florescence an axillary or falsely terminal raceme 2-3 cm. long, with 
2-4 pairs of opposite and decussate flowers; axis of raceme com- 
pressed, about 1 mm. wide just below the lowest node; pedicels 2-5 
mm. long, shaggy-pubescent and appearing stout; bracts ovate- 
lanceolate, 1.5-2 mm. wide, 3-4.5 mm. long, pubescent without, 
glabrous within, acute, persistent through anthesis, the lower often 



FLORA OF PERU 697 

shorter and blunt or rounded at tip; bracteoles membranous, gla- 
brous or essentially so, ciliate, finely gland-dotted, relatively enor- 
mous for the genus and so enveloping and concealing much of the 
bud (ependytes, an outer garment), but not connate, orbicular or 
wider than long, 5-6 mm. wide, 4-5 mm. long; buds about 5 mm. 
long, obovoid or subglobose; hypanthium broadly funnel-form, 
densely appressed-silky with hairs to 1 mm. long; calyx-lobes in 
unequal pairs, broadly rounded with the tips somewhat incurved in 
flower, appressed-silky on both surfaces, the outer (larger) pair 4- 
4.5 mm. wide, 3-4 mm. long, the inner pair 3 mm. wide, 4 mm. long; 
disk 4 mm. wide, glabrous except the inner margin of the staminal 
ring; style about 7 mm. long; stamens about 200, about 7 mm. long, 
the anthers 0.6-0.8 mm. long; petals suborbicular or obovate, about 
7 mm. long, glabrous, gland-dotted, with laciniate margins; ovary 
bilocular, the ovules 12-15 in each locule, somewhat biseriate on a 
centrally affixed placenta; fruit unknown. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 1097. 
?Huanuco: Ganso Azul, Rio Pachitea, 1500 ft. elevation, in par- 
tial shade, C. Sandeman 3351, Oct., 1942 (Herb. Kew, type), 3416 
(Herb. Kew). 

Eugenia feijoi Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 283. 1857. 
E. pisonis Berg, in Mart. I.e. 228. E. costata Berg, in Mart. I.e. 577. 
1859. E, diplocampta Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 191. 1907. 
E. pleurosiphonea Diels, I.e. 

A shrub 5-10 meters high, or a tall tree, the branchlets, vegeta- 
tive buds and young growth heavily strigose with straight lustrous 
coppery-red or pale-red hairs up to 1 mm. long, those on the lower 
leaf-surface at least sparingly persistent, sessile and mostly dibrachi- 
ate; hairs of the inflorescence closely appressed and often yellowish 
and somewhat matted; leaves elliptic-lanceolate, 3-5 cm. wide, 8- 
14 cm. long (on shoots up to 7 cm. wide, 16 cm. long), 2.5-3 times 
as long as wide, cuspidate-acuminate, the tip linear and blunt; base 
rounded or acute, the margins decurrent on the inner angles of the 
channeled petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 5-10 mm. long; midvein with 
narrow elevated median ridge above, pale strigose near base, prom- 
inent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, elevated but not prominent 
above, prominulous beneath, the basal ones sometimes strongly as- 
cending, then diminishing distally and not joining the marginal vein, 
which at mid-leaf is weaker than the laterals and arched between 
them, 3-5 (-8) mm. from margin, usually with a weak submarginal 
vein connected to it by veinlets at right angles; blades above very 
smooth, lustrous, olive green or black when dry, without evident 



698 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

glands; lower surface reddish (liver color), dull, dark-dotted; flowers 
appearing glomerate, in the axils on old wood, the inflorescence an 
abbreviated raceme 1-2 mm. long with 2-5 approximate decussate 
pairs of flowers on pedicels 0.6-1 mm. thick, 4-7 mm. long (or up to 
1.5 mm. thick and 9 mm. long in fruit); bracts ovate, deciduous, 
about 1 mm. long; bracteoles narrowly or broadly ovate, persistent, 
scarcely or not at all connate at base, 1.5-2 mm. long; buds 6-9 mm. 
long, pyriform, with 4 terminal convexities corresponding to the 
thickenings of the calyx-lobes, the hypanthium campanulate, some- 
what angled, 2.5 (-3) mm. long; calyx glabrescent without, glabrous 
within, the lobes salmon-pink (Killip and Smith), imbricated and 
connate in bud except 1-2 mm. at tip, at anthesis splitting to 
the disk or nearly so, and ultimately reflexed, 2.5-4 mm. wide, 3.5- 
5 mm. long (up to 5 mm. wide and 9 mm. long in fruit), hooded, 
convex-thickened near the tips but thin-margined and ciliate, the 
inner ones with scarious apical margins 1 mm. wide; disk 2.5-3 mm. 
wide, glabrous, the center elevated in an annular thickening about 
the style-base; style glabrous, 10 mm. long; stamens 150-175, some- 
what shorter than the style, the anthers linear, 1-1.5 mm. long; 
petals glabrous, ciliate, 4-5 mm. wide, 8 mm. long; fruit broadly 
ellipsoid, or obovoid, 2-2.5 cm. in diameter, 2.5-3.5 cm. long; seed 1, 
ellipsoid, undivided. It is possible that the correct name for this 
species is Catinga aromatica Aubl., as suggested by Amshoff (in Pulle, 
Flora of Suriname 3, pt. 2: 106. 1951). As noted by Amshoff, how- 
ever, "The identification of Aublet's species is still doubtful." The 
type, a sterile specimen in the British Museum (Natural History), 
was examined by Amshoff, who stated that its identity was uncer- 
tain (Rec. Trav. bot. ne*erl. 42: 21. 1949). Miss Amshoff, however, 
in the Flora of Suriname, relegated Eugenia pleurosiphonea to the 
synonymy of C. aromatica. Eugenia feijoi seems to differ from the 
closely related E. cuspidifolia chiefly in the difference in size of the 
flowers, and perhaps study will show the two to be conspecific. The 
type of E. feijoi is in flower, whereas that of E. pisonis is in fruit, 
but the two agree so well in other characters that they seem surely 
to represent the same species. The type of E. pisonis was found by 
Berg among the Brazilian collections deposited at Munich by Mar- 
tius; the type locality was unknown, but from the general morphol- 
ogy of the plant Berg assumed that it came from the Amazon region 
("Brasilia, certe Najas") . Apparently he was correct in this assump- 
tion, for the specimen is very like a collection from near the mouth 
of the Rio Negro, Spruce no. 1325, or "Eugenia (13)," which Berg 
annotated as a new species with a name he seems never to have 



FLORA OF PERU 699 

published (E. stictophylla) . References to fruit characters in the 
above descriptions have been drawn from the specimens collected by 
Martius and Spruce. F.M. Negs. 19941, 19981, 36940, 28349, 
23576. 

Loreto : Soledad, on Rio Itaya, Kittip & Smith 29811 . Amazonian 
Brazil. 

Eugenia flavescens DC. Prodr. 3: 272. 1828. 

A shrub or tree to 10 meters high according to Amshoff, nearly 
glabrous, the vegetative buds, pedicels, bracts, bracteoles and calyx- 
lobes with few short cilia or with sparse minuscule erect hairs about 
0.1 mm. long; foliage and flowers drying light yellow or the leaves 
yellow-green; leaves elliptic or obovate, 2-3 (-5) cm. wide, 5.5-8 
(-13) cm. long, 2-3 times as long as wide, pointed at both ends, 
usually acuminate at tip, acute at base, the margins decurrent on 
the channeled petiole 1 mm. thick, 4-6 mm. long; midvein convex 
above and somewhat more prominently so beneath; lateral veins 
about 8 pairs, slightly elevated on both sides; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals and arched between them, 1-3 mm. from mar- 
gin; leaves smooth and lustrous above, paler beneath, with numerous 
elevated dots on both sides at least when young; inflorescence an 
abbreviated axillary raceme, the axis 1 mm. long or less, bearing 
usually 2 approximate decussate pairs of flowers on compressed ped- 
icels about 0.7 mm. thick, 7-12 mm. long; flowers sometimes in oppo- 
site pairs from the lowest 1-3 nodes of a new leafy branch, subtended 
then by broadly rounded deciduous bracts 1 mm. long; bracteoles 
1-1.5 mm. long, ascending, connate, acute, persistent; buds 4-5 mm. 
long, pyriform, the hypanthium campanulate, 1.5 mm. long; calyx- 
lobes unequal, ovate or suborbicular, imbricate, thin and thin-mar- 
gined, 1.5-2 mm. wide, 1-1.5 mm. long; disk glabrous, about 2 mm. 
wide; style 7-8.5 mm. long; stamens about 75, 5-6 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.5 mm. long; petals suborbicular, white when fresh accord- 
ing to Amshoff, ciliate, 4 mm. wide, 5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, 
the cells about 15-ovulate; fruit (according to Amshoff) a berry, 
depressed-globose, black, striate, the embryo undivided. Originally 
described from eastern Brazil (Bahia), this species is also known from 
the Guianas, from southeastern Bolivia (Santa Cruz), and as near 
to the Peruvian border as the falls of the Rio Madeira, Brazil. F.M. 
Neg. 19943. 

Peru (probably). 



700 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Eugenia florida DC. Prodr. 3: 283. 1828. E. atropunctata Steud. 
Flora 26: 762. 1843. E. gardneriana Berg, in Mart. FI. Bras. 14, 
pt. 1: 316. 1857. E. oligoneura Berg, I.e. 321. 

Tree up to 15 meters high, nearly glabrous, the inflorescence and 
young growth, and sometimes the petioles and blades near the mid- 
nerve, finely pubescent. Hairs usually of several types, those of the 
racemes minuscule, abundant, the axis appearing prickly-hispidulous 
under a lens; hairs of the youngest parts often appressed, rufous, up 
to 0.3 mm. long; dibrachiate hairs probably always present, minute, 
often asymmetric, flaccid and collapsing and soon deciduous, usually 
much less abundant than other types. Leaves elliptic to ovate, often 
varying considerably on the same branch, the lower ones broader 
and more nearly ovate; blades mostly 3-5 (-8) cm. wide, 6-15 cm. 
long, usually 2-3 times as long as wide, acuminate at tip, rounded 
or subcuneate at base, the margins decurrent on the stout petiole 
1-1.5 mm. thick, up to 5-7 mm. long; midvein flat or impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 8-10 pairs, prominent be- 
neath, impressed in delicate lines above, diminishing distally and 
strongly arcuate, the lower veins not ending in a definite marginal 
vein but each overarching about 2-5 (-10) mm. from the margin, 
approaching and ultimately joining the adjacent vein; lower leaf- 
surfaces dull green, usually without evident glands at maturity, the 
upper surface sparingly and minutely impressed-puncticulate; inflo- 
rescence axillary, 7-10 cm. long or less, or often longer, but then 
interrupted by leafy nodes, often twice compound, the individual 
racemes up to about 10, 8-10 (-20) flowered, the terminal flower 
usually aborting; pedicels 3-4 (-7) mm. long, widely spreading; 
bracts ciliate, persistent, ovate, acute, about 1 mm. long, partly en- 
veloping the base of the pedicel; bracteoles similar, broader, persist- 
ent on the pedicel; hypanthium glabrous; calyx-lobes 4, rounded, 
1-1.5 mm. long, 1.5 mm. wide, ciliate, abundantly strigose or silky 
within; disk flat, glabrous, 1.7-2 mm. wide; style 5-6 mm. long, gla- 
brous; stamens about 60, about as long as the style; petals white, 
elliptic, 4-5 mm. long; fruit globose, verruculose, about 8-10 mm. 
in diameter. F.M. Negs. 19944, 23513, 23544, 31595. 

San Martin: Lamas, Williams 6482. Tarapoto, Williams 5827. 
Loreto: Mishuyacu, Klug 2571. Muniches, Poeppig 2353, type of 
E. oligoneura. Santiago Miindung am Pongo de Manseriche, Tess- 
mann 4342. Stromgebiet des Ucayali von 10 S. bis zur Miindung, 
Tessmann 3230. Timbuchi, Rio Nanay, Williams 984, 985. Man- 
finfa, upper Rio Nanay, Williams 1145. Caballo-Cocha on the 



FLORA OF PERU 701 

Amazon, Williams 2487. Yurimaguas, Williams 1+203, 4541, 4686, 
4749. Rio Mazan near Iquitos, Williams 8177. Iquitos, Sandeman 
2259. Bolivia and Amazonian Brazil, to the Guianas, Venezuela and 
northern Colombia (Sierra de Santa Marta). "Rupinia" (Williams). 

Scarcely distinguishable plants, apparently with slightly more 
delicately veined leaves, very slightly smaller flowers and few or no 
dibrachiate hairs, occur in Central America. Similar small-flowered 
individuals, often nearly glabrous, occur also in Peru, and should 
perhaps be recognized nomenclaturally. In these the leaves are 
mostly 4.5-6.5 cm. long, the veins are inconspicuous and less dis- 
tinctly impressed than those of typical florida, the inflorescence is 
usually 1.5-3 cm. long only, the disk about 1.5 mm. wide, the style 
3-4.5 mm. long. Some individuals are completely glabrous, whereas 
others are pubescent almost exactly as in typical florida. 

San Martin: Juanjui, Klug 3876. Loreto: Near Picaflor, Tess- 
mann 3182. Rio Acre: Seringal Auristella, Ule 9660. Near mouth 
of Rio Macauhan, Krukoff 5242. Locality uncertain: "Pavon" ex 
herb. Moricand (G). This latter specimen is labeled "Myrtus fra- 
grans Peru," and, in another hand, "Pavon." The plant appears 
to be identical with a specimen in herb. Barbey-Boissier, the latter 
probably collected by Tafalla(?) and labeled "Fl. H[uayaquil.] descr. 
10.7 1799." Both are probably from the same collection as a speci- 
men in the British Museum which is labeled merely "Myrthus sp. 
nova" and in a later hand "Ruiz et Pavon." I should refer all these 
plants to this small-flowered, nearly glabrous representative of Eu- 
genia florida which is discussed above, and I think it probable that 
all three came from Ecuador rather than from Peru. 

Eugenia gomesiana Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 254. 1857. 

Shrub or tree to 8 meters high, the branchlets, petioles, new 
growth and inflorescence densely hirsute-velutinous with coarse 
somewhat flexuous dark purplish-brown hairs up to 1 mm. long, 
the leaves with similar but paler hairs at least on the midvein be- 
neath, and often along the midvein above; lower leaf-surface often 
with few or numerous shorter, paler and nearly erect hairs; leaves 
narrowly elliptic, 4-6.5 cm. wide, 15-24 cm. long, 3-3.5 times as long 
as wide, gradually acuminate, narrowed below the middle and acute 
or gradually rounded to the base, the margins shortly decurrent on 
the stout dark petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 6-8 mm. long; midvein above 
convex at least at base, distally with a narrow median channel, prom- 
inent beneath; lateral veins 10-15 pairs, slightly elevated above, 



702 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

prominulous beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals or 
somewhat weaker, forming angular arches between them, 4-10 mm. 
from the margin, with a broad veiny zone between it and the mar- 
gin; blades dark and lustrous, glabrous or glabrescent and smooth 
above, with very numerous small elevated dots when young; lower 
surface dull and paler, sometimes reddish brown in drying, the glands 
sometimes apparent, the surface under a strong lens appearing papil- 
lose-roughened and glistening; inflorescence an abbreviated axillary 
raceme, the axis quadrangular, 2 mm. thick, 3-4 (-7) mm. long, 
bearing 3-4 approximate decussate pairs of flowers on stout pedicels 
1-1.5 mm. thick, 6-8 mm. long; bracts round or oblong, deciduous, 
1.5 mm. wide, 1.5-2 mm. long; bracteoles subulate, 2-2.5 mm. long, 
deciduous at anthesis or thereafter; buds about 7 mm. long, subglo- 
bose; calyx-lobes unequal, glabrous inside, the shorter pair rounded, 
2 mm. long, up to 3.5 mm. wide, the other pair oblong, 3.5-4.5 mm. 
long and about 3 mm. wide; disk 3^4 mm. wide; petals (according 
to Berg) orbicular, 6 mm. long; ovary (according to Berg) bilocular, 
multi-ovulate; fruit ellipsoid, 8-12 mm. in diameter, 15-20 mm. long, 
crowned by the incurved calyx-lobes; seed 1, ellipsoid, to 12 mm. 
long, undivided. The type of this species is Spruce 1163, or, as 
Spruce labeled it in the field, "Eugenia (12)," in the Munich her- 
barium. Included under this number in some other herbaria are 
specimens of Eugenia prosoneura Berg, which has superficially sim- 
ilar leaves but very different pubescence. F.M. Neg. 19950. 
Loreto: Iquitos, Killip & Smith 27189. Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia heterochroma Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 
190. 1907. 

A shrub or small tree to 8 meters high, the inflorescence and 
branchlets closely rufous-felted with extremely small crisped or 
scurfy hairs hardly more than 0.1 mm. long; leaves elliptic or ob- 
long-lanceolate, 4.5-8 cm. wide, 12-19 cm. long, 2.5-3 times as long 
as wide, gradually or abruptly short-acuminate, rounded or acute 
at base, the margins abruptly decurrent on the inner angles of the 
dark channeled petiole 2-2.5 mm. thick, 6-8 mm. long; midvein flat 
or convex above, about 1 mm. wide at base, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins 12-15 pairs with some additional intermediate veins, 
a little elevated on both sides, more prominent beneath; marginal 
veins about equaling the laterals and arched beneath them, 3-5 mm. 
from margin; leaves smooth and lustrous above, greenish-brown in 
drying, the lower surface dull and tan color or rufous, sparingly and 
minutely pubescent but the hairs almost invisible on the loosely 



FLORA OF PERU 703 

cellular surface which under a lens sparkles by reflected light from 
the cell-facets; glands not apparent on mature leaves; inflorescence 
an abbreviated axillary raceme, solitary, or 2-3 from the same axil, 
the axis up to 1 cm. long and 1.5 mm. thick, somewhat 4-angled, 
with 1-4 decussate pairs of flowers on pedicels 1 mm. thick, 4-7 mm. 
long; bracts broadly ovate, sub-clasping, 2 mm. long; bracteoles 
nearly 2 mm. long, broadly ovate, fused by the basal margins into, 
a persistent involucre beneath the bud; buds about 7 mm. long, 
pyriform, the campanulate hypanthium 3-4 mm. long; calyx-lobes 
nearly equal, obovate or elliptic, cucullate, sparingly appressed- 
pubescent within, about 5 mm. wide, 6 mm. long; disk 4 mm. wide, 
margined by the broad petal-scars, flat or concave, glabrous or 
slightly pubescent at center; style 10-11 mm. long, glabrous, en- 
larged and verruculose above the middle; stamens 200-250, up to 
8 mm. long; anthers 1 mm. long; petals ovate, glabrous, about 9 mm. 
long; fruit narrowly ellipsoid, 8 mm. in diameter, 15-18 mm. long, 
rufous-puberulent, glandular-verruculose, the calyx-lobes subpersist- 
ent; seed 1, long-ellipsoid, undivided. P.M. Neg. 23546. 
Loreto: Iquitos, Williams 8168. Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia hexovulata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 210. 1956. 

Tree 15 meters high, the twigs, petioles, inflorescence and lower 
leaf-surface completely covered with dense closely appressed dibra- 
chiate reddish-brown hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves lanceolate- 
oblong, 5-7 cm. wide, 12-24 cm. long, (2.5-) 3-3.5 times as long as 
wide, acuminate at tip, rounded at base, the margins short-decurrent 
on the inner angles of the channeled petiole 2.5 mm. thick, 12 mm. 
long; mid vein elevated above in a narrow median ridge, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins about 20 pairs in addition to some slender 
intermediate ones, somewhat elevated on both surfaces; marginal 
vein about equaling the laterals and slightly arched between them, 
1-3 mm. from margin; blades smooth and lustrous above, without 
apparent glandular dots; lower surface obscured by the hairs; inflo- 
rescence umbel-like, the flowers in clusters up to 15 at nodes on old 
wood, on compressed pedicels 1 mm. wide, 8-20 mm. long; each 
cluster probably comprising 1-3 abbreviated racemes, each with an 
axis 1-3 mm. long, bearing 2-5 approximate decussate pairs of flow- 
ers; bracts ovate, 1-1.5 mm. long; bracteoles lanceolate, erect and 
appressed at the narrow apical margins of the pedicels, 1-1.5 mm. 
long; buds 6 mm. long, pyriform, closed at the tip and rounded or 
obscurely apiculate, the narrowly campanulate hypanthium 2-3 mm. 
long with about 8 longitudinal ridges; calyx glabrous inside, at an- 



704 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

thesis splitting nearly to the disk into 4 nearly equal ovate pointed 
lobes 3 mm. wide, 5 mm. long, these finally spreading or the tips 
recurved; disk about 2 mm. wide, concave, glabrous, the staminal 
ring extending nearly to the depressed center; style 6-7 mm. long; 
stamens 100-125, about 5 mm. long, the anthers incurved in the bud, 
linear, 1-1.2 mm. long; petals 4, white, obovate, narrow-based, cili- 
ate, 3 mm. wide, 5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 3 in each 
locule, collateral, axile, the micropyle turned down. A plant of 
somewhat questionable generic position. The small number of ovules 
is unusual but not unknown in the Eugeniinae. The characters of 
the inflorescence, bracteoles and pubescence, the angled hypanthium, 
the anthers and the broad staminal ring all suggest Eugenia feijoi 
and its relatives, but the venation is unlike that of E. feijoi. Univ. 
of Mich. Neg. 462. 

Loreto: Pumayacu, between Balsapuerto and Moyobamba, 600- 
1200 meters, forest, Aug.-Sept., 1933, G. King 3194 (F, type). 

Eugenia illepida McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 210. 1956. 

Shrub or tree to 20 meters high, glabrous except the staminal 
ring and the ciliate bracteoles, calyx-lobes and petals; leaves oblance- 
olate or sometimes elliptic, 4-7.5 cm. wide, 12-26 cm. long, 3-3.5 
times as long as wide, abruptly narrowed to the weakly deltoid- 
acuminate tip, narrowed from the middle or above to the convexly 
acute base, the margins decurrent on the obtuse inner angles of the 
scarcely channeled petiole 1-2 mm. thick, 8-10 mm. long; midvein 
flat above or broadly sulcate and somewhat impressed, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins 10-15 pairs, a little elevated on both sides; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals, arched between them, 
2-5 mm. from margins; leaves green above, smooth and lustrous, 
obscurely dotted or in age without apparent dots; lower surface 
yellow-green, paler, somewhat brown-dotted; flowers 4-6 together in 
clusters (abbreviated racemes) 3 mm. long, on old wood or in leafy 
axils; pedicels 1.5 mm. thick, 8-15 mm. long; bracteoles lanceolate, 
broad at base but not connate, acute, ascending, persistent, 2.5 mm. 
long; buds 10-12 mm. long, subglobose above the narrowly obconic 
hypanthium 3 mm. long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, rigid, prom- 
inently gland-dotted and much imbricated, in very unequal pairs, 
the outer 7 mm. wide, 4 mm. long, the inner 14 mm. wide, 8 mm. 
long; disk about 6-7 mm. wide, hairy, the glabrous center 2 mm. 
wide; style 16-17 mm. long; stamens very numerous (about 300?), 
about as long as the style, the anthers 1-1.3 mm. long; petals some- 
what fleshy, concave, broadly rounded, fimbriate-ciliate with fine 



FLORA OF PERU 705 

brownish hairs, about 15 mm. long and wide; ovary bilocular, the 
ovules about 30 in each locule, radiating from a short centrally 
attached placenta. The type is Krukoff 5675, from near the mouth 
of Rio Macauhan, Acre, Brazil. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia inundata DC. Prodr. 3: 280. 1828. E. inundata a 
membranacea Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1 : 318. 1857. E. inun- 
data j8 coriacea Berg, in Mart. I.e. 319. E. leptantha Benth. in Hook. 
Journ. Bot. 2: 321. 1840. 

A tree or shrub, the branchlets sparsely puberulent or hispidu- 
lous, the inflorescence and vegetative buds appressed-strigose with 
straight or crisped whitish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, these especially 
dense and white on the hypanthium, the foliage glabrescent; leaves 
obovate, 0.6-2.3 cm. wide, 1.5-4 cm. long, (1.3-) 2-2.5 (-3) times as 
long as wide, the apex rounded or blunt-pointed to obscurely acumi- 
nate, the base cuneate, the margins decurrent on the inner angles of 
a petiolar base or a slender petiole up to 3 mm. long; mid vein a little 
impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 5-8 or 10 pairs, 
strongly ascending, scarcely apparent above, faintly visible beneath, 
scarcely forming a definite marginal vein, but a series of weak loops 
about 1 mm. from margin; blades drying dark or black above, dull 
and coarsely impressed-punctate; lower surface pale, reddish brown, 
dull, finely dark-dotted ; inflorescence an axillary raceme (or reduced 
to 1-2 flowers and the axis then almost none), the axis 5-12 mm. long, 
somewhat compressed, usually less than 1 mm. wide, bearing 2-3 
decussate pairs of flowers on ascending or spreading filiform pedicels 
up to 8-12 mm. long; bracts ovate, acute, 1 mm. long; bracteoles 
1-1.5 mm. long and 1.5 mm. or more wide, connate by the basal 
margins, glabrescent and gland-dotted, persistent and explanate after 
flowering and then semicircular or obtusely pointed; buds 3-3.5 mm. 
long, the hypanthium campanulate, 1 mm. long; calyx-lobes gland- 
dotted, rounded, glabrescent without, sparingly appressed-pilose 
within, unequal, the larger ones 1 mm. long, 1.5 mm. wide; disk 
about 1.3 mm. wide, the center glabrous; style 4-5 mm. long; sta- 
mens about 30, 5-8 mm. long (often much longer than the style), 
the anthers 0.4 mm. long; petals elliptic, 2 mm. wide, 3-3.5 mm. 
long, ciliate; ovary bi- (or tri-?) locular, the ovules about 5 in each 
cell, collateral, the placenta central; fruit oblate, about 1 cm. in 
diameter, 1-seeded. This species is well known on the upper Ama- 
zon as near to the borders of Peru as the vicinity of Ega, Brazil 
(Poeppig 2729, the type of var. coriacea Berg) . The species is very 



706 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

like E. biflora except for the shape of the leaves, and it is conceivable 
that some of the puzzling blunt-leaved forms of E. biflora (see p. 686) 
have arisen as a result of hybridization with E. inundata. F.M. 
Negs. 19955, 23550. 

Loreto: Iquitos, Tessmann 3691. Amazonian Brazil and Colom- 
bia (Boca de Loreto- Yacu, Schultes & Black 46-167). 

Eugenia jambos L. Sp. PI. 470. 1753. Jambosa vulgaris DC. 
Prodr. 3: 286. 1828; Berg, Linnaea 27: 342. 1856. Syzygium jambos 
(L.) Alston, in Trimen, Fl. Ceylon (Suppl.) 6: 115. 1931. 

A shrub or small tree, glabrous; leaves lanceolate or elliptic- 
lanceolate, mostly 3-5 cm. wide, 12-20 cm. long, 4-5 times as long 
as wide, long-tapering to the narrowly acuminate apex, subcuneate 
or gradually rounded at the base, the margins shortly decurrent on 
the stout petiole 1-2 mm. thick, about 1 cm. long; midvein impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 10-15 pairs, slightly elevated 
both sides but more prominent beneath; marginal vein about equal- 
ing the laterals, very slightly arched between them, 2-5 mm. from 
margin, with a much fainter nerve very near the margin; upper sur- 
face drying pale or dark green, the lower usually greenish brown; 
glands scarcely apparent on either surface at maturity; inflorescence 
a terminal raceme up to 2.5 cm. long, the axis 4-angled, stout, 2-3 
mm. thick, bearing 2-4 decussate pairs of flowers, the terminal flower 
usually abortive; flowers large, 7-8 cm. across the stamens; pedicels 
up to 1.5 cm. long, 1-1.5 mm. thick (2 mm. in fruit); bracts and 
bracteoles fugacious; hypanthium obconic, about 1.5 cm. long and 
1 cm. across mouth, gradually narrowed to base and slightly con- 
tracted into a stout, poorly defined pseudostalk 2-3 mm. long; 1 
calyx-lobes 4, persistent, concave, reflexed after anthesis, broadly 
rounded, the larger about 1 cm. wide at base, 6 mm. long; petals 
white, orbicular, gland-dotted, about 1.5 cm. broad and long; sta- 
mens very numerous (about 300) and conspicuous, up to 4 cm. long, 
creamy-white; anthers oblong, 1.2 mm. long; style 3.54 cm. long; 
fruit broadly depressed-globose, up to 6 cm. in diameter, 3-4 cm. 
long, rose-scented, pale yellow with pink flush; seed 1, about 2.5 cm. 
in diameter. Widely cultivated in tropical countries for ornament. 
The fruits are edible. 

1 The majority of species of the Asiatic segregate genus Syzygium have the 
hypanthium narrowed abruptly or gradually to a slender pedicel-like base which 
is actually a part of the flower and not a pedicel. This is the pseudostalk (see 
Henderson in Gardens' Bull. Singapore 12: 12. 1949). When a pedicel is present 
the articulation between it and the pseudostalk is evident. 



FLORA OF PERU 707 

Cuzco : Quillabamba, Soukup 136. A native of southeastern Asia. 
"Poma rosa." 

Eugenia limbosa Berg, Linnaea 27: 294. 1856. E. cassapensis 
Berg, I.e. 296. E. 'maynensis Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1 : 318. 
1857. ?E. casaretteana Berg, I.e. 520. 1859. 

Shrub or small tree up to 10 meters high, the inflorescence and 
young growth abundantly silky pubescent with appressed silvery- 
gray or yellowish hairs up to 0.7 mm. long. Leaves glabrous or essen- 
tially so at maturity, elliptic, narrowed about equally to the prom- 
inently and often caudately acuminate tip and to the subcuneate or 
rounded base, the margins decurrent on the petiole which is up to 
1 mm. thick and 3-6 (-9) mm. long; blades 2-3.5 (-5) cm. wide, 
5-8.5 (-11) cm. long, 2-2.7 times as long as wide; mid vein impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins inconspicuous, 15-20 pairs; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals, slightly arched between 
them, 1-1.5 mm. from the margin; upper surface darkening in dry- 
ing, smooth, the lower dull, usually drying pale brown; glands usu- 
ally not apparent in mature leaves, not impressed above; inflores- 
cence a raceme (or sometimes 2 or 3 racemes superposed), up to 5 cm. 
long, with 10-16 flowers in decussate pairs, the axis 0.5 mm. thick 
at base, or flattened and then 1 mm. wide; pedicels straight, (3.5-) 
6-10 mm. long, filiform (up to 0.5 mm. thick), widely spreading; 
bracts somewhat persistent, lanceolate, 1.5-2 mm. long; bracteoles 
ovate, 1-1.5 mm. long, persistent after the fruit falls; calyx-lobes 4, 
often 1.5 mm. wide and 2 mm. long with rounded tip, reflexed after 
an thesis, silky on both sides; disk flat, finely hairy, about 2 mm. 
wide; style glabrous, 5 mm. long; stamens about 75, 4 mm. long; 
petals white, elliptic, ciliate-fringed, 3.5-4 mm. long; fruit not seen 
fully mature, probably globose, about 8 mm. in diameter. Accord- 
ing to Berg E. limbosa differed from E. maynensis in having the leaves 
less narrowly acuminate and the branchlets compressed. In series 
of the original collections of E. limbosa (including some not seen by 
Berg), the leaf-tips vary from broadly acuminate in the younger 
leaves to almost caudate in some of the older ones. The branchlet 
character appears also to be variable and dependent to some extent 
upon the age of the branchlet. The collection by Isern is somewhat 
finely pubescent, and the dried, nearly mature fruits are 3-5 mm. 
in diameter and prominently 8-ridged in the manner of Eugenia uni- 
flora. The other collections of E. limbosa which are available for 
study are all in bud or immature flower, and no ridges can be ob- 
served on the hypanthium in any specimen, but the collection by 



708 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Isern appears otherwise to be the same species. F.M. Negs. 31587, 
36977, 31561, 19924. 

San Martin: Entre Juanjui y Tingo de Saposoa, Ferreyra 4795. 
Entre Bellavista y Banos, Ferreyra 1+71$. Loreto: Yurimaguas, 
Kittip & Smith 27983, 27944, 28062, 29102; Poeppig 2375, type of 
E. maynensis. Huanuco: Est. Cueva Grande near Pozuzo, 4767. 
Cassapi, Poeppig 1276, type of E. cassapensis. Junin: Chancha- 
mayo, Isern 2238. Locality uncertain: Ruiz, type; Ruiz & Pavdn 
19/50; Diehl 2434. Bolivia; ?Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia longicuspis McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 211. 1956. 

Tree 9 meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence, petioles and 
veins of the lower leaf-surface covered with appressed-ascending sor- 
did, or yellowish- or reddish-brown hairs about 0.5 mm. long (up to 
about 1 mm. long on vegetative buds and at nodes) ; leaves obovate- 
oblong, 6-7 cm. wide, 18-21 cm. long, about 3 times as long as wide, 
abruptly rounded at the apex to a slender and narrowly pointed 
acumen 2-3 cm. long, narrowed from above the middle and acute 
at base, the margins decurrent on the inner angles of the channeled 
petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 10 mm. long; mid vein narrowly impressed 
above, raised its own diameter beneath; lateral veins 8-12 pairs in 
addition to some intermediates, somewhat impressed above, prom- 
inent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, equally 
impressed above, nearly straight, 5-8 mm. from margin; leaves 
smooth, dark, dull and glabrous above, with no glandular dots ap- 
parent; lower surface paler, dull, strigose, minutely papillose, with 
hardly any dots apparent; inflorescence an axillary raceme 6-9 cm. 
long (sometimes 2 racemes superposed), the axis bearing 3-5 pairs 
of opposite or subopposite flowers on pedicels 1 mm. thick, 10-17 
mm. long; bracts deciduous, divaricate, ovate, 3 mm. long; bracte- 
oles broadly rounded or rhomboid, connate, persistent, 3 mm. long, 
the involucre 2.5 mm. high, 5 mm. wide; hypanthium campanulate, 
densely tawny-strigose, about 3 mm. long; calyx-lobes 4, nearly 
equal, suborbicular or oblong, rounded or subtruncate at apex, 
closely appressed-pubescent with pale hairs on the inner surface, 
about 4 mm. long and wide; disk about 6 mm. wide, pubescent, the 
center depressed, glabrous, 2 mm. wide; style not seen, probably 
about 9-10 mm. long; stamens more than 200, 7 mm. long or more, 
the anthers 0.6 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 7-8 in each 
locule, radiating and somewhat directed inward from the margin of 
a flat, centrally attached placenta. The only known collection bears 



FLORA OF PERU 709 

flowers just past anthesis, from which the corolla, androecium and 
style have fallen. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 490. 

A specimen which seems to be intermediate between this species 
and Eugenia atroracemosa is Williams' no. 4747, from Yurimaguas, 
Loreto, which bears immature buds and one raceme with half-grown 
fruits. This has the stout, short-pedicelled racemes, short-acuminate 
leaves, and non-connate bracteoles of E. atroracemosa, but the disk 
(6-7 mm. wide, glabrous at center), stamens (about 200) and style 
(9 mm. long) of E. longicuspis. The ovules are about 7 in each locule 
and collateral. This may represent a new species, but the material 
is imperfect and because of the resemblance of the flowers to those 
of E. longicuspis it is referred with doubt to that species. A second 
collection from near Iquitos, Williams' no. 8018, is perhaps also ref- 
erable to this species, but the leaves tend to be elliptic and are not 
conspicuously caudate-acuminate, the upper surface is impressed- 
puncticulate, the pedicels are 5 mm. long and the disk is 4.5 mm. 
wide; the fruit, at maturity or nearly so, is subglobose, about 1.5 cm. 
in diameter. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, alt. 100 meters, forest, Feb.- 
Mar., 1930, G. King 855 (US, type). 

Eugenia macrocalyx (Rusby) McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 212. 
1956. Calycorectes macrocalyx Rusby, Mem. N. Y. Bot. Card. 7: 
313. 1927. 

A shrub 2-3 meters high, thinly strigose on branchlets, young 
leaves and inflorescence (densely so on vegetative buds and hypan- 
thium) with appressed whitish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves 
elliptic to ovate, or obovate, 3-6 cm. wide, 9-18 cm. long, (2-) 2.5- 
3 times as long as wide, broadly or narrowly acuminate, the base 
rounded or acute, the margins decurrent on the petiole 1-1.3 mm. 
thick, 6-15 mm. long; midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins about 10 pairs in addition to some intermediate ones, 
elevated a little but inconspicuous above, somewhat more evident 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched be- 
tween them, 2.5-5 mm. from margin; blades drying pale green, 
smooth and lustrous above, pale beneath with minute glistening par- 
ticles on the surface; glandular dots few on both surfaces; inflores- 
cence an abbreviated axillary raceme with the axis up to 1 cm. long, 
bearing about 3 pairs of flowers on compressed pedicels 0.5-1 mm. 
thick, 5-15 (-35) mm. long, or the raceme-axis elongate and leafy 
with only the lower 1-2 axils flower-bearing; bracts deciduous, sub- 



710 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

ulate, strigose, 5 mm. long; bracteoles deciduous, subulate-filiform, 
strigose, 2-4 mm. long; hypanthium 2.5^4 mm. long in flower, ob- 
conic, often very narrowly so at base and abruptly expanded into 
the cuplike calyx; calyx-lobes foliaceous, erect, separated by broad 
rounded sinuses, unequal, in bud 2-2.5 mm. wide, 7-9 mm. long, 
after anthesis the smaller triangular, 5 mm. wide, 13 mm. long, the 
larger ovate, 7 mm. wide and 16 mm. long; disk glabrous, quad- 
rangular, about 5 mm. across, with broad staminal ring; style 10 mm. 
long; stamens 100-150, up to 12 mm. long, the filaments yellow 
(Killip and Smith), the anthers 0.3 mm. long; petals obovate, appar- 
ently pale yellow, concave, 5-6 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 
about 12 in each locule, radially attached to a short placenta on 
the central axis; fruit oblong or pyriform, glandular-tuberculate, 
2.5 cm. long. 

Loreto: Balsapuerto, Killip & Smith 28512, 28514, 28520, 28523. 
Bolivia. 

Eugenia macrophylla Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 268. 
1857. 

Shrub or tree up to 12 meters high, the young growth flocculent- 
tomentose with thin evanescent crisped pale brown hairs, at least a 
few usually persistent on the lower leaf-surface; axis of raceme, 
pedicels and hypanthium densely, and calyx and bracteoles moder- 
ately, loosely rufous-tomentose; leaves elliptic to oblanceolate, 5-8 
cm. wide, 15-24 cm. long, usually 3 times as long as wide, gradually 
or abruptly short-acuminate, usually narrowed from the middle 
toward the base and there long-acute, the margins decurrent on the 
dark stout petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 10-15 mm. long; midvein above 
convex and 1 mm. wide at base or elevated in a narrow ridge, on 
the lower surface prominent and elevated about its own thickness; 
lateral veins 12-15 pairs, somewhat impressed above, elevated and 
prominent beneath; marginal vein definite and conspicuous, 3-8 mm. 
from margin, but the arches (loops) evidently formed of the dimin- 
ishing tips of the lateral veins; blades above dark yellowish green, 
smooth and sub-vernicose, dull beneath and paler and somewhat 
appressed-pubescent; glandular dots small and numerous but often 
scarcely apparent in mature leaves; inflorescence an abbreviated 
axillary raceme, the stout axis mostly 1-2 mm. long, bearing 1-4 
approximate, decussate pairs of flowers on stout pedicels 1 mm. 
thick, 2-4 mm. long; bracts early deciduous, subrotund, about 2 
mm. long and wide; buds 5-9 mm. long, the broadly campanulate 
hypanthium 2 mm. long, mostly concealed by the involucre-like, 



FLORA OF PERU 711 

fused, ovate-rotund bracteoles, the individual bracteoles about 3 
mm. long, scarious, thin and fragile, the margins fraying and split- 
ting off even in the bud; calyx flaring in bud, much shorter than the 
narrow-based globe of petals, in texture like the bracteoles and sim- 
ilarly disintegrating, the lobes glabrous within, ciliate-fringed, some- 
what unequal, the larger pair suborbicular, 3-4.5 mm. wide and long; 
disk 3 mm. wide, the staminal ring scurf y-puberulent, the center 
1 mm. wide, densely pilose with erect reddish hairs up to 1 mm. 
long; style glabrous, 12 mm. long; stamens 250-300, up to 11-13 
mm. long, the anthers 0.6 mm. long; petals obovate, ciliate, gland- 
dotted, glabrous, 6 mm. wide, 12 mm. long; ovary bilocular, with 
25-30 ovules in each locule, radiating from a centrally affixed pla- 
centa. The type locality was Ega, Brazil, on the upper Amazon, 
and this species is also known from the basin of the Rio Madeira, 
in the southern part of the state of Amazonas. F.M. Neg. 23558. 
Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia malpighioides (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 275. 1828. 
Myrlus malpighioides HBK. Nov. Gen.- & Sp. 6: 146 (folio ed. 
p. 116). 1823. 

A tree or shrub, the branchlets, petioles and inflorescence spar- 
ingly strigose with reddish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves ovate, 
up to 2-2.5 cm. wide, 4 cm. long, acute or obscurely and bluntly 
acuminate at tip, acute or obtuse at base, the margins passing 
abruptly into the petiole 1 mm. thick, 3 mm. long; midvein flat 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 8 pairs, obscure above, 
slightly elevated but not prominent beneath; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals and arched between them, 1.5-2 mm. from 
margin; blades dark, lustrous and smooth above, dull and gland- 
dotted beneath; flowers in axillary clusters, probably abbreviated 
axillary racemes, the axis very short, bearing 2-4 approximate de- 
cussate pairs of flowers on filiform pedicels 3-6 mm. long; buds 
3 mm. long, pyriform; hypanthium campanulate, glabrous, 1 mm. 
long; bracts very short, probably deciduous; bracteoles about 1 mm. 
long or a little more, broadly ovate, blunt, rounded on back, the 
margins fimbriate, the basal margins approximate, not connate; 
calyx-lobes rounded, fringed, unequal, the larger 1 mm. long; disk 
about 1 mm. wide; style probably 4 mm. long; stamens 27-36 
(Kunth), about 4 mm. long, the anthers 1 mm. long; petals elliptic, 
subciliate; ovary (Kunth) bilocular, the ovules 3-5 in each locule. 
The type locality is given in the original publication as "ad ripam 
fluminis Amazonum," but the Bonpland specimen at Paris is labelled 



712 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

"Maranon," and the locality was presumably near Jaen, on the Rio 
Maranon. F.M. Neg. 36899. 

The collection by Killip and Smith is referred to this species with 
some hesitation, because the pubescence of the inflorescence, leaves 
and branchlets is somewhat more abundant, and the veins in the 
leaves are more delicate than those of the type. The two collections 
agree well enough, however, in flower morphology and in the mor- 
phology of the coarse hairs of the petioles, as well as in more general 
features, to be regarded as conspecific. Certain collections with the 
pubescence and apparently the flower characters of E. malpighioides 
but the leaf shape of E. egensis are cited under that species (Wil- 
liams 2614, 2794). 

Cajamarca: "In Prov. Jaen de Bracamoros," Bonpland, type. 
Ayacucho: Aina, between Huanta and Rio Apurimac, 750-1000 
meters alt., Kittip & Smith 22761. 

Eugenia mandonii McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 212. 1956. 

A tree or shrub, the branchlets and inflorescence strigose with 
stiff sordid hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, the foliage glabrate; leaves 
elliptic-ovate, 1-2 cm. wide, 2-4 cm. long, 2-3 times as long as wide, 
the tip blunt-pointed, acute or obscurely acuminate, the base acute, 
the margins cuneately decurrent on the petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 
2-3 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral 
veins 5-8 pairs in addition to some intermediate ones, slightly ele- 
vated on both sides but not very conspicuous; marginal vein weaker 
than the laterals and somewhat arched between them, 1 mm. from 
margin; blades vernicose above, rather dull beneath; both sides 
somewhat strigose and finely dark-dotted; flowers solitary and oppo- 
site from the 2 lowest nodes of new leafy branchlets (or the axis 
occasionally abortive and forming an abbreviated raceme), on slen- 
der compressed glabrous or sparingly strigose pedicels 1-1.5 mm. 
thick, 8-16 mm. long; bracts foliaceous and elliptic, up to 3 mm. 
wide, 6-8 mm. long, or much smaller and scarious, ovate, pointed, 
1.5-2 mm. long; bracteoles subulate, 2 mm. long, white-strigose; 
buds 6 mm. long, obovate, the hypanthium densely white-strigose, 
broad-campanulate, 2.5 mm. long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 
glabrous and gland-dotted outside, thickly white-strigose within, 
about 3 mm. wide, 2.5 mm. long; disk 4-4.5 mm. wide, hirsute, the 
depressed center with some hairs about the style-base; style 6.5- 
9 mm. long; stamens about 200, up to 10 mm. long, the anthers 
0.4-0.5 mm. long; petals suborbicular, glabrous, fringed, 5 mm. long; 



FLORA OF PERU 713 

ovary bilocular, the ovules about 15 in each locule, radiating from 
a short centrally affixed placenta. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 438. 

Peru (probably). Northern Bolivia (Mandon 634, type). 

Eugenia micranthoides McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 212. 
1956. 

A shrub or small tree, minutely pubescent, the branchlets and 
inflorescence densely beset with sharp slender erect pale hairs about 
0.1 mm. long; similar hairs occur on the petioles and sparingly on 
the leaf margins and the principal veins; leaves elliptic, 2-2.5 cm. 
wide, 4-7 cm. long, 2-3 times as long as wide, about equally nar- 
rowed to a narrow and often subcaudate acumen 1-1.5 cm. long, 
and to the rounded and finally subcuneate base, the margins decur- 
rent on the straight petiole about 3 mm. long; midvein impressed- 
sulcate above except at tip, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 
10 pairs, slender, obscure on both surfaces, the marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals and often somewhat arched between them, 
mostly 1 mm. or less from margin; leaves dull, drying pale green 
and without evident glands above, liver-brown and minutely dark- 
glandular beneath; inflorescence an axillary raceme, or twin racemes 
superposed, the axis reddish-hairy, up to 8 mm. long, or only 1-2 
mm. long in flower, somewhat compressed below the nodes, with 
2-5 decussate pairs of flowers, the terminal flower usually abortive; 
pedicels 2-4 mm. long, somewhat compressed, up to 0.5 mm. wide; 
bracts deciduous; bracteoles ovate, acute, persistent, 0.6 mm. long; 
disk about 2 mm. wide, the staminal ring hairy; calyx-lobes broadly 
rounded, unequal, the larger 1.5 mm. wide, 1 mm. long; style 4.5- 
5 mm. long, glabrous; stamens about 50, 5 mm. long, the anthers 
0.5 mm. long; petals suborbicular, 2.5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, 
the ovules 6 in each locule, radiating from a short, centrally affixed 
placenta; fruit not seen. Superficially like Eugenia micrantha 
(HBK.) DC. (Myrtus micrantha HBK.) in many respects, and strik- 
ingly similar to that species in characters of pubescence and mor- 
phology of the inflorescence. In E. micrantha, however, the leaves 
are narrower, prominently veined and glandular, the midvein is not 
impressed above, the flowers are smaller, and the bracts are persist- 
ent. The type locality of E. micrantha is near Honda in the Mag- 
dalena Valley of Colombia, but a note at the end of the original 
description (HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 115 [folio]. 1823) says: "Bon- 
plandius haec specimina in Peruvia lecta esse memorat." Appar- 
ently this reference to Peru is erroneous, for the species is well known 



714 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

in Colombia but has not subsequently been found in Peru. Univ. 
of Mich. Neg. 468. 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, Parana Pura, in forest, Oct.-Nov., 1929, 
Williams 4620 (F, type), Williams 3825, 4102. 

Eugenia multirimosa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 213. 1956. 

A shrub or small tree; young branchlets not seen, the older twigs 
with reddish thin bark separating in longitudinal strips; inflorescence 
closely puberulent with minute crisped pale reddish-brown hairs; 
leaves nearly sessile, oblanceolate to elliptic, 7-11 cm. wide, prob- 
ably 25-?35 cm. long, 3-3.5 times as long as wide, the tips short- 
acuminate, the blade attenuate from the middle or above to near 
the base, where 2-3 cm. wide and then abruptly rounded and cor- 
date-auriculate, the auricles nearly equaling the petiole; petiole 3-5 
mm. long but appearing much longer from below, enlarged and 
corky-shedding and appearing 4-5 mm. thick, the enlarged portion 
10-15 mm. long and extending well below the blade; midvein im- 
pressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 15 pairs in 
addition to some intermediates, impressed but the veins themselves 
convex, prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals and but slightly arched between them, nearly straight, at the 
middle of the leaf 5-10 mm. from the margin, with an outer smaller 
submarginal vein 1-3 mm. from the margin and connected to the 
inner vein by numerous small veins at right angles; blades green and 
lustrous, smooth above, the lower surface somewhat appressed- 
pubescent, gray-green and minutely papillose; dots not apparent in 
mature leaves; inflorescence an abbreviated axillary raceme on old 
wood (or several racemes from a single axil), the axis 1.5 mm. thick, 
2-4 mm. long, bearing about 3 approximate decussate pairs of flowers 
on pedicels 0.5-1 mm. thick (up to 2 mm. thick in fruit, and corky 
like the petioles), 8-11 mm. long; bracts deciduous, ovate- triangular, 
2 mm. wide, 4 mm. long; bracteoles persistent, ovate, pointed, about 
1.5 mm. long, the basal margins not fused or very shortly so; hypan- 
thium at anthesis urceolate, broad-based, 3 mm. long; calyx-lobes 
sparingly strigose within, suborbicular, unequal, the larger 4.5-5 mm. 
wide, 4-5 mm. long; disk 3.5-4.5 mm. wide, the central glabrous 
part 1.5 mm. wide, the staminal ring broad and conspicuous, 1.5 mm. 
wide, the stamens thus probably very numerous (ca. 300?) ; fruit said 
to be orange (immature?), ellipsoid, about 2 cm. in diameter, 3 cm. 
long, the seed 1, undivided. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 491. 



FLORA OF PERU 715 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, lower Rio Huallaga, alt. ca. 135 meters, 
dense forest, Aug. 23-Sept. 7, 1929, Killip & Smith 29019 (US, type) ; 
Yurimaguas, Killip & Smith 28020; Timbuchi, Williams 1017. 

Eugenia myrobalana DC. Prodr. 3: 277. 1828. E. corymbosa 
Berg, Linnaea 31: 256. 71862. 

Tree up to 10 meters high, nearly glabrous, but the inflorescence 
appressed-pubescent to tomentulose with stiff rufous or pale red hairs 
up to 0.5 mm. long, and the lower leaf-surface very minutely and 
closely appressed-pubescent with colorless lustrous hairs; leaves obo- 
vate to elliptic, 9-13 cm. wide, 23-33 cm. long, 2.3-3 times as long 
as wide, rather abruptly narrowed at tip to a small pointed acumen, 
gradually narrowed toward base from the middle or above and finally 
abruptly rounded into the stout dark petiole 2-4 mm. thick, 10-18 
mm. long; principal veins sulcate above, but the veins proper flat 
or slightly convex, all prominent beneath; lateral veins 9-12 pairs, 
strongly ascending, diminishing distally and losing their identity in 
small veins connecting to the next succeeding laterals; leaves brown- 
ing in drying, smooth, dark and obscurely glandular above, lustrous 
grayish-brown beneath from the close covering of hairs, these nearly 
concealing the few dark glands; flowers borne on the twigs at leaf- 
less nodes, the inflorescence consisting of a tapering and somewhat 
4-angled axis 1-2 cm. long (or sometimes 2 or 3 from the same node), 
bearing 6-8 decussate pairs of flowers on compressed slender pedicels 
1.2-2.5 cm. long and 1.5 mm. wide at summit; bracts deciduous at 
anthesis, linear or elliptic, 2-2.5 mm. wide, 6 mm. long; buds glo- 
bose, about 8 mm. in diameter, closely subtended and enveloped by 
the bracteoles which are concave and broadly rounded, obovate, 
8-10 mm. long and 6 mm. wide, their narrow bases surrounding the 
summit of the pedicel like a collar but deciduous at anthesis; hypan- 
thium in anthesis obconic, broad-based, soon much elongating and 
narrowly ellipsoid; calyx-lobes broadly triangular to oblong, blunt- 
tipped, glabrous on the inner surface, 3-6 mm. wide, 4-6 mm. long, 
soon reflexed after opening; disk 4.5-5 mm. wide, glabrous or nearly 
so at the center; style 8-9 mm. long, glabrous; stamens about 150, 
5-6 mm. long; anthers 1 mm. long; petals broadly obovate, 7-8 mm. 
long; fruit ellipsoid, crowned with the persistent calyx-lobes, 1.3- 
1.7 cm. thick, 2.5-3 cm. long. F.M. Neg. 19971, Univ. of Mich. 
Neg. 488. 

San Martin: Pongo de Cainarachi, Klug 2666. Tarapoto, Spruce 
4902, type of E. corymbosa. Loreto: Balsapuerto, Klug 3039. Yuri- 



716 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

maguas, Williams 5263, 5340. Amazonian Brazil. "Sacha caymi- 
tillo" (Williams). 

Eugenia nigra DC. Prodr. 3: 268. 1828. 

A small tree, glabrous or nearly so, the leaves very stiff and cori- 
aceous, elliptic-oblong, often trough-like and the upper side folded 
in when dried, 5-6.5 cm. wide, 10-15 cm. long, the tip shortly del- 
toid-acuminate (acumen 3-5 mm. long), the base rounded to a very 
short petiole (in the type specimen) or the petiole 2 mm. thick, 12 
mm. long; midvein concave above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
12-20 pairs, inconspicuous and sometimes somewhat elevated above, 
very inconspicuous and scarcely elevated beneath; marginal vein 
about equaling the laterals and arched between them, 3-5 mm. from 
the margin, a weaker submarginal vein 1-2 mm. from the margin; 
blades drying green or quite black above, smooth, lustrous, and im- 
pressed-puncticulate, the lower surface dull reddish brown and quite 
featureless; inflorescence an abbreviated axillary raceme, the axis up 
to 4-5 mm. long or much less, the few flowers subsessile, the pedicels 
2 mm. long (or in fruit 1.5 mm. thick, 4 mm. long) ; bracteoles about 
0.7 mm. long, ascending and appressed to the bud, connate and 
forming a narrow, notched, persistent involucre; buds 5 mm. long, 
the hypanthium pyriform, ridged, 2 mm. long, the short rounded 
calyx-lobes ciliate, much shorter than the globe of the petals; fruit 
probably oblong, about 1 cm. long. This species is known with 
certainty only from the type, which was collected by Martius near 
Ega, Brazil. A recent collection from Bolivia, near the Peruvian 
border, however, seems to be conspecific (Baldwin no. 2976a, above 
Buena Vista, Rio Pacahuaris, Terr. Colonia, June 27, 1943). Also 
included in Eugenia nigra in the present treatment (but not in the 
description) are one other Bolivian collection and two Peruvian ones 
which may well represent three different species of which more ma- 
terial is needed for study before formal classification and description. 
All agree with E. nigra in having large, long-petiolate leaves, nearly 
sessile clustered flowers which are glabrous, but with longer styles 
(10 mm. long or more) and more elongate hypanthia than in the 
group of Eugenia tapacumensis and its allies. They differ, however, 
as follows: Baldwin 2976, collected with his 2976a, has thinner, 
veiny-reticulate leaves and about 15 ovules in each locule; Williams 
1099, from Manfinfa, Loreto, Peru, has longer, pointed leaves, pedi- 
cels almost none, calyx-lobes 3 mm. long, stamens 125-150, and 
about 8 ovules in each locule; Killip & Smith 28704, from Yuri- 
maguas, Loreto, Peru, has blunt veiny leaves with strong marginal 



FLORA OF PERU 717 

vein 8-10 mm. from margin, the hypanthium short, stamens 50-75, 
and about 20 ovules in each locule. F.M. Neg. 19975. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia ochrophloea Diels, Verb. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 189. 
1907. 

Shrub 2-6 meters high, glabrous except the ciliate margins of the 
perianth lobes, bracts and bracteoles, and the pubescent staminal 
ring; leaves ovate, 4-6 cm. wide, 10-12 cm. long, about twice as long 
as wide, the tip gradually deltoid-acuminate, decurved, the base 
rounded, the margins passing abruptly into the inner obtuse angles 
of the flat summit of the petiole 2 mm. thick, 4 mm. long; mid vein 
flat above or shallowly sulcate near the base, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins about 10 pairs, narrowly and obscurely elevated above, 
prominulous beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and 
arched between them, 2-4 mm. from margin; leaves smooth and dark 
green above, with few or no glands apparent; lower surface dull, 
paler, finely dark-dotted; inflorescence an abbreviated axillary ra- 
ceme, or 2 racemes superposed, the axis 1 mm. thick, quadrangular, 
2-4 mm. long, bearing 2-4 (-8) approximate, decussate pairs of 
flowers on nearly terete pedicels 0.5 mm. thick, 3.5-8 mm. long; 
bracts subpersistent, broadly ovate, pointed or rounded, 1 mm. long; 
bracteoles ovate, pointed, narrowed at base, not connate, 1 mm. long 
and wide; buds 4 mm. long, pyriform; hypanthium short-campanu- 
late, rounded at base, 1-1.5 mm. long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 
unequal, the smaller 1 mm. long, 1.5-2 mm. wide, the larger 1.5- 
2 mm. long, 2-2.5 mm. wide; disk 2-2.5 mm. wide, the staminal ring 
hairy; style 5 mm. long; stamens about 75, about 5 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.7 mm. long; petals obovate, ciliate, 3.5 mm. wide, 4-4.5 
mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 12 in each locule, radi- 
ally attached to the centrally affixed placenta. This is one of a 
group of species which have in common the nearly glabrous herbage 
and inflorescence, the flowers small, in sessile axillary clusters, the 
midrib flat or convex on the upper leaf-surface, and the fruit as far 
as known globose. Eugenia dittocrepis Berg differs superficially from 
the present species in its much longer petioles (10-15 mm.). E. pro- 
tracta Berg, Linnaea 31: 254. 71862, from the upper Rio Negro, was 
based on Spruce's no. 3816. This appears to be identical with 
E. ochrophloea except that the leaves are somewhat smaller, drying 
black, eglandular beneath, with flat and caudate-acuminate tips. 
The little-known E. malpighioides, described from northern Peru, is 



718 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

pubescent, the leaves are small and ovate, and the flowers much 
smaller. F.M. Neg. 23566, Univ. of Mich. Neg. 432. 

Loreto: Tarapoto, Ule 6454, type. 

Eugenia origanoides Berg, Linnaea 29: 229. 1858. 

Tree or shrub, usually densely tawny-hirsutulous on branchlets 
and inflorescence, and somewhat less densely on the lower leaf-sur- 
faces, with erect or curved lustrous hairs about 0.5-1.0 mm. long; 
leaves elliptic, 2-5 cm. wide, 4-10 cm. long, 2-3 times as long as 
wide, abruptly or gradually narrowed to the pointed or somewhat 
bluntly acuminate tip, narrowed and rounded at base, the margins 
passing abruptly into the sulcate hirsute petiole 1-2 mm. thick (in- 
cluding the hairs), 3-4 mm. long; mid vein impressed and persistently 
hirsutulous above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 10 pairs 
with some intermediate veins almost as strong, slightly elevated in 
drying but inconspicuous above, evident beneath, nearly straight 
and passing directly into the marginal vein, which is about as strong 
as the laterals and arched between them, 2.5-5 (-8) mm. from the 
margin with a smaller, submarginal vein between it and the margin; 
blades dark in drying, strigose above and non-glandular, paler be- 
neath and finely dark-dotted; flowers closely glomerate, the inflores- 
cence a group of abbreviated axillary racemes; axis of each raceme 
up to 4 (-7) mm. long, bearing up to 5 approximate and decussate 
pairs of flowers on pedicels 1-1.5 mm. long or less; bracts rounded- 
deltoid, about 0.7 mm. long and wide, glabrous on the inner surface, 
the outer thickly velutinous with hairs 0.5 mm. long; bracteoles per- 
sistent, narrowly ovate, acute, setose like the bracts, 0.5-1 mm. long; 
hypanthium subglobose, about 1.3 mm. long and wide, sparingly 
pilose; calyx-lobes 4, membranous, glabrous or sparingly setose, 
long-ciliate, gland-dotted, rounded-ovate, about as long as the hy- 
panthium, 1 mm. wide and 1.3 mm. long; disk flat, glabrous or hairy 
at the center, about 1.3 mm. wide; style 6-6.5 mm. long; stamens 
about 35-50, up to 5-6 mm. long, the anthers 0.2-0.4 mm. long; 
petals obovate, glabrous, 2.5 mm. wide, 4 mm. long; ovary bilocular, 
the ovules about 10 in each locule, radially attached to a short pla- 
centa near the center of the central partition; fruit not seen. 

"Peru," Maclean ["McLean"] (Herb. Kew, ex herb. Hook.). 

This species probably does not occur in Peru. It ranges from 
eastern Mexico to Colombia. It has not been collected extensively 
except in Central America. The extent of its range in Colombia is 
not well known. According to Amshoff (Ann. Mo. Bot. Gard. 45: 



FLORA OF PERU 719 

181. 1958) it is one of the two most common species of Eugenia in 
Panama, and probably occurs in all provinces of that country. It 
seems likely that a specimen from Panama, or elsewhere in Central 
America, may have been mixed accidentally with Peruvian speci- 
mens obtained by Maclean. 

John Maclean was a merchant, a long-time resident of Lima, who 
corresponded with Hooker and who sent a number of his own collec- 
tions to Kew. He worked with Andrew Mathews and other Peruvian 
collectors. It appears from the records at Kew that Maclean made 
a number of trips between Europe and South America. His collec- 
tions are usually without definite locality data, which would suggest 
that he kept no systematic records but held plants from various 
localities until some quantity had accumulated, and then bundled 
up and sent or carried them to England. It is possible that he him- 
self obtained a specimen of Eugenia origanoides in Central America 
on one of his trips and failed to note the source of the specimen. 
I am indebted to Mr. N. Y. Sandwith for notes on the Maclean 
correspondence at Kew. 

Eugenia patrisii Vahl, Eel. Amer. 2: 35. 1798. E. inocarpa DC. 
Prodr. 3: 264. 1828. E. vellozii Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 
255. 1857. E. teffensis Berg, in Mart. I.e. Stenocalyx patrisii (Vahl) 
Berg, Linnaea 29: 247. 1858. 

A shrub or small tree 6-7 meters high, or perhaps to 20 meters, 
the branchlets more or less crisped-puberulent or loosely hairy with 
reddish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; vegetative buds and sometimes 
young shoots and bracts strigose with appressed reddish silky hairs; 
leaves glabrous or nearly so, a few long hairs sometimes persisting 
on the lower surface, and the mid vein above often short-hairy; leaves 
elliptic to obovate or ovate, variable in size on the same plant, the 
leaves at flowering time often 2-4 cm. wide, 4-6 cm. long, the ma- 
ture leaves up to 5-7 cm. wide, 8-12 (-16) cm. long, mostly 2-2.5 
times as long as wide, narrowly and gradually or abruptly acuminate 
at tip, cuneate at base, or narrowed and abruptly rounded to the 
stout petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 3-4 (-6) mm. long; midvein plane 
above, or in the central part of the leaf raised in a thin line, promi- 
nent beneath; lateral veins 5-8 pairs, widely spaced, prominent 
beneath, flat above or depressed below the surface in furrows; mar- 
ginal vein conspicuously arched and relatively far (3-8 mm., or 6- 
12 mm. in the larger leaves) from the margin; lower pair of lateral 
veins usually not joining the main marginal vein, but continuing 
into a weak secondary marginal vein about one-third the distance 



720 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

from the margin to the main vein; leaves smooth, minutely gland- 
dotted on both sides, usually drying brown, the upper surface lus- 
trous and often darkening, the lower dull, light rusty brown; flowers 
on long filiform and conspicuously bracteate pedicels, in short axil- 
lary racemes or at the lowest nodes of new leafy shoots; axis of 
raceme up to 1.5 mm. thick, 4-5 mm. long, with 4-5 decussate pairs 
of flowers and the terminal bud abortive, or the flowers apparently 
lateral and solitary on the shoots; pedicels (1.5-) 2-3 cm. long, terete 
or somewhat compressed and then about 0.5 mm. wide, glabrous or 
sparingly and loosely hairy, usually with scattered elevated glandu- 
lar dots; bracts loosely imbricated in 4 ranks at the bases of racemes 
and new shoots, mostly deciduous after anthesis, those subtending 
pedicels mostly narrowly ovate, acute, 1-2.5 mm. wide at base, 1.5- 
7 mm. long, hairy or rarely glabrous; bracteoles at the base of the 
obconic hypanthium, deciduous at anthesis, linear, ciliate, about 1.5 
mm. long; buds glabrous, 4-5 mm. long before the petals unfold; 
calyx-lobes rounded, ciliate, glabrous on both sides, about 2 mm. 
wide, 1.5 mm. long; style glabrous or somewhat hairy, 6-8 (-11) mm. 
long; stamens about 100, to 8 mm. long, the anthers 0.6 mm. long; 
petals white, obovate, ciliate, 4 mm. wide, 10 mm. long; fruit (ac- 
cording to Amshoff) globose to pear-shaped, red, juicy, edible, 1.5- 
2 cm. in diameter. In Peru there occur plants which have two 
different leaf-types but are otherwise closely similar and probably 
conspecific. In the type of Eugenia patrisii the leaves are relatively 
small (mostly 6-8 cm. long) and tend to be cuneate at the base. 
The type of E. inocarpa DC. has leaves of this kind, and so appar- 
ently do most plants in the Guianas and Venezuela. In eastern 
Colombia, Amazonian Brazil and Peru certain plants have some- 
what larger leaves with stouter petioles, the blades narrowed and 
finally abruptly rounded, rather than cuneate, at base; this is E. vel- 
lozii Berg, which perhaps should be distinguished as a variety or 
subspecies, but hardly merits recognition as an independent species. 
F.M. Negs. 7948, 19954, 20016, 23014. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, Klug 318. Iquitos to Pongo de Manseriche, 
Tessmann 3635. Bolivia and Amazonian Brazil to the Guianas. 

Eugenia percincta McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 214. 1956. 

A tree or shrub, the branchlets, petioles, inflorescence, veins of 
the lower leaf-surface and midvein of the upper, velutinous with 
lustrous erect or appressed reddish-brown coarse curved hairs up to 
1 mm. long, the lower surface of the leaves between the veins with 
numerous similar hairs but the surface not obscured ; leaves broadly 



FLORA OF PERU 721 

elliptic-oblong, 6-8.5 cm. wide, 12-14 cm. long, 1.6-2 times as long 
as wide, about equally narrowed to both ends, deltoid acuminate, 
the base obtuse, the margins abruptly joining the flat hirsute sum- 
mit of the stout petiole 2 mm. thick, 10 mm. long; midvein flat or 
broadly channeled above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 8-10 
pairs, elevated above, prominent beneath; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals and strongly arched between them, 3-8 mm. 
from margin, mostly apparent in the distal half of the blade only, 
the lowest 1-2 veins diminishing distally and running irregularly 
into the next succeeding ones; blade with conspicuous cartilaginous 
glabrous margin (as seen on the upper surface) formed by a heavy 
convex vein about twice as thick as the lateral veins; upper surface 
of blade smooth and lustrous, somewhat reticulate-veined, without 
apparent glands; lower surface paler and minutely papillose, with at 
least a few glandular dots; inflorescence an abbreviated axillary ra- 
ceme, the axis almost none, bearing 2 approximate and decussate 
pairs of flowers on pedicels 1-1.5 mm. thick, 5 mm. long; bracts 
lanceolate, deciduous, glabrous on the upper surface, 1.5 mm. wide, 
3.5-5 mm. long; bracteoles similar; hypanthium nearly hemispheric, 
about 2 mm. high; calyx-lobes rounded, velutinous both sides, about 
5-6 mm. long and wide; disk 4-4.5 mm. wide, hairy, the center 1.5 
mm. wide, red-hirsute; style glabrous, 14-16 mm. long; stamens 
about 150, about as long as the style; anthers 0.7-0.8 mm. long; 
petals ciliate-fringed, glabrous inside, partly hairy outside, about 
7 mm. wide, 10 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 15-18 in each 
locule, radially attached to a short placenta on the central axis. 
Known only from the type, Rusby 2084, collected at the falls of the 
Rio Madeira, Brazil. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 453. 
Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia polyadena Berg, Linnaea 31: 258. ?1862. 

Shrub or tree, nearly glabrous, strigose in the inflorescence with 
grayish-white closely appressed hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; bracts, 
bracteoles and calyx-lobes glabrous but ciliate; leaves elliptic to obo- 
vate, 3-6 cm. wide, 6-15 cm. long, 2-2.5 times as long as wide, 
short-acuminate at apex or broadly rounded and the acumen obso- 
lete, rounded to subcuneate at base, the margins decurrent on the 
stout petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 5-10 mm. long; leaves obscurely veined, 
the midvein slightly impressed above, prominently raised beneath; 
lateral veins 10-15 pairs, very slender, slightly raised beneath, the 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched between them, 
2-4: mm. from the margin in the larger leaves; blades brown in dry- 



722 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

ing, the upper surface dark, smooth, with some elevated glandular 
dots, the lower surface reddish brown, thickly and prominently or 
sparingly dark-dotted; inflorescence a stout axillary raceme (or 2 
racemes superposed), 3-6 cm. long, the axis compressed, 2-2.5 mm. 
wide below the first node; flowering nodes 4-5, the terminal flower 
abortive; pedicels 5-7 mm. long (up to 14 mm. long in fruit); bracts 
broadly ovate, pointed, persistent, 2 mm. long; bracteoles ovate, 
joined and forming a cup-like involucre 1.5-2 mm. high and 4 mm. 
long, enveloping the base of the glabrous, broadly cup-shaped hy- 
panthium; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 5 mm. wide, 4 mm. long, 
minutely strigose on the inner surface; disk 4 mm. wide, glabrous; 
style glabrous, 8 mm. long; petals obovate, 8 mm. long; stamens up 
to about 9 mm. long, very numerous (250-300), the anthers 0.8 mm. 
long; fruit globose, about 1.5 cm. in diameter. Williams' no. 6894 
is in bud only. It seems strange that this very distinctive species 
has not been more adequately collected in such a relatively well- 
botanized part of Peru, where the original collections were made by 
Spruce a century ago. I know no species resembling it elsewhere in 
the Amazon drainage, but it is morphologically very similar to 
E. pustulescens McVaugh, from the coastal lowlands of northern 
Ecuador. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 480. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Spruce 4479, type; Spruce 4557; Mathews 
1447. Juan Guerra, near Tarapoto, Williams 6894. 

Eugenia prosoneura Berg, Linnaea 31 : 255. ?1862. 

A shrub or tree up to 7-15 meters high, the branchlets, young 
growth and inflorescence heavily pubescent with appressed silvery 
white or pale yellowish or reddish straight or partly crisped hairs up 
to 0.5 mm. long or a little more, the leaves glabrescent or hairs per- 
sisting on the midvein above and short erect hairs sometimes occur- 
ring in abundance on the lower surface; leaves oblong to elliptic, 
3-8 cm. wide, 8-24 cm. long, 2.5-3 times as long as wide, narrowed 
about equally to both ends, the tip blunt-pointed or short-acuminate, 
the base rounded, its margins abruptly and shortly decurrent on the 
flat summit of the stout dark petiole 1.5-2.5 mm. thick, 6-12 mm. 
long; midvein flat above or narrowly channeled, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins about 10 (-15) pairs, slightly elevated on both sides, 
the marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched between 
them, 3-6 (-12) mm. from the margin, a distinct but smaller sub- 
marginal vein beyond it; leaves above dark green and smooth, the 
lower surface paler and dull, both thickly beset with small elevated 
glands when very young but these obscure in age; inflorescence an 



FLORA OF PERU 723 

abbreviated axillary raceme, the axis 2 mm. thick, up to 5 (rarely 
to 20) mm. long, with up to 6 decussate and usually approximate 
pairs of flowers on slender pedicels 0.5-1 mm. thick, 6-10 (-20) mm. 
long; bracts glabrous, scarious and deciduous, suborbicular or a little 
elongate, cucullate, 1.5-2 mm. wide and up to 2.5 mm. long; brac- 
teoles subulate, deciduous at anthesis, hairy or sometimes glabres- 
cent, 1.5-2.5 (-5) mm. long; buds 5-8 mm. long, the narrowly 
campanulate hypanthium 2-3.5 mm. long, densely and closely white 
hairy; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, ciliate, nearly glabrous inside 
but with some appressed hairs, in unequal pairs, all about 3 mm. 
wide, the larger ones 3.5-4.5 mm. long, the smaller 2-3.5 mm.; disk 
2.5-3 mm. wide, concave, the broad staminal ring hairy, the center 
glabrous or nearly so and convex; style above the convex base gla- 
brous, (10-) 12-15 mm. long; stamens about 200, about as long as 
the style, the anthers 0.7 mm. long; petals glabrous, obovate or 
elliptic, 5-6 mm. wide, 9-12 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 
about 20 in each locule, radially affixed to a central placenta; fruit 
not seen. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 481. 

Loreto: Mishuyacu, Klug 1190. Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia punicifolia (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 267 (as punicaefolid) . 
1828. Myrtus punicaefolia HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 149 (folio ed. 
p. 118). 1823. M. oleaefolia HBK. I.e. 147 (folio ed. p. 117). E. ole- 
aefolia (HBK.) DC. I.e. 270. E. coarensis DC. I.e. 267. E. dipoda 
DC. I.e. 268. E. vaga Berg, Linnaea 27: 166. 1856. E. vaga a puni- 
caefolia (HBK.) Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 238. 1857. E. vaga 
8 brasiliensis Berg, in Mart. I.e. 

A shrub, often 1-2 meters tall, or a small tree up to 5 meters, 
nearly glabrous, the branchlets, bracts and vegetative buds, and 
sometimes the young foliage, pubescent with erect or often appressed 
lustrous rufous hairs up to 0.3 mm. long; leaves obovate, oblanceo- 
late or elliptic, 1-3 cm. wide, 3-6 cm. long (or up to 9 cm. on shoots), 
mostly 2-2.5 times as long as wide, the apex rounded, blunt, retuse 
or less often broadly short-acuminate, the base cuneate, or subcune- 
ate with the sides somewhat rounded, the margins usually thickened 
and evidently involute, decurrent on the stout petiolar base which 
is about 1 mm. thick, 2-5 mm. long; midvein prominent beneath, 
flat or channeled above and often markedly pubescent; lateral veins 
10-12 pairs, slightly raised and about equally apparent above and 
below; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched between 
them, proportionately far from the margin (1-2.5 mm.), and usually 
with a second, more delicate and imperfectly developed vein parallel 



724 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

to it and between it and the margin; glandular dots usually appar- 
ent on both surfaces but not conspicuous on either; inflorescence 
actually racemose (occasionally producing 4 flowers in 2 decussate 
pairs), but the axis ordinarily not elongating, producing 2 flowers 
only, one at each side of the axillary bud; pedicels slender, up to 
about 0.5 mm. thick, 4-10 (-20) mm. long, erect in flower, spread- 
ing or drooping in fruit; bract 1 at the base of each pedicel, closely 
appressed-pubescent, oblong, 1-1.5 mm. long; bracteoles lanceolate, 
about 1 mm. long, ciliate, persisting on the pedicel after the fruit 
falls; calyx-lobes 4, rounded, concave, ciliate, reflexed after anthesis, 
mostly incurved in fruit, 1.5-2 mm. wide and long, or up to 3 mm. 
wide and 2.5 mm. long in fruit; disk flat, about 2 mm. wide, the 
center glabrous, the staminal ring hispidulous; style about 5 mm. 
long, glabrous; stamens 60-75, about as long as the style; anthers 
1-1.2 mm. long; petals white, about 4-5 mm. long; fruit ellipsoid, 
smooth, up to about 8 mm. thick, 13 mm. long, red or yellow accord- 
ing to Amshoff. F.M. Negs. 7940, 19926, 20015, 36900, 36902. 

San Martin: Ricuricocha, Woytkowski (USM 15508). Tarapoto, 
Williams 5428, 5797, 6295, 6508. San Roque, 1350-1500 meters, 
Williams 7319. Cajamarca: Ad ripam fluminis Maranon, Prov. 
Jaen de Bracamoros, Bonpland, type of Myrtus oleaefolia. "Urcu- 
Rupina" (Williams). West Indies; South America east of the Andes, 
south to southern Brazil and southern Bolivia. 

Eugenia uninervia Rusby, based on Bang's no. 1602, from Guanai, 
Bolivia, is a species closely related to E. punicifolia but with the 
leaves narrow and elongate, tapering to both ends, 1-2 cm. wide 
and 5-8 cm. long, the lateral and marginal veins inconspicuous. So 
far as known it has not been found in Peru. 

Eugenia pustulescens McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 215. 1956. 

Tree or shrub, the branchlets, inflorescence and young growth 
more or less densely strigose with lustrous appressed reddish-brown 
partly dibrachiate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, usually with numerous 
shorter erect hairs intermixed; inflorescence branches, bracts, brac- 
teoles and flowers bearing very many dark raised rounded glands; 
leaves elliptic, 3-4 cm. wide, 7-9 cm. long, 2-2.7 times as long as 
wide, the tips deflexed and short-acuminate, the base acute, the mar- 
gins decurrent on the channeled petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 3-6 mm. 
long; midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
about 10 pairs, scarcely visible above, elevated but inconspicuous 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched be- 



FLORA OF PERU 725 

tween them, 1-4 mm. from margin; blades dull green above, rough 
and much pitted with openings of varying sizes; lower surface paler, 
dull, yellow-or reddish-brown, with hardly any glandular dots; in- 
florescence an axillary raceme up to 6 cm. long, the peduncle to 
1.5 cm. long, the flowers in 4-9 decussate pairs on pedicels 1 mm. 
thick, 3 mm. long or less; bracts deltoid-ovate, acute, broad at base, 
rounded on the back, 2 mm. long; bracteoles broadly rounded, 1- 
1.5 mm. long, somewhat connate by the basal margins, forming an 
involucre about 2.5 mm. long; buds 5 mm. long, obovate, the hypan- 
thium broadly conic, 1.5-2 mm. long, closely strigose near base; 
calyx-lobes broadly rounded or subtruncate, appressed-hairy inside, 
unequal, the smaller 3 mm. wide, 1.7 mm. long, the larger 2.5-3.5 
mm. wide, 2-2.5 mm. long; disk about 3.5 mm. wide, glabrous; style 
5-6 mm. long; stamens about 100, about as long as the style, the 
anthers about 0.7 mm. long; petals glabrous but ciliate, concave, 
3-3.5 mm. wide, 4.5-5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 
12 in each locule, radiating from a short placenta affixed to the cen- 
tral axis. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 461. This species, as far as definitely 
known, is confined to the Pacific slope of northern Ecuador. A speci- 
men at Geneva, from the Moricand herbarium, however, is labelled 
"Eugenia sp. nova, Peru," and in another hand "Pavon." This 
specimen is probably one of a considerable series which Moricand 
received from Pavon in 1827, and which included plants from vari- 
ous parts of America, collected in part by Pavon himself and in part 
by others. The source of this particular specimen cannot now be 
ascertained, but it seems probable from its morphology, from the 
state of its preservation and from its degree of maturity that it forms 
a part of an Ecuadorian collection which is attributed to Tafalla. 
If so, the species may justifiably be excluded from the known flora 
of Peru (see Fieldiana Bot. 29: 216. 1956). 
Peru (reported). Coastal Ecuador. 

Eugenia quadrijuga McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 216. 1956. 

A shrub or tree up to 15 meters high, the branchlets, youngest 
leaves and inflorescence more or less appressed-pubescent with small 
sordid, partly flaccid and fusiform dibrachiate hairs about 0.2 mm. 
long, or up to 0.5 mm. long especially near nodes and on buds; leaves 
elliptic, 2-3 (-6) cm. wide, 7-9 (-11) cm. long, (2-) 2.3-3.5 times as 
long as wide, bluntly and often obscurely acuminate, convexly acute 
at base, the margins decurrent on the inner angles of the petiole 1- 
1.5 mm. thick, 5-7 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins about 10 pairs in addition to some intermedi- 



726 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

ates, elevated a little on both sides, prominulous beneath; marginal 
vein about equaling the laterals, arched between them, 2-4 (-8) mm. 
from the margin, the submarginal vein present and conspicuous, but 
weaker; blades dark green, smooth, and lustrous above, somewhat 
roughened by the small elevated reticulate veins; lowe'r surface dull, 
paler green; glandular dots almost wanting or (in Klug 3153} abun- 
dant beneath; inflorescence an abbreviated axillary raceme (or 2-3 
racemes from the same axil), the axis up to 2 mm. long, bearing 1-4 
pairs of flowers on slender compressed pedicels 0.5-0.7 mm. wide, 
4-10 mm. long; buds 4.5-5 mm. long, pyriform, the hypanthium 
campanulate, glabrous, drying dark, 2 mm. long; bracts broadly 
rounded, deciduous, less than 1 mm. long; bracteoles somewhat elon- 
gate, ascending under the hypanthium, ciliate, not connate, 1.5 mm. 
long and about 1 mm. wide, persistent; calyx-lobes rounded or longer 
than wide, glabrous inside, ciliate, drying pale green, the smaller 
2 mm. wide, 1.5 mm. long, the larger 2.5 mm. wide, 2.5-3 mm. long; 
disk (1.5-) 2.5 mm. wide, the staminal ring hairy; style (6-) 7-8 mm. 
long; stamens 60-75, about as long as the style, the anthers 0.6- 
0.8 mm. long; fruit globose or pyriform, probably about 1 cm. in 
diameter; ovary bilocular, with 15-20 ovules in each cell, radially 
attached to the centrally affixed placenta. Peruvian species related 
to Eugenia schomburgkii and E. tapacumensis are poorly represented 
in herbaria and are consequently difficult to interpret taxonomically. 
This group may be characterized as those having small slender- 
pedicellate glabrous flowers in axillary "glomerules" or "fascicles" 
(actually very short racemes), nearly glabrous foliage, the midvein 
impressed above, and the marginal vein relatively far from the mar- 
gin with a distinct submarginal vein beyond it, the fruit globose and 
1 cm. in diameter or less. The species include E. schomburgkii 
Benth., E. tapacumensis Berg, E. maculata Berg, and two newly 
proposed species, E. discreta and E. quadrijuga. A species of Ama- 
zonian Brazil, E. agathopoda Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 
192. 1907, is similar but has larger flowers, longer racemes and longer 
pedicels. Because of the small amount of material available for 
study, no really workable key to these can be constructed. The 
flowers of all the species are so similar that they provide no really 
diagnostic characters, and the fruits are almost entirely unknown 
from herbarium specimens. In the present treatment, Eugenia 
schomburgkii includes chiefly glabrous or nearly glabrous plants with 
lanceolate and long-pointed leaves very smooth on the upper sur- 
face. E. maculata is distinguished from broad-leaved extremes of 
E. schomburgkii (and from the other species here discussed) by its 



FLORA OF PERU 727 

raceme axis, which is up to 5 mm. long. Eugenia tapacumensis is a 
plant with subcoriaceous, elliptic, bluntly pointed leaves and rather 
fine inconspicuous veins. Eugenia discreta, known only from the 
type, has mostly oblanceolate and rather large, reticulate-veined 
leaves and sparse, appressed, dibrachiate hairs in the inflorescence. 
The remaining species, E. quadrijuga, is described from four collec- 
tions which may represent one species, or conceivably as many as 
four. The collections agree very well in most characters but differ 
in leaf-shape from long-elliptic (as in Ule 9661, which suggests 
E. schomburgkii) to broadly elliptic (as in Klug 3158, which sug- 
gests E. tapacumensis). The pubescence differs slightly in all the 
cited collections, but the best distinguishing feature of the species 
lies in the numerous bristly ascending short hairs of the pedicels. 
Univ. of Mich. Neg. 456. 

Loreto : Pumayacu, between Balsapuerto and Moyobamba, Klug 
3153. Rio Acre: Near mouth of Rio Macauhan, Krukoff 5415, 5594 
(US, type). Seringal Sao Francisco, Ule 9661. 

Eugenia quebradensis McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 217. 1956. 

A tree or shrub, the inflorescence, young twigs and lower surface 
of the young leaves tomentose with tough crisped sordid white or 
brown hairs up to 0.7 mm. long (on buds and youngest branchlets 
to 1 mm. long and straight); leaves rigidly coriaceous, lanceolate, 
0.8-1.5 cm. wide, 5.5-7.5 cm. long, 5-6 times as long as wide, acute 
at tip, rounded at base, the margins abruptly contracted to the very 
stout petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 4 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, 
elevated and prominent beneath; lateral veins 10-12 pairs sunken 
in trough-like depressions on the upper surface (at least near the 
midrib), prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals, and slightly or prominently arched between them, inconspic- 
uous, less than 1 mm. from the strongly inrolled leaf-margin, which 
is marked by a stout cartilaginous vein ; blades at maturity dull and 
glabrous above, siliceous-verruculose beneath; glands small, appar- 
ent in immature leaves only; flowers at leafless axils in sessile brac- 
teate clusters of 4 (-6?) flowers each, the axis probably 4-angled, 
1-2 mm. long; bracts lanceolate, 2 mm. long; bracteoles not seen; 
hypanthium sessile, cup-shaped, narrowed to an acute base, 4-5 mm. 
long and wide, with 4 strong wing-like angles extending from near 
the base to just below the calyx-lobes; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 
glabrous near base within, in unequal imbricate pairs, the inner pair 
thin-edged, 5-6 mm. wide, 3.5 mm. long, the outer pair 4 mm. wide, 
3 mm. long; disk copiously short-hairy, 4-angled, about 6 mm. across, 



728 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

the broad convex staminal ring 2 mm. wide; style glabrous, stout, 
more than 5 (probably 10-15) mm. long; stamens about 300, 6 
(-10?) mm. long; anthers broadly elliptic, 0.6 mm. long and about 
as wide; petals not seen; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 15 in 
each locule, descending, arising along a somewhat elongate slender 
placenta attached near the top of the locule. U. S. Nat. Mus. 
Neg. 4466. 

Lambayeque: Prov. Chiclayo, quebrada del Rio Sana, monte 
seco, Dec., 1928, N. Esposto (USM, type). 

Eugenia racemiflora Berg, Linnaea 27: 232. 1856. Psidium 
emarginatum R. & P. Fl. Peruv. & Chil. 4: t. 419, ined. (?1802); 
G. Don, Gen. Hist. 2: 833. 1832. P. emarginatum Ruiz, hb. flor. 
Peruv. no. 152, ex Berg, I.e. 233. Not Eugenia? emarginata (HBK.) 
DC., 1828. 

Tree or shrub, the young branchlets and leaves and the inflores- 
cence densely ferruginous- tomentose; leaves rigidly coriaceous, gla- 
brous or nearly so at maturity, elliptic-ovate, 3-5.2 cm. wide, 5.5-7 
cm. long, the tips rounded or retuse or very shortly and obtusely 
acuminate, the base rounded or obtuse, the margins abruptly decur- 
rent on the petiole 4-5 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prom- 
inent beneath; lateral veins about 6-8 pairs, slightly elevated but 
inconspicuous above, not very prominent beneath, the marginal vein 
about equaling the laterals and arched between them, 3-5 mm. from 
margin; blades discolorous, darker and glabrous above, rusty-brown 
and dark-dotted beneath; flowers solitary at the lowest 1-3 nodes of 
new leafy shoots, or the inflorescence a stout raceme 2 cm. long, the 
axis up to 2 mm. thick (including tomentum), bearing up to 4 decus- 
sate pairs of flowers on pedicels up to 1.5 mm. thick, 7 mm. long; 
bracts small, or sometimes foliaceous; bracteoles oblong, tomentose 
on both sides, 2 mm. long; buds 6 mm. long, pyriform; hypanthium 
campanulate, 2.5-3 mm. long; calyx-lobes unequal, broadly rounded 
or obtusely pointed, tomentose on both sides, about 3 mm. long and 
wide; disk hairy, about 4 mm. wide; style 8 mm. long or more, 
red-hairy below the middle; petals obovate, hairy on the back, 8 mm. 
long; stamens probably 150-200 or more, up to 10 mm. long; anthers 
0.5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, many-ovulate. Description compiled 
from the original one by Berg, from a photograph (F.M. Neg. 29479) 
of the Ruiz specimen of no. 152 at Madrid, and from a fragment of 
this specimen (herb. F). 

Junin: Vitoc ("Vitos"), Ruiz, type, in herb. Berol., not seen. 



FLORA OF PERU 729 

Eugenia riparia DC. Prodr. 3: 283. 1828. ?Eugenia rypdocarpa 
Ruiz & Pavon, Fl. Peruv. & Chil. 4: t. 416, ined. (71802). ?E. muri- 
cata DC. I.e. ?E. verruculosa DC. I.e. 284. ?E. rutidocarpa R. & P. 
ex G. Don, Gen. Hist. 2: 865. 1832. E. lugens Berg, Linnaea 27: 
299. 1856. ?E, rugosa Ruiz ex Berg, I.e. 300. E. amazonica Berg, 
in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 322. 1857. E. fenzliana Berg, in Mart. 
I.e. 323. E. racemifera Berg, in Mart. I.e. 322. E. schlechtendaliana 
Berg, in Mart. I.e. 321. E. calothyrsa Diels, Verb. Bot. Ver. Bran- 
denb. 48: 189. 1907. 

A tree up to 15 meters or more in height, the inflorescence and 
young growth crowded with appressed-ascending, lustrous, often 
flexuous yellowish tb gray or dark brown hairs up to more than 
0.5 mm. long, some of the hairs dibrachiate; leaves mostly glabrous 
above at maturity, more or less densely beset on the lower surface 
with closely appressed dull colorless hairs 0.1-0.2 mm. long, some- 
times with a few darker lustrous hairs intermixed; blades elliptic or 
oblong-elliptic, rounded about equally to the acuminate tip and to 
the base, (3-) 4-6 (-8.5) cm. wide, (8-) 12-17 (-21) cm. long, 2-3 
(-3.5) times as long as wide, the margins decurrent on the stout 
petiole up to 2 mm. thick, 6-9 (-12) mm. long; mid vein impressed 
above, prominent beneath; principal lateral veins 15-20 pairs, slen- 
der and not always clearly distinguished from the intermediate pairs, 
not very conspicuous on either surface; upper surface dark when dry 
and somewhat lustrous, usually impressed-puncticulate; lower sur- 
face dull, drying pale or rusty brown, often gland-dotted when young 
but the glands rarely apparent at maturity; inflorescence an axillary 
raceme mostly 8-12 cm. long with 6-12 pairs of opposite (or sub- 
opposite) and decussate flowers; axis of raceme often flattened and 
1-2 mm. wide at the lowest nodes; lowermost node (in the axil of 
the leaf) often bearing two short racemes in addition to the primary 
one, and the upper nodes occasionally raceme-bearing or with 2 or 3 
flowers in a cluster; pedicels up to 8-12 mm. long and 1 mm. thick, 
the lower longer and often flexuous, the upper often much shorter 
(2-4 mm. long) and stiffly spreading; bracts lanceolate, 1-2 mm. 
long, usually deciduous before an thesis; bracteoles ovate, about 1.5 
mm. wide and long, united at base into a persistent involucre-like 
cup; buds about 4 mm. long; calyx-lobes 4, rounded, silky both sides, 
2.5-3 mm. long and wide, spreading and somewhat reflexed after 
anthesis; disk with depressed center, somewhat 4-angled, 2.5-3 mm. 
wide, somewhat pubescent among the stamens, the center with a 
few appressed yellowish hairs; style glabrous, 5-8 mm. long; stamens 



730 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

more than 100, up to 10 mm. long; petals elliptic, 4-6 mm. long; 
fruit subglobose or pear-shaped, about 1.5 cm. long. The specific 
limits of Eugenia riparia are poorly understood, and it is possible 
that several species are involved instead of the one recognized here. 
The oldest name for any species in this group is apparently E. poly- 
stachya Rich. (Act. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris 1: 110. 1792); this particu- 
lar plant was described from French Guiana, but may prove to be 
identical with E. riparia, of which the type came from Brazilian 
Amazonia. 

Mature fruits, in the group which includes E. riparia and its 
relatives, may be smooth or nearly so, as in E. schlechtendaliana; 
they may have 8 longitudinal ridges, as in Ktflip and Smith's no. 
29259; or they may be muricate or verruculose. Fruiting speci- 
mens are rarely collected, and even more rarely are they identified 
with flowering specimens from the same plant. On the basis of the 
rather numerous flowering specimens that have been available for 
study I have been quite unable to see any consistent indication that 
more than a single species is represented. Fruiting specimens, more- 
over, agree so well with flowering material, and with one another, 
except in the characters of the fruit itself, that I venture to suggest 
that the apparently diverse fruit types represent manifestations of 
one and the same species. Much field study may be necessary to 
resolve these problems. 

The warty-fruited types all appear to belong to the same natural 
population, which may or may not be specifically different from the 
smooth-fruited one. The oldest names for warty-fruited species are 
the doubtfully published E. rypdocarpa (71802) (which was properly 
published, as E. rutidocarpa, in 1832), and E. muricata and E. ver- 
ruculosa (both 1828). In E. verruculosa, a plant known only from 
the type, the warty projections on the fruit are small and uniformly 
distributed, about 10 per 4 square mm. In the other species men- 
tioned, and also in E. rugosa, the fruit is more coarsely warty, with 
projections which may be 1-2 mm. high and broad. If after further 
taxonomic study it appears that more than a single species is repre- 
sented in this complex, the correct name for the Peruvian species 
with coarsely warty fruits would be E. muricata DC. unless it were 
ultimately decided that E. rypdocarpa R. & P. should be considered 
as validly published. The few known collections of E. muricata and 
E. rugosa are cited below with those referred to E. riparia. These 
are indistinguishable except by the muricate or non-muricate fruit. 
The type collection of E. rugosa was originally referred by DeCan- 
dolle to E. polystachya Rich. 



FLORA OF PERU 731 

Fruit is unknown in the other species which are here reduced to 
synonymy, and E. riparia itself is known only from flowering speci- 
mens. E. lugens, known only from the type, is a narrow-leaved 
flowering specimen in which the pubescence is dark brown and the 
lower surface of the leaves is rather thickly pubescent with pale 
hairs and rather numerous darker hairs; E. amazonica was distin- 
guished by Berg from all other species by the rather longer petioles 
(up to 14 mm.) ; E. fenzliana, known only from the type, was dis- 
tinguished by Berg chiefly because of the muticous outer calyx-lobes; 
E. racemifera was said by Berg to differ from E. riparia in leaf-shape, 
in the more dense indument and in the glabrous ovary; E. schlech- 
tendaliana, according to Berg, was distinguished by the terminal 
thyrse and the leaves bearing glandular dots on the lower surface; 
E. calothyrsa was compared by Diels with E. riparia, but was said 
to differ in having a longer inflorescence, shorter and stouter pedi- 
cels, larger flowers and obtuse reniform bracts. The characters noted 
by Berg appear to be of little taxonomic value in this group of species; 
especially it may be noted that the "ovary" (that is, the depressed 
area surrounding the base of the style), uniformly bears some hairs 
but is glabrous in age, and does not vary as indicated by Berg. 
The glandular dots by which E. schkchtendaliana was distinguished 
may be seen on the lower surface of almost any immature leaf but 
usually become less apparent or indistinguishable in mature leaves; 
it may be noted in passing that in the type collection of E. schkch- 
tendaliana the dots are most conspicuous in the youngest leaves. 
F.M. Negs. 19968, 19991, 19998, 20017, 23511, 23517, 23583, 31569. 

San Martin: Pongo de Cainarachi, Klug 2627. Juanjui, Klug 
3857. Chazuta, Klug 4131. In sylvis ad Huallaga, Poeppig 2395, 
type of racemifera. Near Tarapoto, Williams 6792. San Roque, 
Williams 7046. Loreto: Santa Rosa, below Yurimaguas, Killip & 
Smith 28955. Portal, lower Rio Huallaga, Killip & Smith 29259. 
Mishuyacu, Klug 373. Balsapuerto, Klug 2994. Stromgebiet des 
Ucayali von 10 S. bis zur Miindung, Tessmann 3118, 3122, 3301. 
Iquitos to Pongo de Manseriche, Tessmann 4915. Pinto-Cocha, 
Williams 805. La Victoria, Williams 2954. Santa Rosa, Williams 
4883 (muricata). Huanuco: Mufia, 4025 (muricata). Cerro San 
Cristobal prope Cuchero, Poeppig 1355, type of lugens (herb. Wien). 
Rio Acre: Mouth of Rio Macauhan, Krukoff 5273, 5408, 5592. 
Seringal Sao Francisco, Ule 9655. Madre de Dios: Iberia, Mira- 
flores, Rio Tahuamanu, Seibert 2133. Without locality, "Ruiz & 
Pavon" 23/41, 23/42, probably type collection of E. rugosa (F). 



732 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Amazonian Brazil and Colombia; Guianas. "Rupina" (Williams); 
"Carapacho" (Poeppig). 

Eugenia scalariformis McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 218. 1956. 

A shrub or tree, the young leaves and twigs not seen, the mature 
leaves with a few fusiform appressed dibrachiate hairs up to 0.3 
mm. long, on the lower surface; inflorescence densely felted with 
straight or crisped flaccid, pale brown, mostly dibrachiate hairs up 
to 0.3 mm. long; leaves elliptic or oblanceolate, 7.5-8 cm. wide, 33- 
35 cm. long, about 4 times as long as wide, acuminate at tip, nar- 
rowed somewhat toward the base where abruptly contracted and 
rounded-subauriculate, the basal margins somewhat prolonged and 
produced above the surface where decurrent on the inner angles of 
the stout petiole 4 mm. thick, 12-15 mm. long; midvein convex 
above, 2 mm. wide near the base, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
25-30 pairs, including some nearly equal intermediate ones, im- 
pressed above, prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling 
the laterals, nearly straight between them, 2.5-3.5 mm. from the 
margin, with a very slender submarginal vein beyond it; blades 
nearly concolorous, yellow-green, smooth and lustrous and minutely 
and obscurely impressed-puncticulate above; dull, sparingly pubes- 
cent and finely dark-dotted beneath; inflorescence probably an axil- 
lary cluster of a few pedicellate flowers on old wood; pedicels 15 mm. 
long, compressed, 2 mm. wide; bracteoles probably deciduous after 
anthesis, elliptic, about 5 mm. wide, 12 mm. long, appressed to the 
narrowly elliptic 8-angled hypanthium 4 mm. thick, 10 mm. long; 
buds probably about 2 cm. long; calyx-lobes imbricate, with thin 
lateral margins, concave, suborbicular, the two sides similarly pubes- 
cent; outer lobes often deciduous from the base after anthesis, 
about 16 mm. wide, 8-10 mm. long; inner lobes 20 mm. wide, 15 
mm. long; disk 10 mm. wide, glabrous, the concave center 4 mm. 
wide; style glabrous, 2.5 cm. long; staminal ring very broad, the 
stamens probably about 500, up to 2 cm. long, the linear anthers 
1.5-1.8 mm. long; petals glabrous, 12-15 mm. wide, 25-32 mm. long; 
ovary bilocular, thick- walled, the ovules about 40 in each locule, 
attached to the central axis in a U-shaped group. F.M. Neg. 23507. 

Loreto : Stromgebiet des Maranon, Santiago Miindung am Pongo 
de Manseriche, G. Tessmann Jt328 (G, type). 

Eugenia schomburgkii Benth. in Hook. Jour. Bot. 2: 321. 1840. 
E. correae Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 277. 1857. 



FLORA OF PERU 733 

Large shrub, or tree up to 20 meters high, completely glabrous 
except the ciliate bracts and bracteoles, petals and calyx-lobes, and 
the finely ruf ous-hirsutulous staminal disk, or sometimes the branch- 
lets and pedicels minutely prickly-hispidulous; leaves elliptic-lanceo- 
late or elliptic-ovate, (2-) 3-5 (-6) cm. wide, (6-) 8-15 (-18) cm. 
long, 2.5-3.5 times as long as wide, gradually or abruptly acuminate 
at tip, rounded or subcuneate at base, the margins decurrent on the 
stout petiole which is 1 mm. or more thick, (4-) 6-8 mm. long, often 
transversely rimose in age; mid vein sulcate or impressed above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 12-15 pairs, inconspicuous, some- 
what raised beneath, the marginal vein moderately to strongly 
arched between the laterals and about equaling them, 2-4 mm. from 
the margin and with a second, weaker but evident submarginal vein; 
leaves drying green, the veins often reddish, the upper surface darker, 
smooth and lustrous, the glands scarcely apparent; lower surface 
dull, paler, often somewhat prominently gland-dotted; inflorescence 
an axillary raceme or sometimes 2 superposed racemes, the axis very 
short (1.5-2.5 mm.) and the 2-4 decussate pairs of flowers appearing 
glomerate; bracts rounded, persistent, about 1.5 mm. long and broad; 
pedicels relatively short and stout, compressed, (2-) 4-9 mm. long, 
0.5 mm. thick (up to 1 mm. thick in fruit); bracteoles ovate, acute, 
persistent, 0.7-1 mm. long; hypanthium ellipsoid or obovoid, 1-1.5 
mm. long, the calyx-lobes unequal, the larger broadly rounded or 
bluntly triangular, glabrous inside, 1.8-2.5 mm. long; disk about 
2.5 mm. wide, the center flat, glabrous; style 7-10 mm. long; sta- 
mens 60-775, about as long as the style; anthers 0.7 mm. long; petals 
orbicular or obovate, 5-7 mm. long; fruit globose or broadly ellip- 
soid, black at maturity, 1 cm. in diameter or up to 12-15 mm. thick 
and 15-19 mm. long, the calyx-lobes subpersistent; seed 1. The 
type of Eugenia correae seems certainly conspecific with that of 
E. schomburgkii, which is a relatively homogeneous species of the 
Amazonian and Venezuelan lowlands. The type of E. correae, how- 
ever, has the pedicels distinctly although minutely spinulose-hispid- 
ulous, whereas most specimens from Venezuela and the Guianas are 
very sparingly pubescent to almost completely glabrous. F.M. Negs. 
19929, 23588. 

Loreto: Timbuchi, Williams 988. Manfinfa, Williams 1112. 
Gamitanacocha, Rio Mazan, Schunke 113. Rio Acre: Near mouth 
of Rio Macauhan, Krukoff 5415. "Lancha Caspi" (Williams). 
Bolivia and Amazonian Brazil to the Guianas. 

The type of Eugenia maculata Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 
297. 1857, is Poeppig's no. 2409, from Yurimaguas, Peru. This is a 



734 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

plant bearing immature fruit; except that the racemes are up to 
5 mm. long, with up to 8 pairs of flowers, I cannot distinguish this 
specimen from some of the broad-leaved plants referred above to 
E. schomburgkii, e.g. Schunke's no. 113. E. maculata also resembles 
E. egensis, from which it may be distinguished by the impressed 
midvein and the relatively few glands on the lower leaf-surface. 
Krukoff's no. 6346, from the basin of the Rio Madeira, near Tres 
Casas, Amazonas, Brazil, is also E. maculata, or near it. F.M. 
Neg. 23559. 

Eugenia schunkei McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 218. 1956. 

A tree 5 meters high, glabrous except the red-strigose vegetative 
buds, the minutely ciliate bracteoles and calyx-lobes, and the spar- 
ingly hairy disk; leaves (those on short lateral branches not seen) 
on vigorous leading branchlets oblong-lanceolate, 5-6.5 cm. wide, 
14-23 cm. long, (2.5-) 3.5 times as long as wide, slenderly acuminate, 
narrowly rounded at base, short-decurrent on the inner angles of the 
dark petiole 2 mm. thick, 10-12 mm. long; midvein plane and some- 
what impressed above, usually with a narrow elevated median ridge, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins about 10 pairs, elevated both sides, 
diminishing distally and passing irregularly into the next succeeding 
ones, only in the apical third of the blade forming a marginal vein 
3-6 mm. from the margin; blades olive green or dark, and very 
smooth but scarcely lustrous above, with no glands apparent at 
maturity; lower surface purplish red, smooth, dark-dotted, the small 
veins scarcely apparent; inflorescence axillary on old wood, an abbre- 
viated raceme, or often several together on short spurlike excres- 
cences, the axis up to 2 mm. thick and 5 mm. long, with up to 5-6 
approximate decussate pairs of flowers on pedicels 1 mm. thick and 
5-7 mm. long, the whole drying black; bracts not seen, probably 
small; bracteoles ovate, not connate, 1-2.5 mm. long, persistent; 
buds pyriform, 12-15 mm. long; hypanthium obconic, 5 mm. long; 
calyx-lobes oblong, hooded and thickened near tips, 5 mm. wide, 
8-10 mm. long, rounded at the free apex about 2 mm. long, imbri- 
cate to near base and connate submarginally, ultimately spreading, 
the inner ones minutely ciliate on the scarious apical margins and 
at the free tips; disk 4 mm. wide, the glabrous center raised in an 
annular thickening about the style-base; style 12 mm. long; stamens 
about as long as the style, 300 or more, the anthers linear, 1.5 mm. 
long, erect in the bud, the filaments replicate; petals ovate, 10 mm. 
wide, 15 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 12 in each 



FLORA OF PERU 735 

locule, radially attached to a short placenta on the central axis; 
fruit not seen. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 450. 

Loreto: Rio Mazan, Quebrada Luiio, alt. 110 meters, on river 
bank, Feb., 1935, Jos6 M. Schunke 184 (US, type). 

Eugenia spruceana Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 257. 1857. 

A shrub or small tree to 6 meters high, the vegetative buds, peti- 
oles and branchlets (sparingly or densely) and the inflorescence 
(sparingly or not at all) strigose with straight white hairs 0.5-0.8 
mm. long; leaves oblong, 4-7 cm. wide, 12-18 cm. long, 2.4-3 times 
as long as wide, nearly equally narrowed to both ends, gradually 
acuminate at the apex, rounded to the base, the margins abruptly 
decurrent on the petiole 1.2-2 mm. thick, 6-10 mm. long; petiole 
stout, dark, irregularly and spirally longitudinally furrowed, and 
transversely wrinkled, heavily strigose; midvein impressed above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 10-15 pairs, obscure but slightly 
elevated on both sides; marginal vein about as prominent as the 
laterals, somewhat arched between them, 2-3 mm. from the margin; 
blades smooth, dark and polished above, the lower surface dull and 
yellowish- or grayish-brown, somewhat strigose, waxy-papillose; 
glands not apparent on either surface; inflorescence an abbreviated 
axillary raceme, the axis up to 2 mm. long, bearing usually 2 approx- 
imate decussate pairs of flowers on pedicels 0.5-0.8 mm. thick, 5-10 
mm. long; bracts ovate or lanceolate, 1 mm. long; bracteoles similar, 
1-1.5 mm. long, persistent, not connate; buds 7-10 mm. long, pyri- 
form, the hypanthium 4 mm. long, campanulate, usually thinly stri- 
gose; calyx-lobes suborbicular, chartaceous, concave, finely ciliate, 
glabrous inside, very unequal; outer pair about 4 mm. long and wide, 
connate along the margins about a third their length with the inner 
pair, which are thin-margined laterally, 8 mm. wide, 5 mm. long; 
disk about 4 mm. wide, the glabrous center 2 mm. wide; style 12 
mm. long; stamens about as long as the style, 200-250, at least the 
inner incurved in bud, the anthers up to 2 mm. long, linear; petals 
concave, minutely ciliate, suborbicular, about 10 mm. long; ovary 
bilocular, the ovules about 15 in each locule, radiating from a short 
centrally affixed placenta. F.M. Neg. 20004. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia stipitata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 219. 1956. 

A small or large tree, hispidulous with stiff erect sharp yellowish - 
gray hairs, these particularly dense on the hypanthium and fruit, 



736 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

and uniformly and thickly distributed on the branchlets and inflo- 
rescence; leaves short-petioled, the margins scarcely decurrent, the 
petioles not channeled ventrally but flat, the midvein flat at the base 
of the blade, channeled distally; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, widely 
spaced, relatively obscure above and raised and conspicuous be- 
neath, not forming a marginal vein but each curving and forming a 
high arch between it and the next, the arches often as high as the 
distance between the veins; inflorescence racemose, axillary, usually 
an axis 1-1.5 mm. in diameter, 4-10 mm. long, with 3-5 decussate 
pairs of long-pedicelled flowers, the terminal flower wanting; axis 
sometimes elongate and leafy, floriferous at 1-2 lower nodes only, 
or each pedicel cymosely 3-flowered and the lateral secondary pedi- 
cels up to 8-10 mm. long; bracts 1-3 mm. long, linear; primary 
pedicels 10-20 mm. long, longitudinally several-striate and sharp- 
angled, the bracteoles linear, 1-2 mm. long, standing well below the 
terminal flower (whether on 1-flowered or 3-flowered pedicels); hy- 
panthium obconic; disk somewhat quadrangular, hairy; calyx-lobes 
rounded, broader than long, strongly overlapping in bud, reflexed 
in anthesis, appressed-pubescent within; petals white, obovate, cili- 
ate; ovary (3-) 4-locular, the ovules anatropous, 5-8 in each locule, 
slender-stalked, projecting horizontally from a short placenta above 
the middle of the central axis, aligned in two vertical rows with the 
micropyle turned outward. This species occurs in two well-marked 
races, either one of which would probably be described as an inde- 
pendent species if it were found geographically isolated. These 
races, described below as subspecies, are readily distinguished by the 
characters given in the key, but they have so many qualitative char- 
acters in common that they seem surely conspecific. The generic 
position of Eugenia stipitata is by no means clear. The usually 4- 
locular ovary, the alignment of the ovules, the rather numerous 
seeds, and the method of branching of the inflorescence all these 
suggest the subtribe Pimentinae. The structure of the seed, how- 
ever, as far as I have been able to observe, is eugenioid. 

1. Eugenia stipitata McVaugh, subsp. stipitata. 

A tree up to 12-15 meters high, markedly hispidulous, the hairs 
of the lower leaf-surface uniformly and thickly distributed on veins 
and parenchyma, up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves ovate or broadly ellip- 
tic, (3.5-) 5-6 (-9.5) cm. wide, 8-13 (-18) cm. long, 1.8-2.3 times as 
long as wide, acuminate, rounded and often subcordate at base; 
petiole about 3 mm. long; lateral veins impressed above, diminish- 
ing distally, recurving at a point 2-5 mm. from the margin, and join- 



FLORA OF PERU 737 

ing the next vein at a point up to 10 (-25) mm. from the margin; 
glands obscure on both surfaces; bracteoles often at middle of pedicel 
or below; disk 4 mm. wide; style glabrous, 7-8.5 mm. long; calyx- 
lobes 4-6 mm. wide, 4-5 mm. long; petals 4 mm. wide, 10 mm. long; 
fruit unknown. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 464. 

Loreto: San Antonio, on Rio Itaya, Killip & Smith 29469; 
Williams 3397. Mishuyacu, King 788 (F, type). La Victoria, 
Williams 2787. "Pichi" (Williams). Amazonian Brazil. 

2. Eugenia stipitata subsp. sororia McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 
29:219. 1956. 

A shrub or small tree up to 3 meters high, finely hispidulous on 
the branchlets and inflorescence with hairs up to 0.3 mm. long, the 
leaves often glabrous beneath at maturity, hispidulous on the veins, 
or minutely and uniformly beset with hairs hardly more than 0.1 mm. 
long; leaves elliptic, 2.5-4.5 cm. wide, (6.5-) 9-13 cm. long, 2.2-3.3 
times as long as wide, acuminate and sometimes acute and falcate 
at the tip, cuneately narrowed below the middle or sometimes 
broadly rounded, then often abruptly and unequally rounded into 
the petiole at the very base; petiole 3^4 mm. long; lateral veins not 
impressed above, scarcely evident, little diminished distally but re- 
curving rather uniformly from a point 2-4 mm. from the margin to 
join the next vein up to 10 mm. from the margin; leaves sparingly 
or not at all dark-dotted above, sparingly dotted beneath; bracteoles 
mostly 3-5 mm. below the flower; disk 3 mm. across; style 5-6.5 mm. 
long, hairy near the base; calyx-lobes 3 mm. wide, 2.5-3.5 mm. long; 
petals 4 mm. wide, 7 mm. long; stamens about 75, 6 mm. long, the 
anthers 0.6 mm. long; fruit oblate, about 1.5 cm. across, velutinous, 
the seeds about 6-15, kidney-shaped, 3-7 mm. long, the cotyledons 
and embryo completely united except that the cotyledons are dis- 
tinct for a short distance at the chalazal end. Univ. of Mich. 
Neg. 474. 

San Martin: Juanjui, alto Rio Huallaga, alt. 400 meters, forest, 
King 3834 (type, GH). Tarapoto, Williams 5486, 5667. Amazo- 
nian Bolivia to Colombia (Villavicencio) . "Rupina caspi" (Williams). 

Eugenia subterminalis DC. Prodr. 3: 263. 1828. 

Shrub or tree up to 10 meters high, finely pubescent on the 
branchlets, inflorescence axis, petiole, midvein on upper surface of 
leaf, and leaf-margins, with minute pale or reddish sharp-pointed, 



738 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

mostly erect hairs about 0.1 mm. long, these intermixed on the 
vegetative buds and leaf-bases with longer, somewhat appressed 
hairs up to 0.4 mm. long; leaves lance-ovate or occasionally elliptic, 
1-2 (-2.7) cm. wide, 3-5 (-7) cm. long, 2.25-3.3 (-4) times as long 
as wide, gradually acuminate at tip, rounded to subcuneate at base, 
the margins decurrent on the stout channeled petiole up to 0.7 mm. 
thick, 1.5-2.5 mm. long; midvein more prominently raised above 
than beneath, elevated above in a nearly flat-topped pubescent 
ridge, somewhat raised beneath; lateral veins 8-12 pairs, obscure, 
with numerous parallel intermediates, all somewhat elevated on both 
sides when dry; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched 
between them, up to 1 mm. from margin (to 3.5 mm. in the largest 
leaves); leaves smooth, green or dark above when dry, the lower 
surface pale brown or coppery, the glands few and scarcely evident 
on either side even in young leaves; flowers solitary, opposite, from 
the 3-5 nodes at the base of new leafy shoots, or the shoots abortive 
and the raceme axis 2-3 mm. long with 3-5 decussate pairs of flowers; 
base of leafy shoot, or raceme axis, with scarcely imbricate, 4-ranked, 
dark-scarious deciduous ciliate bracts, the basal shortest, those sub- 
tending the flowers lanceolate to ovate, acute, 1-3.5 mm. long; pedi- 
cels filiform (up to 0.8 mm. thick in fruit, much more slender in 
flower), (6-) 15-30 mm. long, glabrous or slightly pubescent; brac- 
teoles acute, ciliate, lanceolate, persistent, 1 mm. long or less; buds 
(immature) surrounded by the calyx-lobes, glabrous, about 4 mm. 
long; calyx-lobes reflexed at anthesis, glabrous both sides, ciliate, 
triangular-oblong or rounded at apex, 2-2.5 mm. wide, 3-3.5 mm. 
long; disk somewhat quadrangular, 2.5 mm. wide; flowers said to be 
white, not seen; stamens about 100; fruit probably globose or pyri- 
form, seen immature (then 5-8 mm. long), with prominent calyx- 
lobes. Killip & Smith's no. 29324 was compared directly with the 
type of Eugenia subterminalis, in Munich, in 1954, and seemed un- 
questionably to belong to the same species. There is some doubt as 
to the propriety of identifying a Peruvian species with DeCandolle's 
plant, because of the uncertainty about the source of the latter. 
The type of E. subterminalis, as noted on the specimen at Munich, 
was found by DeCandolle in the herbarium of Martius, mixed with 
the material of "Myrtus modesta Mart." (Eugenia modesta DC.). 
The type locality of both species is given by DeCandolle as "in 
Brazilia ad flum. Ilheos" (that is, near the Atlantic coast, in the 
State of Bahia), but no locality is noted on the type specimen of 
E. subterminalis, and it is of course possible that it came originally 
from somewhere on the upper Amazon. F.M. Neg. 20009. 



FLORA OF PERU 739 

San Martin: Quebrada Chambira cerca a Juanjui, Ferreyra 4567. 
Loreto: San Antonio, on Rio Itaya, Killip & Smith 29324; Wil- 
liams 3499. Yurimaguas, Williams 5311. ? Amazonian Brazil. 

Eugenia tapacumensis Berg, Linnaea 27: 222. 1856. 

A small tree, up to 10 meters high, nearly glabrous, the pedicels 
and hypanthium often minutely pubescent with pale erect hairs; 
leaves elliptic, (2-) 3.5-6 cm. wide, (4.5-) 9-14 cm. long, 2-2.5 times 
as long as wide, blunt-pointed or broadly and obscurely acuminate, 
rounded toward the base, the margins cuneate at the very base and 
decurrent on the petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, (3-) 5-10 mm. long; mid- 
vein impressed or broadly sulcate above, prominent beneath, the 
lateral veins about 15 pairs, with about as many small intermediate 
veins, slender, slightly elevated on both sides when dry, the marginal 
vein about equaling the laterals, slightly and somewhat irregularly 
arched between them, 1.5-3 mm. from the margin, and with a 
smaller exterior submarginal -vein; leaves drying green or brown, 
nearly concolorous, the upper surface lustrous and nearly eglandu- 
lar, the lower dull and usually minutely gland-dotted; flowers often 
on old wood; inflorescence a very short axillary raceme, the axis 2.5 
mm. long or less, with up to 5 decussate pairs of flowers, on pedicels 
up to 0.7 mm. thick, 5-6 mm. long, the number of flowers actually 
produced usually 2-4; bracts broadly rounded, deciduous, 1.5 mm. 
wide and 1 mm. long; bracteoles 1.3-1.5 mm. long, persistent, some- 
what fused at the basal margins, ovate, acute or rounded at the tip; 
disk 2.5 mm. across; mature buds 4.5-5.5 mm. long, the rounded 
dome of the petals 2.5-4 mm. in diameter, much exceeding the 
broadly rounded calyx-lobes which are 1.7-2 mm. wide, 1-1.3 mm. 
high; style 6.5-8 mm. long; stamens 150-175, shorter than the style; 
anthers 0.8 mm. long; petals obovate to suborbicular, gland-dotted, 
4.5-6 mm. long; fruit subglobose, about 1 cm. in diameter. This 
species belongs to a group which ranges from the West Indies 
through most of tropical South America east of the Andes. It was 
first reported from Peru by Amshoff (Rec. trav. bot. ne"erl. 39: 164. 
1942), on the basis of Klug's collection cited below. This collection 
agrees well with material of the same species from Venezuela and 
the Guianas, but Williams' no. 6527, also cited below, is more gland- 
ular than the average for the species. The group as a whole should 
be revised as soon as there is sufficient material of the several de- 
scribed glabrous species having small and few flowers in axillary 
clusters, and blunt elliptic leaves with the midvein somewhat im- 
pressed. F.M. Neg. 31621. 



740 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 6527. Loreto: Juanjui, Klug 
4271 . Amazonian Brazil, to Colombia, Venezuela, the Guianas, and 
the Lesser Antilles. 

Eugenia tenuimarginata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 220. 
1956. 

Tree or shrub, the new growth not seen, the mature foliage and 
branchlets glabrous, the inflorescence minutely appressed-pubescent 
with glistening brown hairs 0.1-0.2 mm. long; leaves elliptic to ellip- 
tic-ovate or -obovate, 5.5-8 cm. wide, 10-14 cm. long, about twice 
as long as wide, the tips decurved and bluntly acuminate, the base 
convexly acute, the margins decurrent on the channeled petiole 1.5 
mm. thick, 15 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent be- 
neath; lateral veins 6-8 pairs in addition to some intermediates, 
slightly raised above, prominent beneath; marginal vein (above the 
middle of the blade) about equaling the laterals and arched between 
them, 6-10 mm. from the margin, the lowest lateral veins diminish- 
ing distally and not forming a marginal line but recurving to join 
the next succeeding ones; blades on the upper surface pale green, 
papillose-roughened, with no glandular dots apparent; lower surface 
purplish green, dull, siliceous-papillose; inflorescence an abbreviated 
axillary raceme, the axis almost none, bearing 1-2 approximate de- 
cussate pairs of flowers on compressed pedicels 1 mm. thick, 5-8 mm. 
long; bracts small, chartaceous, deciduous; bracteoles ovate, blunt- 
tipped, the basal margins united 0.5 mm. forming a laterally notched 
boat-shaped involucre 4 mm. long; buds 8-9 mm. long, pyriform, the 
hypanthium rather densely strigose, 3 mm. long, distally campanu- 
late, attenuate at base; calyx-lobes with thin, hyaline fragile mar- 
gins, broadly rounded, glabrous within, unequal, the outer notably 
shorter, 4-6 mm. wide, 4^4.5 mm. long, the inner 5-8 mm. long and 
wide; disk about 6 mm. wide; style 9-10 mm. long; stamens about 
250, up to 8 mm. long, the anthers 1-1.2 mm. long; petals concave, 
suborbicular, ciliate, 8-10 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 
about 20 in each locule, radiating from a short placenta affixed to 
the central axis. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 437. 

Loreto: Mouth of the Rio Santiago, on high land, G. Tessmann 
4213, in "1924" (G, type). 

Eugenia tetrasticha Poepp. ex Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, 
pt. 1:324. 1857. 

A shrub or small tree, short-hispidulous on the branchlets, inflo- 
rescence and lower leaf-surface with uniformly distributed erect 



FLORA OF PERU 741 

sharp brownish-yellow hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves broadly 
elliptic to obovate, markedly bullate, 5-10 cm. wide, 10-20 cm. long, 
1.7-2.2 times as long as wide, short-acuminate, rounded or gradu- 
ally narrowed to the base, the margins very shortly decurrent on 
the very stout petiole 3-6 mm. long, 2-2.5 mm. thick; mid vein flat 
above, but like the other principal veins much depressed beneath 
the general surface of the blade and prominent beneath; lateral veins 
about 15 pairs; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched 
between them, 3-5 mm. from the margin; upper surface of blade 
dark green in drying, glabrous or nearly so, lustrous; lower surface 
dull, greenish-brown, marked with the somewhat contrasting dark 
coppery-brown veins; glands scarcely apparent on either surface; 
inflorescence a contracted axillary raceme (or 2-3 racemes super- 
posed), the axis quadrangular, (3-) 10-18 mm. long, 1-2 mm. thick 
at the base, with up to 8-13 approximate, decussate pairs of flowers 
subtended by persistent, strigose, round or ovate bracts 1-1.3 mm. 
long; pedicels divaricate, 0.5 mm. thick, 5-14 mm. long; bracteoles 
ovate, 1.5 mm. long, acute, ciliate but otherwise nearly glabrous, 
the basal margins connate; disk about 2 mm. wide, glabrous; calyx- 
lobes broadly rounded, about 1.5 mm. wide, 1-1.5 mm. long, ciliate 
but otherwise glabrous; fruit ellipsoid, 5-6 mm. wide, 6.5-8 mm. 
long. A most distinctive species, known only from the type local- 
ity and vicinity, and collected in mature or nearly mature fruit only. 
F.M. Neg. 31622. 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, Killip & Smith 27938; Poeppig 2139 
[= Addenda 53], type; Williams 3848, 4240, 4709. "Rupina" 
(Williams). 

Eugenia tumulescens McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 221. 1956. 

A mound-forming shrub 70 cm. high, the bark of leafy twigs 
flaking off in thin dark red plates, the inflorescence thinly tomentose 
with crisp brownish-white hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves elliptic 
or oblong, (4.5-) 6-8 cm. wide, (10-) 20-38 cm. long, (2.5-) 3-5 
times as long as wide, abruptly or gradually acuminate at tip, grad- 
ually or somewhat abruptly rounded at base, the margins passing 
abruptly into the much-thickened and corky-roughened exfoliating 
reddish petiole 3-4 mm. thick, 10-18 mm. long; midvein promi- 
nently convex on both surfaces (hardly less prominent above than 
beneath) ; lateral veins 20-30 pairs, convex above but the leaf-surface 
sulcate, prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the lat- 
erals, 3-5 mm. from the margin, slightly arched between the laterals 
but forming a definite vein, separated from the margin by a second 



742 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

and indistinct vein; blades olive-green in drying, smooth and lus- 
trous above, dull beneath, with prominent biconvex glands 0.3 mm. 
wide, 1-3 mm. apart, on both surfaces; inflorescence an axillary 
cluster of 6-8 flowers, probably opposite in decussate pairs but the 
axis very short; pedicels somewhat compressed, 1 mm. wide, 8-10 
mm. long; bracts inconspicuous; bracteoles persistent through an- 
thesis, spreading, 3 mm. wide at base, 4-5 mm. long; hypanthium 
sessile, cup-shaped, rounded at base, 3 mm. wide and long, obtusely 
8-ridged, abruptly expanded into the gamosepalous base of the calyx, 
which is 1 mm. long, 4.5-5 mm. wide; calyx-lobes oblong, erect in 
anthesis, 4-5.5 mm. wide, 6-8 mm. long, round-tipped, glabrous in- 
side; disk 3.5-^4 mm. wide; style 10-12 mm. long, glabrous; stamens 
250-300, the filaments 8-10 mm. long, the anthers lanceolate, slen- 
derly apiculate, 2.4-2.6 mm. long; petals white, obovate, cucullate, 
glabrous, ciliate, 7 mm. wide, 13 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the 
ovules about 10 per locule, radiating from a short placenta attached 
to the central axis; immature fruit long-ovoid; fruit "amarelo sal- 
mon" (Froes). 

Peru (possibly). Amazonian Brazil (lower Rio Negro). 

Eugenia ulei (Diels) McVaugh, comb. nov. Psidium ulei Diels, 
Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 187. 1907. 

A shrub or tree with compressed branchlets, in age nearly gla- 
brous, but the inflorescence in anthesis, and the young shoots and 
leaves, sparingly to densely strigose to tomentellous with appressed 
pale or reddish white, at least in part sessile, fusiform and dibrachi- 
ate hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves elliptic to ovate or obovate, 
4.5-5 cm. wide, 8-11 cm. long, about twice as long as wide, usually 
about equally narrowed to both ends, the tip acute to deltoid-acumi- 
nate, the base acute, the margins cuneate-decurrent on the thin-edged 
pubescent petiole 1 mm. thick, 5-7 mm. long; mid vein impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 10-12 pairs, visible 
as fine lines on both sides, more conspicuous beneath; marginal vein 
about equaling the laterals and arched between them, 1.5-2.5 mm. 
from the margin; leaves nearly concolorous, somewhat darker and 
more lustrous above, with small glandular dots apparent on both 
surfaces; inflorescence an axillary or falsely terminal raceme up to 
4.5 cm. long, with at least two decussate pairs of flowers on pedicels 
1 cm. long; axis of the raceme about 1.3-2 mm. thick below the low- 
est node; bracts deciduous or sometimes persistent, paired, forming 
a boat-shaped involucre 9 mm. long; bracteoles ("prophylla") accord- 
ing to Diels 3-4 mm. long, 6 mm. wide, glabrous within, probably 



FLORA OF PERU 743 

deciduous after anthesis; calyx-lobes 4, triangular-ovate, 8-9 mm. 
long, 5-6 mm. wide at base, tomentulose without, appressed-pubes- 
cent within; disk probably 5-6 mm. wide, glabrous ("glabrescens," 
according to Diels) ; style 7-?8.5 mm. long; stamens numerous, about 
as long as the style; petals white (Ule), obovate, sparsely hairy, 4r-5 
mm. wide, 8-10 mm. long; ovary, according to Diels, bilocular. 
F.M. Neg. 23500. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, prope Fuan-Guerra [Juan Guerra], Dec., 
1902, Ule 6645 (type, in herb. Berol., not seen, probably destroyed; 
G; fragm., F). 

The photograph of the isotype at Geneva (F.M. Neg. 23500) 
shows clearly the racemose nature of the inflorescence in this speci- 
men. On the basis of this feature alone one might justify the transfer 
of Diels' Psidium ulei to Eugenia. The photograph also shows the 
presence of a tiny capitate stigma and paired boat-shaped bracts, 
both of which are commonly found in Eugenia but not in Psidium. 
The broad rounded bracteoles are to be expected in this group of 
Eugenia, but not in Psidium. The presence of 4 calyx-lobes and a 
bilocular ovary are to be expected in Eugenia, but not in Psidium. 
Finally, the whole aspect of the type, as indicated by the photo- 
graph, is strikingly like that of other racemosely flowered species of 
Eugenia, e.g. E. riparia. 

Eugenia versicolor McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 223. 1956. 

A tree to 15 meters high, the branchlets and inflorescence densely 
puberulent with short crisped pale reddish hairs; leaves elliptic, (2.5-) 
3.5-^4.5 cm. wide, 6-13 cm. long, about 2-3 times as long as wide, 
acuminate at tip, acute to rounded at base, the margins passing into 
the flat ventral surface of the slender flexuous petiole which is up to 
1 mm. thick and 8 mm. long; mid vein sulcate or nearly flat above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, slightly convex on both 
surfaces and a little more prominent beneath, scarcely forming a 
marginal vein but diminishing distally and forming a series of loops 
3-6 mm. from the margin; leaves smooth and lustrous and probably 
dark green above, rusty- or ashy-brown beneath, the lower surface 
obscured by very numerous tiny glistening hairs; glands scarcely 
apparent in mature leaves; inflorescence borne with new leaves on 
slender branchlets 2-3 mm. thick; racemes much abbreviated, the 
axis almost undeveloped, bearing 1-3 pairs of approximate decussate 
flowers (the 4-12 flowers at each node forming an umbelliform clus- 
ter) on slender pedicels 0.5 mm. thick, 3-6 mm. long; bracts broadly 



744 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

ovate, less than 1 mm. long; bracteoles rounded, 1-2 mm. wide, con- 
nate into a persistent involucre 2-2.7 mm. long; buds 4.5-6 mm. 
long, globose above the cup-shaped hypanthium 2-2.5 mm. long; 
calyx-lobes broadly rounded, in unequal pairs, appressed-hairy with- 
in, 2.5-3.5 mm. wide, 1.5-2 mm. long; disk hairy, 2-2.5 mm. wide; 
style 7-9 mm. long; stamens about 200, shorter than the style; an- 
thers about 0.5 mm. long; petals rotund, about 6 mm. long and wide, 
ciliate but otherwise nearly glabrous, gland-dotted; ovary bilocular, 
the ovules 15-20 in each locule, radiating from a centrally affixed 
placenta. Known from two recent collections not far from the 
Peruvian boundaries: Brazil, Amazonas, Mun. Sao Paulo de Oli- 
venca, Krukoff 8910; Colombia, Amazonas, trapecio amazonico, 
Loretoyacu River, Schultes 6959, type. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil and Colombia. 

EXCLUDED SPECIES 

Eugenia conglobata [Sesse" & Mocino]. A specimen at G, from 
the Moricand herbarium, received by Moricand from Pavon in 1827, 
is labeled "Eugenia conglobata sp. nova Peru," and in another hand, 
"Pavon." The plant is precisely the same as the specimens of Eu- 
genia conglobata Sesse" & Mocino (PI. Nov. Hisp. 77. ed. 2, 1893), 
from Acahuizotla, Mexico (nos. 2055 and 2107, in the duplicates of 
Sesse" & Mocino at F). The Mexican specimens have been identified 
by Standley as Eugenia origanoides Berg. Numerous other dupli- 
cates from the collections of Sesse* and Mocino are present in the 
Geneva herbarium, and it seems apparent that the name of Pavon 
and locality "Peru" were mistakenly added to the present specimen 
at some time after its receipt by Moricand. 

Eugenia guayaquilensis (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 275. 1828. Myrtus 
guayaquilensis HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 147. (folio ed. p. 117). 1823. 
Berg (Linnaea 27: 190. 1856) cited a Peruvian example of this spe- 
cies, collected by Ruiz and deposited in the Berlin herbarium. As 
far as I am aware E. guayaquilensis is extremely local in distribution, 
having been collected only in the vicinity of Guayaquil, near the 
coast of Ecuador. If the specimen which Berg saw was correctly 
identified, it probably did not originate in Peru. 

Eugenia ligustrina (Sw.) Willd. A widespread species, occurring 
from the Greater Antilles to eastern and southern Brazil. It is easily 
recognized by its small lustrous glabrous obovate leaves 3-5 cm. 
long, and by the 4-ranked imbricated scarious bracts which surround 



FLORA OF PERU 745 

the base of the young shoots. The flowers are solitary, on long slen- 
der pedicels, from leafless nodes but subtended by linear scarious 
bracts up to 1.5 mm. wide, 8 mm. long. This is a member of the 
group segregated by Berg as a genus, Stenocalyx. Other representa- 
tives of this genus occur in Amazonian Brazil and in the lowlands of 
northern Bolivia. A specimen of E. ligustrina from the herbarium 
of Moricand (G) is labeled "Myrtus bracteiflora," the collector is 
given as Pavon, and the locality is given as "Peru." The plant is 
an exact match for the type collection of Myrtus bracteiflora Sess4 & 
Mocifio, a native of Puerto Rico, and the specimen is doubtless one 
of the several in the Moricand herbarium which are known to have 
been mistakenly labeled "Peru" and "Pavon." 

Eugenia ruiziana Berg, Linnaea 27: 167. 1856. Luma ruiziana 
(Berg) Burret, Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin 15: 524. 1941. "(v. in hb. 
Berol.). . . . Habitat in Peruviae Andium nemoribus (Ruiz)." This 
is referred by Berg to his species group Biflorae, and is said to be 
closely related, except for the sometimes 3-flowered peduncles, to a 
Chilean species, E. chrysocarpa Berg [Myrceugenia chrysocarpa (Berg) 
Kausel]. Burret suggests that E. ruiziana (Luma ruiziana} may be 
a synonym of Luma parvifolia (DC.) Burret, which is also a Chilean 
species [Myrceugenia parvifolia (DC.) Kausel]. Kausel himself, in 
a recent commentary on some species of Myrceugenia, tentatively 
accepts this disposition of Eugenia ruiziana (Lilloa 13: 133. 1947). 
It seems likely in any event that E. ruiziana is to be excluded from 
the flora of Peru. 

5. MYRCIANTHES Berg 

Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 315. 1856, and in Mart. Fl. Bras. 
14, pt. 1:351-354. 1857. 

Calyx-lobes 4 (or in some species 5), distinct, imbricated, per- 
sistent. Hypanthium not prolonged beyond the summit of the ovary. 
Petals as many as the calyx-lobes, conspicuous. Ovary usually biloc- 
ular, the ovules several (5-20, usually 10-15) in each locule, in a 
sub-capitate group attached near the middle of the central dissepi- 
ment or in a few species (with 7-10 ovules) attached somewhat above 
the middle and the ovules pendent. Seeds one or two, often one 
developing in each locule, the cotyledons distinct, accumbent, large, 
fleshy, plano-convex; radicle often hairy, stout, usually about one- 
third as long as the cotyledons or less, impressed between their edges 
and lying at right angles to them or curved parallel to their margins; 
plumule often silky-hairy, much shorter than the radicle. Inflores- 



746 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

cence an axillary dichasium, the central (terminal) flowers usually 
sessile in the forks; flowers usually 3 or 7, sometimes as many as 31, 
or reduced to 1 only (but if solitary, arising directly from the axils 
of foliage leaves, not from the lower bracteate nodes of new branches 
which are leafy above, nor from the bracteate nodes of abortive axil- 
lary buds). Bracts and bracteoles mostly linear or lanceolate, 
scarious, deciduous at anthesis or often much before this. 

As originally proposed by Berg, this genus consisted of 4 species 
only, all natives of southeastern Brazil or of Uruguay. The genus 
was recognized by Berg and distinguished by him from Eugenia be- 
cause of the 5-merous flowers of the 4 original species. Species with 
flowers in a dichasium, but with 4-merous flowers, were referred by 
Berg to Eugenia, but may also be regarded as members of an inde- 
pendent genus, Anamomis Griseb. (Fl. Brit. W. Ind. 240. 1860). 
I am unable to perceive any differences between Myrcianthes and 
Anamomis except the number of perianth-parts, and even this is 
inconstant. Almost any of the 4-merous species may have occasion- 
ally 5-merous flowers. One species in cis-Andean Peru has 5-merous 
flowers but has little apparent affinity otherwise with the Uruguayan 
and south-Brazilian species. The various details of inflorescence 
structure, calyx morphology, placentation and seed structure are so 
much alike in the supposed "Anamomis" and "Myrcianthes" that 
their close relationship is apparent. There appears to be no justifi- 
cation for maintaining them as separate genera, and the older name, 
Myrcianthes, is here taken to apply to both. 

The taxonomy of the American eugenioid Myrtaceae has recently 
been studied by Eberhard Kausel. According to Kausel's treatment 
(Ark. Bot. ser. 2, 3: 502. 1956) the species assigned in this Flora to 
Myrcianthes would be divided among the genera Anamomis, Myrci- 
anthes and Amyrsia. Kausel stated that in the genus Anamomis the 
embryo lacks a plumule, but my observations on mature seeds of 
the type species, A. fragrans (Sw.) Griseb., do not confirm this. In 
all species of Myrcianthes (including Anamomis} of which seeds have 
been available, it is noteworthy that the plumule is invariably pres- 
ent in the mature seed but often appears to be wanting in half -grown 
or other immature seeds, suggesting that this structure develops 
relatively late in the maturation of the embryo. 

Certain Andean species previously referred to Eugenia (e.g. E. 
orthostemon Berg, E. minimifolia McVaugh, E. cartilaginea McVaugh, 
E. myrsinoides (HBK.) Diels, and E. triquetra Berg) are probably 
better referred to Myrcianthes, as indicated by general similarity to 



FLORA OF PERU 747 

the species of that group. None is known in the fruiting condition, 
however, and all are strictly 1-flowered species (i.e. the inflorescence 
is never a dichasium as far as known), so that positive generic assign- 
ments cannot be made. In this Flora the species in question are 
associated with the undoubted species of Myrcianthes in the key to 
that genus, and they are treated as species of Myrcianthes except 
that the formal nomenclatural combinations have not been made. 
A sixth species, Eugenia myrtomimeta Diels, is probably of another 
generic affinity, as discussed below, but is keyed out here with 
Myrcianthes. In the key which follows, these species of uncertain 
generic position are treated as species of Eugenia (e.g. E. minimi- 
folia, E. myrtomimeta, etc.). 

Leaves ternate, or opposite at some nodes, 2 cm. long or less; flowers 
solitary, axillary; Cajamarca, north to Colombia. . . .E. triquetra 

Leaves opposite, or occasionally subopposite only. 

Primary branches of the inflorescence racemosely arranged (i.e. 
in decussate pairs), but each cymosely 3- (or rarely 7-) flow- 
ered, or 1-flowered; hypanthium on a slender stipe (pseudo- 
stalk) often longer than itself, the bracteoles thus well below 
the flower and the central flowers apparently pedicellate. 

(see Eugenia stipitata, p. 735) 

Cymes (dichasia) arising directly from the leaf-axils, sometimes 
irregularly branched but the branches never in decussate 
pairs; bracteoles usually closely subtending the flowers, and 
each branch of the inflorescence terminated by a sessile or 
nearly sessile flower at the first node. 

Flowers 5-merous; leaves coriaceous, yellow-green and verni- 
cose, subsessile, orbicular to broadly ovate, 1.5-7.5 cm. 
long and wide; Pacific slope, Lima M. quinqueloba 

Flowers 4-merous; leaves various; species mostly of the inter- 
Andean valleys Key A 

A Flowers solitary (see also under second A, for plants with flowers 
partly solitary and partly in threes or more numerous). 

Leaves 6 mm. long or less, rigidly coriaceous, vernicose, promi- 
nently impressed-punctate on both sides; flowers numerous 
toward the tips of the branches, on peduncles 2-3 mm. long. 

E. minimifolia 

Leaves mostly 1-2.5 cm. long, the texture various; blades not im- 
pressed-punctate beneath, sometimes obscurely so above; 



748 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

flowers relatively few, not crowded in the terminal axils, the 
pedicels (or peduncles) usually much longer. 

Hypanthium with strong longitudinal angles; leaves often sub- 
orbicular, grayish-green and closely appressed-pubescent 
beneath M. oreophila 

Hypanthium not angled; leaves rarely suborbicular, neither 
grayish-green nor closely appressed-pubescent. 

Hypanthium narrowly obconic, attenuate at base; pedicels 
12-20 mm. long; calyx-lobes glabrous within; leaves 
about 2.5 cm. long, mostly acutely narrowed to both 
ends E. myrtomimeta 

Hypanthium narrowly campanulate or broader, blunt or 
rounded at base and usually broader than the markedly 
compressed pedicel; calyx-lobes appressed-pubescent 
within (sometimes sparingly so in E. myrsinoides with 
pedicels 2-6 mm. long) ; leaves various. 

Leaf margins pale, cartilaginous-thickened and revolute, 
often irregularly roughened and apparently denticu- 
late because of the prominent glands; flowers always 
solitary, the pedicels filiform, little compressed, scarcely 
1 mm. wide at summit, 10-20 mm. long or more. 

E. cartilaginea 

Leaf margins scarcely thickened or roughened, the glands 
scarcely or not at all apparent in mature leaves; 
peduncle 1- or 3-flowered, usually markedly com- 
pressed, enlarged distally and 1 mm. wide or more. 

Stamens 250 to more than 300; inflorescence glabrous, 
the branchlets glabrous or coarsely appressed-pubes- 
cent; peduncle 1- or 3-flowered, if 1-flowered 5-15 
mm. long, compressed, up to 1.5 mm. wide; calyx- 
lobes 2.5-5 mm. wide; Huanuco and Cuzco. 

M. indifferens 

Stamens 50-100; branchlets from nearly glabrous to 
pubescent, if coarsely pubescent the inflorescence 
not markedly less so; peduncle 1- or 3-flowered. 
Leaves mostly less than 1.5 cm. long, obovate, and 
cuneate at base; flowers all solitary, on pedicels 
mostly 2-6 mm. long; hypanthium mostly gla- 
brous; northern Peru and Ecuador. 

E. myrsinoides 



FLORA OF PERU 749 

Leaves 1.2-4 (-6) cm. long, broadly elliptic to ovate, 
rounded at base; peduncles usually 3-flowered. 

Branchlets glabrous or sparingly strigose; Ecuador 
and Colombia. 

Hypanthium densely pale-strigose; peduncle 1.5- 
2 mm. wide at summit; calyx-lobes 2.5-3 mm. 
wide; style 7-8.5 mm. long; Ecuador and 
southern Colombia M. hallii 

Hypanthium glabrous or sparingly strigose; pe- 
duncle 1-1.2 mm. wide; calyx-lobes 1.5-2 
mm. wide; style 5-6 mm. long; central Co- 
lombia and (?) southern Ecuador. . .M.foliosa 

Branchlets densely strigose with straight appressed 
white or brownish hairs; southern Peru (Are- 
quipa) M. ferreyrae 

(See also first A, for plants with solitary flowers at least in part) . 
Flowers 3 to many, in dichasia, the central flowers usually pres- 
ent and sessile. 

Veins of the lower leaf-surface raised in a conspicuous reticulum, 
the veinlets enlarged, with appearance of having softened and 
fused; plants silky-strigose; inflorescence long-pedunculate, 
3- to 7-flowered, the terminal flowers not closely sessile, often 
pedicellate up to 3 mm M. fimbriata 

Veins, if apparent, slender and inconspicuously reticulate; pubes- 
cence and inflorescence various; terminal flowers usually 
closely sessile. 

Inflorescence stout, the peduncle 2-3.5 mm. wide near summit; 
flowers usually 3-7, large, the style 10-11 mm. long; north- 
ern Peru (Hudnuco, Cajamarca) to Colombia. 

Inflorescence usually reddish-purple, glabrous or essentially so. 

M. rhopaloides 

Inflorescence softly and densely tomentose with gray or yel- 
lowish-white hairs M . lanosa 

Inflorescence green or brownish in drying, glabrous or variously 
pubescent, more slender, the peduncle 2 mm. wide at sum- 
mit or usually less; flowers smaller, the style 8.5 mm. long 
or less. 

Inflorescence 7-flowered (or the smaller ones on the same plant 
3-flowered), or repeatedly branched and many-flowered; 



750 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

plants usually markedly strigose or otherwise pubescent, 
especially on the inflorescence and hypanthium. 

Inflorescence loosely pubescent or tomentose with soft 
curved or spreading hairs; dichasia usually with more 
than 7 flowers. 

Pubescence of whitish spreading hairs 0.5-1 mm. long; 
leaves mostly obovate, 5 cm. long or less; northern 
Peru (Huanuco, Cajamarca) M . lindleyana 

Pubescence of rufous curved matted hairs; leaves elliptic- 
ovate, 6.5-11 cm. long; Bolivia M. pearcei 

Inflorescence thinly appressed-puberulent or strigose with 
shorter hairs; leaves and number of flowers variable. 

Leaves less than 2 cm. long, obovate, cuneate; flowers 
small (style 3.5-4.5 mm. long), numerous in terminal 
clusters of 2- to 3-forked cymes; Bolivia. 

M. osteomeloides 

Leaves, if less than 2 cm. long, usually elliptic or sub- 
orbicular, rarely cuneate; style 5-7 mm. long; dicha- 
sia axillary, 3- to 7-flowered ; central Peru to Ecuador. 

Branchlets thinly appressed-puberulent; leaves elliptic- 
oblong, 2.5-5 cm. long; disk 3.5-4 mm. wide, the 
hairy staminal ring prominent; calyx-lobes 2.5-3 
mm. long; stamens more than 200; northern Peru 
(Piura) and Ecuador M. limbata 

Branchlets coarsely pubescent with spreading-ascend- 
ing hairs; leaves elliptic to suborbicular, 0.5-2 cm. 
long; disk 2.5 mm. wide, the staminal ring incon- 
spicuous, nearly glabrous; stamens 50-60; central 
Peru (Ayacucho, Apurimac) M. bifurcata 

Inflorescence 3-flowered (or if occasionally 7-flowered, gla- 
brous), or the flowers solitary in some or all of the axils; 
hypanthium glabrous or variously strigose. 

Hypanthium with strong longitudinal angles, the surface 
whitened with small soft hairs which are matted or 
felted together; leaves on flowering branches often sub- 
orbicular or nearly so, grayish-green beneath and 
appressed-pubescent with very short and partly di- 
brachiate hairs 0.1-0.2 mm. long; Cuzco. 

M. oreophila 



FLORA OF PERU 751 

Hypanthium not angled, glabrous or somewhat coarsely 
strigose; leaves various, rarely suborbicular, neither 
gray-green nor closely appressed-pubescent. 

Branchlets nearly or quite glabrous, sometimes thinly 
strigose; central and northern Peru to Colombia. 

Leaves obovate, euneate, 3 cm. wide, 5 cm. long; 
hypanthium glabrous, the peduncle minutely his- 
pidulous; stamens about 175 M. compressa 

Leaves mostly elliptic to ovate or suborbicular, often 
less than 5 cm. long; pubescence various, not as 
above. 

Stamens 250 to more than 300; inflorescence gla- 
brous; peduncle often 1.5 mm. wide or more at 
summit; calyx-lobes 2.5-5 mm. wide; petioles 
2-3 mm. long; Huanuco and Cuzco. 

M. indifferens 

Stamens 50-100; pubescence various; inflorescence 
sometimes glabrous but if so the calyx-lobes 
usually less than 2.5 mm. wide or the petioles 
3-5 mm. long; northern Peru to Colombia. 
Leaves 3-5 cm. long; petioles 3-5 mm. long; inflo- 
rescence, including base of hypanthium, gla- 
brous; northern Peru (Libertad, Cajamarca). 

M . discolor 

Leaves mostly less than 3 cm. long; petioles mostly 
less than 3 mm. long; inflorescence, at least 
the hypanthium, usually strigose. 

Hypanthium densely pale-strigose; peduncle 
1.5-2 mm. wide at summit; calyx-lobes 2.5- 
3 mm. wide; style 7-8.5 mm. long; Ecuador 
and southern Colombia, often cultivated. 

M. hallii 

Hypanthium glabrous or sparingly strigose; pe- 
duncle 1-1.2 mm. wide; calyx-lobes 1.5-2 
mm. wide; style 5-6 mm. long; central 
Colombia and (?) southern Ecuador. 

M. foliosa 

Branchlets with numerous appressed or spreading stiff 
hairs up to about 0.5 mm. long; central and southern 
Peru. 



752 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Inflorescence glabrous; stamens about 250-300; Hua- 
nuco and Cuzco M . indifferens 

Inflorescence rather densely strigose; stamens about 50; 
coastal hills, Arequipa M. ferreyrae 

Myrcianthes bifurcata (McVaugh) McVaugh, comb. nov. 
Eugenia bifurcata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 205. 1956. 

A shrub to 3 meters high, the branchlets, vegetative buds, and 
petioles thickly and coarsely pubescent with spreading or ascending 
yellowish or sordid hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, the inflorescence more 
sparsely pubescent, with finer and paler appressed hairs, the hypan- 
thium whitened or merely thinly strigose; branchlets eglandular; 
leaves elliptic or suborbicular to ovate or obovate, occasionally 
cuneate, 0.5-1.5 cm. wide, 0.5-2 cm. long, 1-1.5 (-2) times as long 
as wide, usually rounded or emarginate at tip but sometimes bluntly 
pointed, rounded or sometimes acute or cuneate at base; margins 
decurrent on the stout petiole 1-2 mm. long; midvein slightly im- 
pressed above and raised beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, obscure 
on both sides of the mature leaves or slightly elevated beneath; mar- 
ginal vein often obscure except in immature leaves, somewhat arched 
between the laterals, 0.5 mm. from the margin; blades darker green 
and somewhat lustrous above, impressed-punctate but often ob- 
scurely so; lower surface dull and paler, gland-dotted; flowers in 
terminal corymbose clusters, the individual inflorescences mostly 3- 
or 7-flowered dichasia 2-3 cm. long, the lower ones on short new 
leafy or abortive branchlets from the upper leaf-axils, and the upper 
ones arising directly as branches from the terminal shoot; peduncles 
compressed, up to 2 cm. long and more than 1 mm. wide at summit; 
lateral branches divaricate, 3-6 mm. long; bracts and bracteoles 
deciduous before or during anthesis, lanceolate, 2-3 mm. long; buds 
3-4 mm. long, the hypanthium campanulate; calyx-lobes in unequal 
pairs, rounded or bluntly triangular, 1.5-2 mm. wide and long, ciliate 
and (at least one or both of the outer pair) finely appressed-pubescent 
within; disk quadrangular, 2.5 mm. wide, the staminal ring slightly 
pubescent; style glabrous, 5-7 mm. long; stamens white, 50-60, 5-6 
mm. long, the anthers 0.4 mm. long; petals glabrous, greenish white 
(Stork & Horton), obovate, 4 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 
about 7 in each locule, radiating from a central placenta; fruit not 
seen. This species is evidently nearly akin to Myrcianthes osteome- 
loides but differs in a number of individually trivial respects, the 
most notable of which are set forth above in the key to species. 
Univ. of Mich. Neg. 440. 



FLORA OF PERU 753 

Apurimac: Valley of the Rio Pampas, elev. 2,600 meters, Weber- 
bauer 5842 (US, type). Pincos, elev. 2,700 meters, Stork & Horton 
10678. Ayacucho: Hills from River Pampas to Ocros, elev. 9,000- 
10,000 feet, R. Pearce s.n. 

Eugenia cartilaginea McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 205. 1956. 

A shrub or small tree 4-6 meters high, finely hispidulous on the 
branchlets, petioles and leaves near base with erect or somewhat 
appressed pale hairs 0.2-0.4 mm. long, strigose on the vegetative 
buds with somewhat longer hairs; leaves small and lustrous, ovate 
or elliptic, 7-15 mm. wide, 10-25 mm. long, 1.5-2 times as long as 
wide, rounded to acute and usually mucronate at tip, mostly cuneate 
at base, the margins attenuate into the petiole 1-2 mm. long; margins 
whitish, cartilaginous-thickened and somewhat revolute, often irreg- 
ularly roughened and appearing denticulate because of the promi- 
nently elevated glands; mid vein slightly sulcate above, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins indefinite, about 6-10 pairs, somewhat raised 
and evident on both sides in young leaves, usually obscure in mature 
leaves; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and markedly 
arched between them, mostly less than 1 mm. from the margin; 
leaves nearly concolorous, drying green or pale brown, the upper 
surface often very smooth and lustrous, eglandular at maturity or 
sparingly impressed-punctate, the lower surface somewhat lustrous, 
gland-dotted at least when young; flowers solitary, axillary, sub- 
tended by normal leaves or those from the lowest 1-2 nodes on a 
branchlet subtended by ovate strigose deciduous bracts about 1.5 
mm. long; pedicels filiform, somewhat compressed and up to 1 mm. 
wide just below the bracteoles, 10-20 (-32) mm. long, ascending or 
widely spreading; bracteoles linear-subulate, ciliate, 2-3 mm. long, 
deciduous at anthesis; hypanthium glabrous, obconic, 1.5-2 mm. 
long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, gland-dotted, ciliate, closely ap- 
pressed-pubescent on the inner surface, the larger 2.5-3 mm. wide, 
2-2.5 mm. long; disk 2.5-3 mm. wide, glabrous at the center; style 
5-6 mm. long, glabrous; petals white, obovate, ciliate, 4-5 mm. long; 
stamens about 75, 5-7 mm. long, the anthers 0.3-0.5 mm. long; 
ovary bilocular, the ovules 7-8 in each locule, radiating from a cen- 
tral placenta; fruit not seen. This species is very similar to E. 
orthostemon Berg, which ranges from central Ecuador to Colombia, 
chiefly in the central and western Cordilleras. In E. orthostemon, 
however, pubescence is of more general occurrence on the flowers 
and pedicels, the leaves are larger (up to 3.5 cm. wide and 6-7 cm. 
long) and lack the cartilaginous margins, prominent glands and 



754 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

mucronate tips which characterize the leaves of E. cartilaginea. The 
latter is similar in many respects, on the other hand, to E. myrsi- 
noides, from which it may be distinguished by the characters given 
in the key. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 445. 

Junin: Valley of the Rio Mantaro near Huachicna, elev. 2,300 
meters, Weberbauer 6548. Huancavelica: Pampas-Salcabamba trail, 
elev. 2,500 meters, Stork & Horton 10443 (F, type). 

Myrcianthes compressa (HBK.) McVaugh, comb. nov. Myr- 
tus compressa HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 135 (folio ed. p. 107). 1823. 
Eugenia? compressa (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 276. 1828. Amyrsia 
compressa (HBK.) Kausel, Ark. Bot. ser. 2, 3: 513. 1956. 

A tree or shrub with compressed branchlets, nearly glabrous, the 
young shoots finely pale-strigose, the peduncles finely bristly-pubes- 
cent, the petals and calyx-lobes ciliate; leaves obovate, up to 3 cm. 
wide and 5 cm. long, obtuse or rounded at the tip, the base cuneate 
and the margins decurrent on the channeled petiole 3-4 mm. long; 
midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 10-12 
pairs, rather inconspicuous, slightly elevated on both sides, more 
prominent beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and 
slightly arched between them, 1-1.5 mm. from the margin; blades 
lustrous, smooth and almost without apparent glands above, dull 
and paler, and usually gland-dotted beneath; inflorescence an axil- 
lary 3-flowered dichasium, the peduncle about 2.5 cm. long, com- 
pressed, slender, less than 1 mm. wide near the summit, the lateral 
branches 1.5-3 mm. long; bracts and bracteoles fallen before anthe- 
sis; buds 3.5-4 mm. long, glabrous, turbinate; [flowers said to be the 
same size as those of M. discolor, therefore the style 6-8 mm. long, the 
disk 3-3.5 mm. wide]; calyx glabrous, glandular-punctate (Kunth), 
the lobes unequal, concave, suborbicular, about 2.5-3 mm. wide; 
stamens about 175 (according to Kunth) ; petals (Kunth) suborbic- 
ular, concave, glabrous, much longer than the calyx; ovary (Kunth) 
bilocular, with about 15 centrally attached ovules in each locule. 
A doubtful species, apparently collected by Bonpland only, which 
seems closely related to Myrcianthes discolor but differs in having 
the leaves obovate and cuneate and the peduncle minutely bristly. 
See also a note under M. foliosa. F.M. Neg. 36879. 

Cajamarca: Near Cajamarca, Bonpland, type. 

Myrcianthes discolor (HBK.) McVaugh, comb. nov. Myrtus 
discolor HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 134 (folio ed. p. 107). 1823. 



FLORA OF PERU 755 

M. bicolor HBK. I.e. pi. 540. Eugenia? discolor (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 
3:277. 1828. 

Shrub up to 2 meters high, completely glabrous except the very 
youngest leaves which are sparingly strigose, the ciliate petals and 
calyx-lobes, the bristly stamen-ring and the appressed-pubescent 
inner surface of the calyx-lobes; leaves mostly elliptic, varying to 
ovate or obovate, 1.5-3.5 cm. wide, 3-5 cm. long, 1.5-2 times as long 
as wide; blades at tip acute or blunt or less often broadly short- 
acuminate, at base rounded or subcuneate, the margins shortly de- 
current on the stout petiole 3-5 mm. long; midvein impressed above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 10 pairs or fewer, somewhat raised 
on both surfaces, often obscure above in mature leaves; marginal 
vein continuous, 1-2 mm. from the margin, about equaling the lat- 
erals and somewhat arched between them; leaves often browning in 
drying, the upper surface smooth and markedly lustrous, sometimes 
sparingly impressed-punctate, the lower surface paler and dull, some- 
what gland-dotted; inflorescence a simple axillary dichasium, con- 
sistently 3-flowered, drying green or brownish, rarely purplish; 
peduncle slender, 1.5-3 (-5) cm. long, flattened distally, 1.5 (-1.8) 
mm. wide at summit; terminal flower ebracteolate and sessile, the 
lateral ones bracteolate and on slender divaricate bracteate pedicels 
C3-) 5-9 mm. long; bracts and bracteoles subulate or linear, 2-2.5 
mm. long, deciduous at anthesis or before, leaving prominent auricle- 
like scars; calyx-lobes 4, broadly rounded, strongly concave, about 
2.5 mm. wide, 2 mm. long; disk flat, 3-3.5 mm. wide, the center 
glabrous; style glabrous, or sparingly hairy when young, 6-8 mm. 
long; stamens about 90-100, 6-8 mm. long; petals white, turning 
rose in age, broadly elliptic, ciliate, 4-4.5 mm. long; fruit unknown. 
-F.M. Neg. 36886. 

Libertad: Abajo de Parcoy, 2,800 meters, Weberbauer 7085. 
Amazonas: Lamud, H. de Cavasco s.n. (USM 13158); Chachapoyas, 
Mathews 1452. Cajamarca: Celendin, subida del Maranon, Ferreyra 
11 SO. Prov. Cajamarca, elev. 2,750 meters, Velarde Nunez 3000. 
San Felipe, Provincia Jaen de Bracamoros, Bonpland, type. Between 
Huambos and Montan, 2,300-2,600 meters, Weberbauer 4213. 

Certain collections from southern Bolivia (Tarija, West 8312} are 
scarcely to be distinguished from M. discolor. The fruit is black- 
purple (West), with the seed 6-7 mm. long, the cotyledons distinct, 
fleshy, plano-convex, the radicle accumbent and about half as long 
as the seed. This Bolivian plant is apparently to be referred to 



756 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Eugenia pseudo-mato Legrand, originally described from northern 
Argentina (Lilloa 10: 477. 1944). 

Myrcianthes ferreyrae (McVaugh) McVaugh, comb. nov. 
Eugenia ferreyrae McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 209. 1956. 

A shrub, or a tree up to 6-7 meters high, the branchlets, vegetative 
buds, inflorescence and young leaves rather densely strigose with stiff 
straight appressed white or brownish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; 
branchlets somewhat compressed, those of the second year pale 
gray-brown, smooth; leaves broadly elliptic, ovate or obovate, 0.8- 
1.4 cm. wide, 1-2 cm. long, 1.2-1.9 times as long as wide, obtusely 
pointed to rounded or emarginate at tip, rounded to the base, where 
shortly decurrent on the channeled petiole 2-3 mm. long; mid vein 
impressed above near base, prominent beneath; minor veins incon- 
spicuous in mature leaves, apparent in young leaves, the laterals 
6-8 pairs, the marginal vein about equaling the laterals and arched 
between them, about 1 mm. from the margin; blades coriaceous, 
sometimes drying bluish- or grayish-green above and dark reddish- 
brown beneath; upper surface smooth, polished, sparingly impressed- 
puncticulate; lower surface dull, obscurely glandular at maturity 
(evidently so in young leaves); margins thickened and somewhat 
revolute; inflorescence a simple 3-flowered dichasium with the cen- 
tral flower sessile, or the lateral flowers mostly suppressed and nearly 
all the flowers solitary in the axils; peduncle 7-10 mm. long, distally 
compressed and 1 mm. wide at the summit; pedicels divaricate, 2-4 
mm. long; bracts and bracteoles apparently early deciduous; hypan- 
thium in anthesis probably campanulate, 2 mm. long; calyx-lobes 
conspicuous, coriaceous, broadly ovate or rounded to short-oblong 
with rounded or bluntly pointed tips, strigose within or glabrous in 
age, about 2.5 mm. wide at base, 2-3 mm. long; disk in post-anthesis 
3 mm. wide, glabrous; style 7-9 mm. long, glabrous; stamens prob- 
ably about 50, as long as the petals; anthers 0.5 mm. long; petals 
broadly elliptic or obovate, 4-5 mm. long, 4 mm. wide, glabrous 
without, sparingly strigose within, fringed at tips; ovary bilocular, 
the ovules about 15 in each locule, radiate in a subcapitate group 
attached to the central partition near the summit of the ovary; seeds 
1 or 2, about 7 mm. long, 5 mm. wide and 3 mm.(?) thick, with deli- 
cate membranaceous testa easily separated from the cotyledons and 
from the surrounding tissues; cotyledons unequal, plano-convex, 
nearly or quite distinct; plumule 1 mm. long, hairy; radicle accum- 
bent, tapering-cylindrical, about 0.5 mm. thick at base, 2.5 mm. 
long; fruit probably globose or nearly so, glabrous at maturity 



FLORA OF PERU 757 

(short-pubescent when young), about 7 mm. in diameter, crowned 
by the upright calyx-lobes. This species is of unusual interest, as 
coming from an arid area of southern cis-Andean Peru, where no 
other native species of Myrtaceae is known to occur. Univ. of Mich. 
Neg. 427. 

Arequipa: Prov. Caraveli, Lomas de Chaparra, 500-560 meters, 
falda de cerro, Oct. 19, 1946, Ramdn Ferreyra 1483 (USM, type). 
Southeast of the port of Chala, highway to Chaparra, 600-750 
meters, Ferreyra 11450. Prov. Camara, south of Chala, steep que- 
brada 5 km. from the ocean, 700-800 meters, Worth & Morrison 
15698. Without definite locality, Maclean (herb. Kew). 

Myrcianthes fimbriata (HBK.) McVaugh, comb. nov. Myrtus 
fimbriata HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 137 (folio ed. p. 109). 1823. 
Eugenia? fimbriata (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 278. 1828. 

A shrub or small tree, sparingly silky-strigose on the young leaves 
and branchlets and on the hypanthium and calyx (calyx-lobes heavily 
ciliate-fringed, and densely appressed-pubescent on the inner sur- 
face); leaves subrotund-ovate or subrotund-elliptic, 1.5-3.5 cm. 
wide, 2.8-5 cm. long, 1.2-2 times as long as wide, abruptly short- 
acuminate with deltoid tip, or merely obtuse and mucronate, rounded 
at base and the margins decurrent on the inner angles of the deeply 
channeled but nearly terete petiole 1 (-2) mm. thick, 6-7 mm. long; 
midvein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 10 
pairs, obscure above, evident beneath but scarcely more prominent 
than the prominently reticulate small veins; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals and strongly arched between them, 0.5-3 mm. 
from the margin; all the veins of the lower surface enlarged, some- 
what raised in a conspicuous reticulum, the margins of the veinlets 
not sharp but appearing as if fused and softened ; blades concolorous, 
lustrous, eglandular; inflorescence a slender axillary 3- to 7-flowered 
dichasium, the peduncles 4.5-9 cm. long, compressed, up to 2.5 mm. 
wide near the summit, the lateral branches 1-2 cm. long, often uni- 
lateral and often strongly ascending; terminal flowers not closely 
sessile, their pedicels up to 3 mm. long; bracteoles linear, 3 mm. 
long, deciduous, like the bracts, before anthesis; buds 4-5 mm. long, 
pyriform, the hypanthium narrowly campanulate; calyx-lobes bluntly 
triangular, subequal, about 2 mm. long and wide; disk 3 mm. wide, 
sparingly pilose; style 4.5-5 mm. long; stamens about 75, 5-6.5 mm. 
long, the anthers 0.4 mm. long; petals obovate-elliptic, ciliate-fringed 
and pubescent outside, 3.5-4.5 mm. wide, 5.5 mm. long; ovary (ac- 
cording to Kunth) bilocular, with about 15 ovules in each locule, 



758 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

these affixed to the convex placentae on the central axis; fruit not 
seen. This species, readily recognized at sight because of the dis- 
tinctive venation of the leaves, is known only from the collections 
cited below, which are geographically widely separated. The type 
locality of Myrtus fimbriata was not stated specifically by Kunth, 
who wrote merely "Crescit cum praecedente" [i.e. with Myrtus lim- 
bata, stated by Kunth to have come from Ayavaca]. It is possible 
that the type specimens of M. fimbriata were taken by Bonpland 
not at Ayavaca but at some more southern locality on the explorers' 
route to Lima, e.g. at some point near Trujillo where they approached 
the coast; Weberbauer's locality for the plant is in this same general 
area. F.M. Neg. 36889. 

[Piura: Ayavaca], Bonpland, type (see discussion above). Liber- 
tad: Entre Usquil y la Hacienda Capachique, 2,800-2,900 m., monte 
bajo compuesto de arbustos, July 10, 1914, Weberbauer 7003. 
Amazonas: Huancas ["Guancas"], Mathews 1450. Cajamarca: La 
Colmena-Llama (Cutervo), 9000 feet, Sandeman 4138, 4149. 

Myrcianthes foliosa (HBK.) McVaugh, comb. nov. Myrtus 
foliosa HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 134 (folio ed. p. 106). 1823. Euge- 
nia? foliosa (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 277. 1828. Amyrsia foliosa 
(HBK.) Kausel, Ark. Bot ser. 2, 3: 513. 1956. 

Shrub 0.5-2 meters high, or treelike, up to 4 meters high, usually 
nearly glabrous, the branchlets, young leaves, and inflorescence spar- 
ingly strigose with pale hairs up to 0.3 mm. long; leaves often approx- 
imate, nearly sessile, variable in shape, broadly elliptic to ovate or 
rotund, 0.8-2.5 cm. wide, 1.2-4 cm. long, 1.5-2 times as long as 
wide, or occasionally as wide as long; blades acutely pointed (and 
then often mucronate), or rounded or less often emarginate at tip, 
rounded or somewhat cordate at base, the margins decurrent on the 
very short stout petiole which is 1-2 mm. thick, 1-2 (-3) mm. long, 
somewhat dorso-ventrally compressed; midvein somewhat impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 10 pairs or fewer, slightly 
raised on both surfaces or often obscure; marginal vein continuous, 
about equaling the laterals but often curved and appearing as a 
series of arches between the adjacent veins, the greatest distance 
from the margin 0.5-1.5 mm.; leaves often browning in drying, the 
upper surface smooth and markedly lustrous, the lower dull, spar- 
ingly gland-dotted; inflorescence a simple axillary dichasium, regu- 
larly 3-flowered but occasionally 1-flowered by abortion of the lateral 
buds, and rarely 7-flowered by proliferation of these buds; peduncle 
10-20 (-25) mm. long or reduced to 4 mm. in 1-flowered dichasia, 



FLORA OF PERU 759 

compressed below the summit and there 1-1.2 mm. wide; terminal 
flower ebracteolate and sessile, the lateral ones bracteolate and on 
bracteate divaricate pedicels 3-4.5 (-6) mm. long; bracts usually 
deciduous before anthesis, glabrous, subulate, 2.5-3.5 mm. long, or 
rarely linear, 1 mm. wide and 6 mm. long; bracteoles usually decid- 
uous before anthesis, like the bracts but often slightly shorter, both 
bracts and bracteoles leaving prominent auricle-like scars at abscis- 
sion; calyx-lobes 4, in slightly unequal pairs, appressed-pubescent 
within, ciliate, bluntly triangular, 1.5-2 mm. long and wide; disk 
with slightly depressed center, glabrous, somewhat 4-angled, 2.5 mm. 
wide; style glabrous, often uncinate, 5-6 mm. long; stamens about 
50, 4-5 mm. long; anthers about 0.5 mm. long; petals white, elliptic, 
ciliate, 4.5-5 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 10-15 in each 
locule, radiate in a subcapitate group affixed to the central axis; 
fruit smooth, globose or oblate, 5-7 mm. thick, orange-red when ripe 
(Popenoe) ; cotyledons distinct, plano-convex; plumule present; rad- 
icle about half as long as the cotyledons. This species is well known 
and has been often collected in central Colombia, from Cundina- 
marca to Santander del Norte. A collection from southern Ecuador 
(San Vicente, Espinosa E-1285) has been tentatively referred here 
but also resembles M. compressa in having leaves which tend to be 
cuneate at base. The description given above is based on Colom- 
bian specimens. F.M. Neg. 36888. 

Peru (possibly). Central Colombia and (?) Ecuador. 

Myrcianthes hallii (Berg) McVaugh, comb. nov. Eugenia 
hallii Berg, Linnaea 27: 250. 1856. Amyrsia hallii (Berg) Kausel, 
Ark. Bot. ser. 2, 3: 513. 1956. 

Shrub or tree to 8 meters high, nearly glabrous, the branchlets, 
young leaves and inflorescence sometimes sparingly pale-strigose; 
hypanthium densely pale-strigose; leaves sometimes approximate, 
ovate or broadly elliptic, 0.8-2 cm. wide, 1.3-2.7 cm. long, 1.3-1.8 
times as long as wide; blades broadly and bluntly short-acuminate 
to rounded or merely acute at tip, the base rounded and shortly 
cuneate, the margins decurrent on the stout petiole 1.5-3 mm. long; 
midvein impressed above, slightly raised beneath; lateral veins 5-8 
pairs, slightly raised on both surfaces, or usually obscure; marginal 
vein obscure, about 1 mm. from the margin, arching between the 
laterals; leaves often browning in drying, the upper surface smooth 
and markedly lustrous, the lower dull; glands apparent in young 
leaves, but at maturity inconspicuous, often apparent beneath, the 
upper surface sparingly impressed -punctate or smooth; inflorescence 



760 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

an axillary dichasium, regularly 3-flowered, sometimes 1-flowered; 
peduncle (5-) 10-20 mm. long, flattened near the summit and there 
1.5-2 mm. wide; terminal flower ebracteolate and sessile, the lateral 
ones bracteolate and on bracteate divaricate pedicels (1-) 2.5-4 mm. 
long; bracts and bracteoles usually deciduous before an thesis, leav- 
ing prominent auricle-like scars at abscission, the bracteoles lanceo- 
late, 2 mm. long, acute; calyx-lobes 4, glabrous or nearly so without, 
appressed-pubescent within, ciliate, broadly rounded to bluntly trian- 
gular, 3 mm. long, 2.5-3 mm. wide; disk 3 mm. wide, with depressed 
glabrous center, somewhat 4-angled, the staminal ring somewhat 
hairy; style glabrous, 7-8.5 mm. long; stamens about 50, up to 8-9 
mm. long; petals white, elliptic, 5-6 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the 
ovules 6-11 in each locule, attached above the middle of the central 
axis and tending to be pendent; fruit purple (Hall), smooth or nearly 
so, globose or oblate, about 1 cm. in diameter, about 2-seeded; cotyle- 
dons distinct, plano-convex; plumule present, small; radicle stout, 
accumbent, 2 mm. long. 

Peru (probably). Central Ecuador to southern Colombia, often 
cultivated. 

A plant, known from but a single collection (Marin, no. 1581, 
from an elevation of 3,700 meters, near Penas, Cuzco, Peru), is sim- 
ilar but differs in some respects and may represent a distinct species. 
The branchlets and the whole inflorescence are heavily strigose with 
pale hairs, the style and stamens are more than 10 mm. long, and the 
stamens are probably more than 100 in number. 

Myrcianthes indifferens (McVaugh) McVaugh, comb. nov. 
Eugenia indifferens McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 211. 1956. 

A tree or shrub, glabrous or the branchlets and at least the young 
leaves pubescent with appressed or irregularly spreading pale or 
brownish stiff hairs up to 0.6 mm. long, the inflorescence always gla- 
brous or very nearly so; leaves ovate to broadly elliptic or subor- 
bicular, rigidly coriaceous, 1-2 cm. wide, 1.3-3 cm. long (on older 
branches up to 4.5 cm. wide, 6 cm. long), 1.3-1.5 (1-2) times as long 
as wide, the tips blunt-pointed, rounded or retuse, the base rounded 
and the margins decurrent on the flattened and channeled petiole 
1-2 mm. wide, 2-3 mm. long; midvein impressed above at least near 
base, prominent beneath; lateral veins 8-10 pairs, with some addi- 
tional intermediate ones, obscure on both sides but sometimes slightly 
elevated, the marginal vein obscure, slightly arched between the 
laterals, about 1-2 mm. from the margin; blades smooth and lus- 



FLORA OF PERU 761 

trous above, paler and dull beneath; glandular dots not apparent in 
mature leaves; inflorescence axillary on new leafy branches, the pe- 
duncles (5-) 10-20 mm. long, compressed, up to 1.5-2 mm. wide at 
apex, a few 1-flowered, or those in the lower axils 2- or 3-flowered 
with the central flower sessile, the lateral ones on pedicels (1-) 4-8 
mm. long; bracts and bracteoles ciliate, subulate, 2 mm. long or 
more, mostly deciduous before anthesis and leaving prominent pro- 
jecting auriculate scars; buds 3-6 mm. long, obovoid, the hypan- 
thium broadly obconic, smooth, glabrous; calyx-lobes 1.5-2 mm. 
long, silky inside, sometimes obscurely cuspidate, in unequal pairs, 
the outer pair thicker, sometimes rounded-triangular, 2.5-4 mm. 
wide, the inner broadly rounded, ciliate, with thin margins, 3-5 mm. 
wide; disk 3.5-4 mm. wide, glabrous or the staminal ring hairy; style 
6.5-8 mm. long; stamens about 250 to more than 300, up to 8 mm. 
long, the anthers 0.4-0.6 mm. long; petals obovate, fringed, 5-8 mm. 
long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 18-20 in each locule, radiate in a 
subcapitate group affixed to the central axis. Univ. of Mich. Negs. 
442, 1093. 

Huanuco: Sierra de Chaqlla, region of Huanuco and Panao, 
10,000 feet, Sandeman 5103. Cuzco: Urubamba Valley, Hacienda 
Fanccac, 2760 meters, Sept. 10, 1928, F. L. Herrera 2099 (US, type). 

The collection by Sandeman (Herb. Kew) differs from the type 
in being completely glabrous and in having the flowers very slightly 
larger in most parts. The two collections agree well in other charac- 
ters, however, and in the large number of stamens, a feature unique 
in this group of Myrcianthes. 

Myrcianthes lanosa McVaugh, sp. nov. 

Arbor tomentosa, foliis 3.5-8 cm. longis coriaceis, late ellipticis 
vel obovatis, rotundatis retusisve, vel obtuse acuminatis; venis in- 
conspicuis, nervo medio supra ad basin paullo impresso; dichasio 
plerumque 7-floro, floribus in dichotomis sessilibus, hypanthiis longi- 
tudinaliter sulcatis; pedunculo 3-6 cm. longo, compresso, apicem 
versus usque ad 2-3 mm. lato; alabastris 8-9 mm. longis; stylo piloso 
11 mm. longo. 

A tree, softly and densely tomentose, the young growth, inflores- 
cence and lower leaf surface (at least when young) covered with gray 
or yellowish-white crisped hairs up to 1 mm. long; leaves rigidly cori- 
aceous, broadly elliptic or obovate, 2.5-5 cm. wide, 3.5-8 cm. long, 
1.4-2 times as long as wide, rounded or even retuse to bluntly acumi- 
nate at tip, rounded at base and then finally attenuate, the margins 



762 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

involute when dry, shortly decurrent on the compressed tomentose 
petiole 1.5-2 mm. wide, 7-10 mm. long; midvein slightly impressed 
above at base, tardily glabrate; lateral veins about 10 pairs, scarcely 
distinguishable from the intermediate ones, slightly raised above the 
upper surface, and similarly on the lower; marginal vein about equal- 
ing the laterals and forming short angular arches between them, 
2-5 mm. from the margin; blades glossy as if varnished above, dull 
and paler beneath, with glands not apparent on either surface; inflo- 
rescence an axillary dichasium, usually 7-flowered (by reduction 3- 
to 6-flowered), the peduncle 3-6 cm. long, compressed distally and 
there 2-3 mm. wide; secondary peduncles divaricate, 3-10 mm. long; 
bracts deciduous before anthesis; bracteoles linear-elliptic, blunt- 
pointed, 0.7 mm. wide, 2 mm. long; buds 8-9 mm. long, obconic, 
the conic hypanthium 4-5 mm. long, its 4 prominent angles alter- 
nating with the calyx-lobes and 4 lesser angles between; calyx-lobes 
4, in unequal pairs, lanate outside, finely and densely so inside, the 
outer pair broadly ovate-triangular, bluntly pointed, 4 mm. long 
and wide, the inner pair broadly rounded, thin-margined, 5 mm. 
wide and 4 mm. long; disk about 5 mm. wide, tomentose; style hairy, 
11 mm. long; stamens 250-300, up to 7-8 mm. long, the anthers 
0.6 mm. long; petals obovate, glabrous, about 7 mm. wide, 8 mm. 
long; ovary bitocular, the ovules about 15 in each locule, radiate in 
a subcapitate group attached near the middle of the central partition; 
fruit not seen. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 1099. 

Cajamarca: Llama (Cutervo), 8000 feet elevation, full exposure, 
C. Sandeman 4%14 (herb. Kew, type). 

Myrcianthes limbata (HBK.) McVaugh, comb. nov. Myrtus 
limbata HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 136 (folio ed. p. 108). 1823. 
Eugenia? limbata (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 278. 1828. Amyrsia lim- 
bata (HBK.) Kausel, Ark. Bot. ser. 2, 3: 513. 1956. 

A small, compactly branched tree, thinly (the hypanthium 
densely) appressed-puberulent with pale sordid straight hairs 0.2- 
0.3 mm. long; leaves elliptic-oblong, 1.5-2.5 cm. wide, 2.5-5 cm. 
long, mostly 1.6-2 times as long as wide, about equally narrowed to 
the bluntly short-acuminate or acute tip and to the acute base, the 
margins thickened, decurrent on the channeled petiole 1 mm. thick, 
3-5 mm. long; midvein slightly impressed above near base, promi- 
nent beneath; lateral veins about 10 pairs, with some additional 
intermediate veins, somewhat elevated on both sides; marginal vein 
a little weaker than the laterals and arched between them, 1-2 mm. 
from the margin; blades coriaceous, dark green, smooth and some- 



FLORA OF PERU 763 

what lustrous above, with glands scarcely apparent in mature leaves; 
lower surface paler, dull, dotted with dark glands; inflorescence an 
axillary 3- to 7-flowered dichasium, these sometimes aggregated near 
the tips of the branches; peduncles 1.5-2.5 cm. long, somewhat com- 
pressed, about 1.5 mm. thick near the summit; lateral branches 
divaricate, 4-7 mm. long; pedicels, if developed, about 3 mm. long; 
sessile terminal flowers present and conspicuous; bracts and bracte- 
oles deciduous before anthesis; buds 5-6 mm. long, pyriform, the 
hypanthium campanulate, whitened by the thickly appressed hairs; 
calyx-lobes 2.5-3 mm. long and wide, reflexed in anthesis, markedly 
unequal, the outer pair bluntly triangular, longer than wide, the 
inner pair broadly rounded, thin-margined, wider than long; all lobes 
sparingly puberulent and gland-dotted outside, finely appressed- 
pubescent inside; disk quadrangular, 3.5-4 mm. wide, the short- 
hairy staminal ring very broad and large in proportion, 1-1.5 mm. 
wide, the depressed center of the disk 1.5 mm. wide, pilose; style 
6-7 mm. long, hairy near base; stamens yellowish white (Espinosa), 
about as long as the style, very numerous (about 230 according to 
Kunth), the anthers 0.3 mm. long; petals about 5 mm. long, sub- 
orbicular, concave, appressed-silky inside; ovary bilocular with each 
locule containing about 16 ovules attached to the central axis 
(Kunth); fruit not seen, purple (Espinosa). A species seemingly 
of limited geographical distribution, thus far known only from the 
type, and from a collection made by Espinosa (no. 1334) in south- 
ern Ecuador about 75 km. north of the type locality. F.M. Neg. 
36892. 

Piura: Ayavaca, Bonpland (type). Southern Ecuador. A speci- 
men from Rio San Bernardo, Junin, Weberbauer 6558 (NY; US, p.p.} 
is perhaps of this species but the plants are in over-mature fruit and 
indeterminable. 

Myrcianthes lindleyana (HBK.) McVaugh, comb. nov. Myr- 
tus lindleyana HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 138 (folio ed. p. 110). 1823. 
Eugenia? lindleyana (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 278. 1828. 

A compact, densely branched shrub or tree to 3.5 meters high, 
the trunk sometimes more than 30 cm. in diameter (Macbride); 
youngest growth and inflorescence heavily pubescent with soft whit- 
ish spreading hairs 0.5-1 mm. long; leaves glabrous or with a few 
hairs persisting beneath, obovate or elliptic, 1-2.5 cm. wide, 1.5-3.5 
(-5) cm. long, 1.5-2 times as long as wide, rounded or retuse or 
sometimes bluntly pointed at the tip, acute or cuneate at the base, 
the strongly thickened margins decurrent on the stout pale com- 



764 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

pressed petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 2-2.5 mm. long; midvein impressed 
above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 5-10 pairs, slightly elevated 
both sides or a little impressed above; marginal vein about equaling 
the laterals and arched between them, 1-2 mm. from the margin; 
blades smooth and lustrous above, dull and paler beneath, the glands 
not apparent in mature leaves; dichasia up to about 5 cm. long, 
2 to 3 times compound, axillary or forming a subcorymbose terminal 
cluster; peduncles 2-3.5 cm. long, flattened distally and 2 mm. wide 
near the summit, with 2 or usually 4 subequal branches in addition 
to the terminal sessile flower; flowers mostly near tips of branches, 
nearly sessile; bracts and bracteoles deciduous about at anthesis, 
2-4 mm. long, lanceolate or subulate, sparingly pubescent; buds 4-6 
mm. long, the hypanthium narrowly campanulate; calyx-lobes in 2 
unequal pairs, the tips gland-dotted and sometimes glabrate, the 
inner surface appressed-pubescent; inner pair broader, suborbicular, 
2-3 mm. wide and about as long, ciliate-f ringed; disk about 3 mm. 
wide, glabrous except the sparingly hairy staminal ring; style about 
as long as the stamens, glabrous; stamens about 75 (about 140, 
according to Kunth), up to at least 7 mm. long, the anthers 0.5 mm. 
long; petals glabrous, obovate, 4 mm. long, ciliate; ovary 2- (or 3-?) 
locular, with about 20 ovules in each locule, these radiating from a 
short placenta on the central axis; fruit not seen. F.M. Neg. 36893. 
Cajamarca: San Felipe, prov. Jaen de Bracamoros, Bonpland, type. 
?Huanuco: Mito, Macbride & Featherstone 1574- "Carapachu." 

Eugenia minimifolia McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 213. 1956. 

A much-branched sclerophyllous shrub 2 meters high, with the 
numerous white flowers near the tips of the branches; branchlets, 
inflorescence, and young leaves closely appressed-strigose with gray 
or brownish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves vernicose, coriaceous, 
obovate or elliptic, 2-3.5 mm. wide, 2.5-6 mm. long, 1.5-2 times as 
long as wide, round-tipped to obtusely pointed or emarginate, some- 
times with a blunt terminal glandular mucro which may be slightly 
sub terminal and dorsal; base of blades rounded and the margins 
shortly decurrent on the stout compressed black petiole 0.5-0.6 mm. 
thick, 1-1.5 mm. long; blades often involute toward the base and 
appearing cuneately narrowed when dry; midvein obscure above ex- 
cept near base, prominent on lower surface; lateral and marginal 
veins not apparent; leaves drying yellowish green, varnished above, 
concolorous, the upper surface impressed-punctate, the lower dull, 
impressed-punctate, with raised and somewhat lustrous midvein and 
strongly thickened, somewhat involute margins; flowers solitary, 



FLORA OF PERU 765 

axillary, the pedicels in anthesis stout, compressed, 2-3 mm. long 
and 0.5 mm. thick; bracteoles lanceolate, glabrous or nearly so, per- 
sistent through anthesis, about 1 mm. long/appressed to the broadly 
obconic base of the hypanthium; buds 3.5 mm. long, the hypanthium 
less than half this, densely strigose; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 
about 1.7 mm. wide, 1 mm. long, glabrous both sides; disk some- 
what quadrangular, more than 1.5 mm. wide, glabrous; style 5.5-6 
mm. long, glabrous; stamens about 125, up to 6 mm. long, the an- 
thers 0.4 mm. long; petals oblong-obovate, about 3 mm. wide, 4 mm. 
long; fruit not seen; ovary bilocular, with about 10 ovules on each 
face of an axile placenta. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 443. 

Huancavelica: Prov. Tayacaja, Cerros en el lado izquierdo del 
Rio Mantaro, encima del puente de Chiquiac, 2,600-2,700 meters, 
low open mountain sides covered with evergreen shrubs, Mar. 15, 
1913, A. Weberbauer 6500 (US, type). 

Eugenia myrsinoides (HBK.) Burret, ex Diels, in Biblioth. 
Bot. Heft 116: 115. 1937; Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berl. 15: 495. 1941. 
Myrtus myrsinoides HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 132 (folio ed. p. 105). 
1823. Myrteola myrsinoides (HBK.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 396. 1856. 
Eugenia Weberbaueri Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 598. 1906, in part? 

A shrub 1-3 meters high, nearly glabrous, the young growth spar- 
ingly or densely and the leaves and hypanthium sometimes sparingly, 
strigose with pale or blackish flexuous hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; 
leaves coriaceous, broadly elliptic or obovate, 3.5-11 mm. wide, 7-16 
mm. long, 1.5-2.4 times as long as wide, the tip bluntly pointed, 
rounded or emarginate, the base cuneate, the margins thickened, 
decurrent on the stout petiole 1 mm. thick, 1.5-2 mm. long; midvein 
usually impressed above, prominent beneath, the other veins obscure, 
hardly apparent in dried specimens; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, the 
marginal vein less than 0.5 mm. from the margin; blades smooth 
and lustrous above, green, darkening in drying, without evident 
glands; lower surface drying greenish-brown, roughened by small 
dark glands; flowers solitary, axillary, the pedicels 2-6 (-15) mm. 
long, compressed distally and there nearly 1 mm. wide; bracteoles 
deciduous at anthesis, linear-subulate, 2-2.5 mm. long; bud 4-6 mm. 
long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 2-2.5 (-3) mm. wide, 2-2.5 mm. 
long, sparingly strigose or glabrous within; disk 2-2.5 mm. wide, 
glabrous, somewhat quadrangular; style 5 (-9) mm. long; stamens 
75-100, the filaments white, 4-5 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 mm. long; 
petals concave, nearly orbicular, white, about 6 mm. long. An im- 
perfectly known species, of uncertain generic position, but probably 



766 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

related to E. cartilaginea and to E. triquetra (see pp. 754, 774). 
Weberbauer's no. 4244, which is slightly more pubescent than the 
other collections cited below, has longer pedicels and slightly larger 
flowers also, but seems otherwise closely similar. F.M. Negs. 23599, 
36896. 

Piura: Paramo de Guamani, between Ayavaca and Huanca- 
bamba, Bonpland, type. Cajamarca: Between Cajamarca and 
Celendin, 3,300-3,400 meters, Weberbauer 4244, syntype of E. weber- 
baueri; [above San Pablo, Weberbauer 3811, syntype of E. weber- 
baueri, herb. Berlin, not seen]. Locality uncertain: Hua[t?]asco, 
Fl. H[uayaquilensis], nos. 441, 947, anno 1809 (herb. Barbey-Bois- 
sier, coll. Tafalla?). Southern Ecuador. "Zhiripi" (Steyermark), 
"Rumilanche" (Weberbauer). 

Eugenia myrtomimeta Diels, Engl. Bot. Jahrb. 37: 598. 1906. 

Shrub or small tree to 10 meters high, pubescent on the branch- 
lets, vegetative buds, and peduncles, and sparingly on the hypan- 
thium and on the younger leaves, especially midveins and margins, 
with colorless or pale yellowish erect or antrorsely curved hairs up 
to 0.5 mm. long; branchlets yellowish-brown, usually prominently 
glandular-dotted; leaves elliptic or occasionally obovate, 5-13 mm. 
wide, 13-25 mm. long, 2-2.3 times as long as wide, about equally 
narrowed to both ends, acutely pointed from near or above the 
middle, rounded or subcuneate at base, the margins slightly decur- 
rent on the stout petiole up to nearly 1 mm. thick, 1-1.5 (-2) mm. 
long; mid vein narrowly and inconspicuously impressed above, prom- 
inent beneath, the other veins obscure; lateral veins 4-5 pairs, dis- 
tant, arched distally and forming a marginal vein 1-2 mm. from the 
margin; blades drying pale yellowish-green, nearly concolorous, the 
upper surface lustrous, sparingly and usually inconspicuously im- 
pressed-puncticulate, the lower surface conspicuously glandular when 
young, obscurely so in age; flowers solitary, axillary, the pedicels 
filiform, (7-) 12-20 mm. long, 0.5 mm. thick, sparsely tuberculate 
with raised glandular dots; bracteoles strigose, linear, 0.3 mm. wide, 
2-2.5 mm. long, scarious, falling before anthesis when the buds are 
unexpanded and about as long as the bracteoles (rarely foliaceous, 
1 mm. wide, 4 mm. long, subpersistent) ; mature buds 6-7 mm. long, 
the hypanthium obconic, prolonged at base into a poorly defined 
pseudostalk up to 0.5 mm. long; calyx-lobes rounded, ciliate, gla- 
brous both sides, sometimes longer than wide, 2-3.5 mm. wide, 3-4 
mm. long; disk 4-angled, glabrous, about 2 mm. wide; style glabrous, 
5.5-7 mm. long; stamens 150-175, up to about 7 mm. long, the an- 



FLORA OF PERU 767 

thers 0.4 mm. long; petals obovate, ciliate, 6 mm. wide, 8-9 mm. 
long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 4-6 in each locule, ascending in 2 
parallel rows on a centrally affixed placenta. I am unable to find 
even the most trivial point of difference by which to separate this 
species from the Chilean Myrceugenella chequen (Mol.) Kausel; 
Burret (Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berl. 15: 523. 1941) has also called 
attention to this similarity. Unfortunately all the numerous Peru- 
vian specimens are in young flower only, and it has not been feasible 
to study the cotyledonary structure. It is possible that the Chilean 
plant was introduced into Peru at an early date and has subsequently 
spread widely in the highlands, in part through the agency of culti- 
vation. Peruvian collections are noted variously as having come 
from cultivation, from roadsides, hedgerows, or near cultivated 
ground, but some have been taken from river banks and other 
native habitats. Curiously little variation is apparent among the 
Peruvian collections, practically all of which could have come from 
the same plant as far as their external features indicate; this suggests 
that many or most of the plants in Peru may have come from a 
relatively few original introductions. U. S. Nat. Herb. Neg. 4460. 

Ancash: Huaras, 3,050-3,100 meters, Proano 113. Junin: Inter 
Tarma et Palca ["Palea"], Weberbauer 1737 (USM; type, herb. 
Berol., not seen). Between Palca and Acobamba, Esposto (USM). 
Tarma, 3,000-3,200 meters, Kittip & Smith 21910. Valley of Tarma, 
Mathews 887. Above Huariaca, alt. 3,000 meters, Seibert 2208. 
Huanuco: Mito, Macbride & Featherstone 1374, 1943. Tomaiqui- 
chua, 3 miles below Mito, 8,500 feet, Macbride & Featherstone 2424- 
Lima: Lima, gardens, Mathews 390. San Mateo, Prov. Huaro- 
chiri, alt. 3,000 meters, Goodspeed 33131, Ridoutt (USM 11422). 
Cuzco: Above Paucartambo, 12,000 feet, Balls 6798. Paucartambo, 
3,300 meters, Woytkowski 221 . Urubamba, 9,590 feet, Pentland (herb. 
Kew) . Ollantaytambo, 3,000 meters, Cook & Gilbert 769. Arequipa : 
Arequipa, hedge plant at Harvard Observatory, Cook & Gilbert 62. 
"Arrayan," "arrayan de Castilla." 

Myrcianthes oreophila (Diels) McVaugh, comb. nov. Eugenia 
oreophila Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 597. 1906. 

Tree 5-8 meters high, the young branchlets, vegetative buds, 
leaves and inflorescence conspicuously and often densely beset with 
closely appressed sordid white soft straight hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, 
the hairs often arachnoid-aggregated or matted, those on the under 
surface of the leaf at least in part dibrachiate, and often very short 



768 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

(0.1-0.2 mm.), the closely appressed and matted hairs sometimes 
giving a slight lustre and an appearance as of a greasy or graphite- 
covered surface; leaves ovate to orbicular or reniform, 1-3 cm. wide, 
1-4.5 cm. long, sometimes wider than long, but up to 1.7 times as 
long as wide (up to 4 cm. wide and 6 cm. long on shoots, where often 
ovate and shortly deltoid-acuminate), those nearest the base of the 
branchlets often smaller and suborbicular; blades blunt-pointed or 
rounded at tip, rounded at base, the margins thickened, somewhat 
cuneately decurrent on the stout petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 2.5-4 mm. 
long; mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 5-8 
pairs, obscure above, elevated beneath; marginal vein slightly weaker 
than the laterals, comprising a series of short arches between them, 
1-2 mm. from the margin; blades drying rigidly coriaceous, polished 
and pale olive-green above (or darker in immature leaves), dull and 
grayish-brown beneath; glands apparent above in young leaves, usu- 
ally not seen in mature leaves; inflorescence an axillary 3-flowered 
dichasium, the central flower sessile, or the whole reduced to a single 
flower; peduncle 10-15 mm. long, compressed distally, 1-2 mm. wide 
near the summit; bracts linear, 1 mm. wide, 6 mm. long; lateral 
pedicels up to 6 mm. long; bracteoles linear-subulate or lanceolate, 
deciduous after an thesis, nearly glabrous, somewhat keeled, 2-4 mm. 
long; hypanthium densely white-hairy, 3-4 mm. long, obpyramidal, 
strongly 4-angled or with additional smaller intermediate angles; 
calyx-lobes deltoid, blunt-tipped, 3.5-4 mm. wide at base, about 3.5 
mm. long, strigose without, sparingly strigose or nearly glabrous 
within; disk about 5 mm. wide, hairy near center; style glabrous, 
7-8 mm. long; stamens about 150, up to 8 mm. long, the anthers 
0.5 mm. long; petals obovate, about 7 mm. long; ovary bilocular, 
the ovules about 10 in each locule, in a subcapitate group attached 
above the middle of the central axis; fruit probably ellipsoid when 
mature; cotyledons distinct, plano-convex; plumule present; radicle 
about 2 mm. long, probably accumbent. 

Cuzco: Pinasniocj, Panticalla Pass, 3,600 meters alt., Cook & 
Gilbert 1231, 1863, 1887. Urubamba Valley, Hacienda Fanccac, 
2,760 meters, Herrera 2099 p.p. (US 1422429). Ollantaytambo, 
Cook & Gilbert 385, 486, 542; Herrera 3382, 3424- Valle Lares, 
Urubamba, Soukup 37. Urubamba, Soukup 566. Above Piri, way 
to Sta. Ana, 3,400 meters, Weberbauer 4937 (type, herb. Berlin, 
not seen). 

Myrcianthes osteomeloides (Rusby) McVaugh, comb. nov. 
Myrtus osteomeloides Rusby, Mem. Torr. Bot. Club 6: 36. 1896. 



FLORA OF PERU 769 

Myrtus myrciopsis 0. Ktze. Rev. Gen. 3, pt. 2: 92. 1898. Eugenia 
myrciopsis (0. Ktze.) K. Schum. in Just, Bot. Jahresb. 26, pt. 1: 
359. 1900. Eugenia osteomeloides (Rusby) McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 
29: 214. 1956. 

Densely branched shrub to 3 meters high, the vegetative parts 
glabrous or the leaf-buds, young leaves and branchlets sparingly or 
densely gray-strigose; inflorescence whitened by loosely appressed 
gray or yellowish hairs up to 0.3 mm. long; branchlets roughened 
with prominent elevated brownish glands which persist as the sur- 
rounding cortex sloughs off; leaves obovate, coriaceous, small, 3-7 
(-10) mm. wide, 8-17 mm. long, usually about twice as long as wide 
(1.6-2.8), rounded or emarginate at the tips, cuneate at the base, 
narrowed to the stout petiole 1-2 mm. long; mid vein slightly im- 
pressed above and raised beneath; lateral veins about 6-10 pairs, 
obscure, sometimes slightly raised and apparent on the upper sur- 
face, usually invisible beneath; marginal vein obscure; blades lus- 
trous as if varnished above, and there dotted with sometimes 
impressed glands, dull and gland-dotted beneath; inflorescence a 
terminal cluster of about 100 flowers or less, formed by pairs of 
dichasia, 2 to 3 times compound, at the 4-6 uppermost nodes, usu- 
ally only the lowest or two lowest fertile nodes leafy; dichasia usually 
about 2 cm. long, each with 2-3 nodes, the internodes 2-5 mm. long, 
the lateral flowers of the ultimate forks on pedicels 2 mm. long or 
less; bracts persistent, resembling reduced foliage leaves or lanceolate 
and 1.5 mm. long, strigose; bracteoles persistent, lanceolate, 0.7-1 
mm. long; calyx-lobes 4, glabrous within, broadly rounded, 1.3-1.5 
mm. wide, 0.7-1.3 mm. long; disk less than 2 mm. wide, the center 
glabrous, the staminal ring sometimes hairy; style glabrous, 3.5-4.5 
mm. long; stamens about 35, 2.5-3 mm. long; petals white, elliptic, 
cucullate, 3 mm. long; fruit roughened with rounded glands, oblate, 
about 5 mm. thick, 4 mm. high; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 

10 in each locule; seed 1, 5 mm. long, the cotyledons plano-convex, 
the radicle cylindrical, 1.5 mm. long. 

Peru (probably). Bolivia. 

Myrcianthes pearcei (McVaugh) McVaugh, comb. nov. 
Eugenia pearcei McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 214. 1956. 

An evergreen shrub 2-3 meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence 
and lower surface of the leaves densely rufous-tomentose with soft 
curved hairs; leaves coriaceous, elliptic-ovate, 3.5-5.5 cm. wide, 6.5- 

11 cm. long, about twice as long as wide, the tips rounded, obtuse 



770 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

or bluntly pointed, the base acute or convexly acute or the sides 
converging at right angles, the margins decurrent on the channeled 
petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 12-20 mm. long; midvein channeled and 
tomentose above near the base, distally flat or with a narrow ele- 
vated median ridge, prominent beneath; lateral veins about 10 pairs, 
somewhat impressed above, prominent beneath, ascending and dimin- 
ishing distally and abruptly incurving, 1-2 mm. from the margin, to 
join the next succeeding veins, the marginal vein scarcely recogniz- 
able as such except toward the tip of the blade; blades lustrous and 
hard-surfaced above, impressed-punctate, the lower surface obscured 
by the tomentum; inflorescence a dichasium 4-7 cm. long, 3 times 
compound, up to 15-flowered, the terminal flowers sessile, the pe- 
duncle 2.5-5 cm. long, compressed and up to 2 mm. wide near the 
summit; bracts and bracteoles deciduous, probably small and nar- 
row; buds 4-5 mm. long, pyriform, the hypanthium campanulate; 
calyx-lobes rounded, somewhat unequal, tomentose on both surfaces, 
3 mm. wide, 1.5-2.5 mm. long; disk somewhat quadrangular, 3-4 
mm. wide, hairy, the center red-tomentose about the base of the 
style; style more than 5 mm. long, pilose at least below the middle; 
stamens 200-250, about as long as the style, the anthers about 0.5 
mm. long; petals concave, white, ciliate, lightly tomentose outside; 
ovary bilocular, the ovules 5 in each cell, collateral, pendent. A 
very distinctive species, but unfortunately the only known specimen 
has been severely damaged by insects. The type was collected near 
Pata, Bolivia, by R. Pearce (BM). Univ. of Mich. Neg. 483. 
Peru (probably). Bolivia. 

Myrcianthes quinqueloba (McVaugh) McVaugh, comb. nov. 
Eugenia quinqueloba McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 217. 1956. 

A tree 4-6 meters high, the branchlets and inflorescence covered 
with appressed or ascending pale hairs to 0.8 mm. long, the hairs 
with reddish lumina, colorless sheaths and tips; leaves usually with 
a few hairs persistent on both surfaces, nearly sessile, broadly ovate 
to orbicular, 1.5-7.5 cm. long and wide, about as wide as long or 
even wider, or on growing branchlets a little longer than wide; blades 
usually rounded at the tip, sometimes obtuse, the base rounded to 
subcordate, the margins decurrent on the broad flat green petiolar 
base 2-3 mm. long and almost as wide; midvein flat above, or chan- 
neled near the base, promindgt beneath but diminishing distally; 
lateral veins about 6 pairs, ot/scure above, elevated beneath at least 
when young, diminishing distally; marginal vein about equaling the 
tips of the laterals and strongly arched between them, 2-6 mm. from 



FLORA OF PERU 771 

the margin; blades concolorous, yellow-green and vernicose above, 
probably somewhat lustrous beneath, with small and often obscure 
dots on both surfaces; inflorescence an axillary dichasium, 3- or 7- 
flowered, the central flowers sessile; peduncle stout, up to 2 cm. long, 
compressed, 2 mm. wide near the tip; branches and pedicels com- 
pressed, 4-7 mm. long; bracteoles deciduous at anthesis, subulate, 
nearly glabrous, 3-4 mm. long; buds 5-6 mm. long, somewhat pyri- 
form, the heavily pubescent, urceolate or campanulate hypanthium 
3-4 mm. long; calyx-lobes 5, fleshy, glabrescent outside, finely ap- 
pressed-pubescent near tips within, unequal; smaller (outer) lobes 2, 
suborbicular, 2 mm. long, 2-2.5 mm. wide; 3 larger lobes broadly 
rounded, 3 mm. long, 3.5 mm. wide; disk flat, 3-4 mm. wide, gla- 
brous; style glabrous, 6 mm. long; stamens 75-100, hardly as long 
as the style, the anthers 0.6 mm. long; petals ovate, ciliate, white or 
yellowish (Ferreyra), 3.5-5 mm. wide, 5-7 mm. long; fruit probably 
ellipsoid, 1 cm. long or more; ovary bilocular, the ovules about 20 in 
each locule, radially attached to and externally directed from a short 
centrally affixed placenta; seeds 1 or 2, reniform, 4 mm. long or more 
(not seen mature), the testa free, membranaceous, the cotyledons 
fleshy, plano-convex, the radicle accumbent, at least half as long as 
the cotyledons. The 5-merous flowers of this plant are unusual 
among the Andean species of this genus, and superficially suggest a 
relationship to the species of eastern warm- temperate South America. 
It is probable rather that the 5-merous condition has arisen inde- 
pendently in the two groups. 

Lima: Prov. Huarochiri, arriba de San Bartolome*, monte bajo, 
2,900-3,000 meters, Nov. 5, 1954, Ferreyra 10417 (MICH, type); 
Ferreyra 10424- "Guayabillo." 

Myrcianthes rhopaloides (HBK.) McVaugh, comb. nov. Myr- 
tus rhopaloides HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 137 (folio ed. p. 109). 1823. 
Eugenia? rhopaloides (HBK.) DC. Prodr. 3: 278. 1828. E. porphy- 
roclada Berg, Linnaea 27: 266. 1856. 

Small compact tree up to 10 meters high, completely glabrous 
except that the very young leaves and branchlets are sparingly pale 
strigose, the petals and calyx-lobes are ciliate, the staminal ring is 
bristly-pubescent, and the calyx-lobes are markedly appressed- 
pubescent on the inner surface; branchlets sometimes, and inflores- 
cence usually, drying reddish-purple; leaves variable in shape even 
on the same plant, elliptic to obovate or ovate, suborbicular or even 
broader than long, on flowering branches 2-4 (-5) cm. wide, 4-6 (-8) 
cm. long, mostly 1.5-2 times as long as wide, on shoots often larger 



772 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

and relatively longer, up to 3.5-6.5 cm. wide, 8-13 cm. long, mostly 
2-3 times as long as wide; blades at tip usually obtuse, rounded or 
emarginate, but sometimes, especially in the upper leaves, broadly 
short-acuminate or acute (when acute the very tip often twisted); 
base cuneate or rounded, the margins usually shortly cuneate at 
extreme base and decurrent on the broad stout dorso-ventrally flat- 
tened petiole which is 3-6 (-8) mm. long; midvein impressed above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-8 pairs, slightly raised on both 
surfaces, usually strongly ascending; marginal vein about equaling 
the laterals, continuous, but evidently formed of the strongly arch- 
ing tips of the laterals, its distance from the margin as much as 8-10 
mm. at the ends of the arches in large leaves, or as little as 1 mm. in 
small leaves; leaves usually browning and discolorous in drying, the 
upper surface smooth and markedly lustrous, usually eglandular, 
the lower dull, sparingly gland-dotted at least when young; inflores- 
cence an axillary dichasium, usually 3- or 7-flowered but on some 
plants mostly 15-flowered or nearly all 1-flowered; peduncle 1.5-5.5 
(usually 2.5-3.5) cm. long, strongly compressed near the summit 
and there 2-3.5 mm. wide; pedicels and intermediate branchlets 
somewhat compressed, more slender, 2-5 (-10) mm. long; bracts 
and bracteoles subulate, linear or narrowly lanceolate, 2-4 (-12) mm. 
long, deciduous at anthesis or before, leaving prominent auricle-like 
scars; calyx-lobes 4, broadly rounded, strongly concave, 3-4 mm. 
wide, 2-3 mm. long; disk flat, 3.5-5 mm. wide, the center glabrous; 
style glabrous, 10-11 mm. long; stamens 150-175, 7-10 mm. long; 
petals white or cream-colored, broadly elliptic, about 6 mm. long; 
fruit probably globose, black, about 1 cm. in diameter; seeds 1 or 2. 
-F.M. Neg. 36904. 

Piura: Ayavaca, Bonpland, type. Huanuco: Panao, 3624- 
?Junin: Pariahuanca, Mathews 1225. Without definite locality, 
Ruiz(l] (in herb. Barbey-Boissier, lectotype of E. porphyroclada) . 
Andes of Ecuador and Colombia, at elevations of 2,000-3,000 meters. 

Apparently conspecific is Eugenia coccolobifolia (HBK.) Burret, 
Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berl. 15: 521. 1941 [Myrtus coccolobaefolia HBK. 
Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 139 (folio ed. p. 110). 1823. Myrcia coccolobae- 
folia DC. Prodr. 3: 255. 1828. Pseudocaryophyllus coccolobaefolius 
Berg, Linnaea 27: 416. 1856]. The original specimens, from Ibague", 
Colombia (F.M. Neg. 36882), represent a broad -leaved vigorous ex- 
treme. Similar plants are found throughout the range of E. rhopa- 
loides. Berg cited no specimen of his Pseudocaryophyllus coccolobae- 
folius, and apparently he did not actually see any material of the 



FLORA OF PERU 773 

species; presumably he transferred it to Pseudocaryophyllus (a genus 
of the subtribe Pimentinae) because of statements in the original 
description by Kunth, in which the calyx was said to be "4-5 par- 
titus" and the embryo "immaturus uncinatus." Kunth's type, the 
specimen collected by Bonpland, agrees precisely in other respects 
with Eugenia rhopaloides, and it seems likely that the description 
of the immature ovules as "uncinate" was based on mistaken obser- 
vation. I am unable to explain the reference to a 5-parted calyx, 
unless there was some confusion of specimens by Kunth; as far as 
I could determine by examination in 1954, the Bonpland specimen 
at Paris bore 4-parted calyces only. As far as I am aware there has 
been no collection, subsequent to that made by Bonpland, of any 
material legitimately referable on characters of the fruit to Pseudo- 
caryophyllus coccolobaefolius. 

Eugenia porphyroclada was based on collections made by Ruiz 
in "Peru et Chile," which Berg saw "in hb. Berol. ex hb. Lamb." 
The specimens which he described have presumably been destroyed, 
but among the Barbey-Boissier collections at Geneva is a series of 
four sheets, three labeled as from Peru and one as from Chile, which 
from the labels are apparently also from the collections of Ruiz and 
Pavon. These specimens agree precisely with Berg's description of 
E. porphyroclada, which he distinguished from E. rhopaloides (al- 
though he did not contrast the two species directly) by its shorter 
petioles, the acute upper leaves and the more obtuse lower ones, the 
short 3-flowered peduncles with deciduous lanceolate foliaceous 
bracts 10-12 mm. long. In these specimens the characters in ques- 
tion seem to reflect individual variation rather than any interspecific 
differences. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 479. 

In Ecuador and probably southern Colombia occurs the very 
similar Eugenia alaternifolia Benth. (PL Hartw. 175. 1845), which 
differs from E. rhopaloides in the shorter, more congested dichasia 
and the slightly smaller flowers (e.g. the styles 6 mm. long). In 
appearance E. alaternifolia suggests a transitional form between 
E. rhopaloides and E. pycnantha Benth. (PL Hartw. 174. 1845). In 
the latter species, a native of western Ecuador and southern Colom- 
bia, the inflorescences are corymbosely aggregated toward the ends 
of the branches, the individual dichasia are 3 to 4 times dichoto- 
mously forked with flat joint-like more or less appressed branches 
1 cm. long or less, the 20-30 flowers form a cluster 1-2 cm. long, and 
the individual flowers are about the size of those of E. alaterni- 
folia. 



774 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Eugenia triquetra Berg, Linnaea 27: 141. 1856. E. triquetra ft 
aequatorialis Berg, Linnaea 31: 253. 71862. Eugenia Weberbaueri 
Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 598. 1906, in part? 

A shrub, with small, mostly glabrous ternate leaves, the branch- 
lets with numerous ascending to appressed sordid stiff hairs up to 
0.5 mm. long, a few appressed hairs sometimes persisting on the 
leaves, the inflorescence glabrous (or in var. aequatorialis the hypan- 
thium white-strigose) ; leaves cuneate-obovate to ovate or suborbic- 
ular, 4-9 mm. wide, 6-18 mm. long, as wide as long or up to twice as 
long as wide, the tip rounded to retuse, or bluntly pointed, the base 
acute to cuneate, the margins decurrent on the terete petiole 1-3 mm. 
long; mid vein impressed in a narrow line above, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins 5-8 pairs, usually not apparent in mature leaves, evi- 
dent beneath in young leaves; marginal vein about equaling the 
laterals and arched between them, up to 1 mm. from the margin; 
blades green and lustrous above, sometimes with impressed glands, 
the lower surface paler and somewhat dull, often drying brown, 
gland-dotted, acutely and narrowly cartilaginous-edged; flowers axil- 
lary, solitary, on slender pedicels 6-16 mm. long, these terete or 
somewhat compressed, up to about 0.5 mm. thick or a little more; 
bracteoles subulate, about 1 mm. long, deciduous at anthesis; buds 
4-5 mm. long; calyx-lobes broadly rounded or triangular-ovate, cili- 
ate, somewhat appressed-pubescent within, sometimes slightly un- 
equal, 1-2 mm. wide, or up to 2.5 mm. long and 2.5 mm. wide; disk 
2-2.5 mm. wide, glabrous; style 7-12 mm. long; stamens about 50, 
7-10 mm. long, the anthers 0.4 mm. long; petals subrotund, ciliate- 
fringed, 4-8 mm. long; fruit not seen. A little-known Colombian 
species, with an Ecuadorian variety known from a single collection 
on the southern slopes of Chimborazo. The Peruvian collection cited 
below is apparently conspecific, but additional material of this spe- 
cies is needed for study. F.M. Negs. 20013, 23595. A syntype 
collection of Eugenia weberbaueri, from mountains west of Huam- 
bos, Cajamarca, Weberbauer 4176 (herb. USM), has most of the 
leaves ternate, and is indistinguishable from other material of E. tri- 
quetra. It is probable that E. triquetra and E. myrsinoides represent 
ternate-leaved and opposite-leaved forms, respectively, of the same 
species. 

Cajamarca: Cutervo, Jelski 341- 

DOUBTFUL AND EXCLUDED SPECIES 

Eugenia andina Berg, Linnaea 27: 274. 1856. "Myrtus emargi- 
nata Ruiz hb. . . . (v. in hb. Berol.) . . . Habitat in Peruviae Andium 



FLORA OF PERU 775 

nemoribus (Ruiz)." In Berg's systematic arrangement of species 
this is placed near E. rhopaloides (HBK.) DC., which the descrip- 
tion somewhat suggests. 

Eugenia ovalis Berg, Linnaea 27: 156. 1856. "(v. in hb. Berol. 
gen.). Habitat in Peruviae Andium nemoribus (Ruiz)." This is said 
to have solitary axillary flowers; the description suggests a species 
similar to Myrcianthes discolor but this is by no means certain. 

Myrcianthes sp. Weberbauer's no. 5898, from near the Rio Apuri- 
mac, Cuzco, in bud only, represents a somewhat hirsutulous species 
with obovate to orbicular leaves 3 cm. long, and a finely strigose 
3-flowered dichasium. 

6. PLINIA L. 

Calyx-lobes 4, somewhat united at base, the calyx-tube (hypan- 
thium) splitting irregularly longitudinally in anthesis. Hypanthium 
prolonged beyond the summit of the ovary. Flowers pubescent, in 
small, nearly sessile, persistently involucrate clusters. Ovules 2. 
Cotyledons free, plano-convex. 

A small genus of tropical America; it is of somewhat doubtful 
homogeneity, including as it does about a half dozen species of north- 
ern lowland South America, and about 25 superficially dissimilar 
West Indian species which were placed in the genus by Urban. The 
genotype, P. pinnata L., is founded entirely upon Plumier's Plinia 
fructu croceo, odorato (Plum. Nov. PI. Amer. Gen. 9. t. 11. 1703), 
which from the illustration can hardly be identified with any exist- 
ing species unless it may be something like Eugenia uniflora with 
5-merous flowers. Urban, however (Repert. Sp. Nov. 15: 412-413. 
1919), took the position that P. pinnata was identical with Marlierea 
glomerata Berg, a species of British Guiana and the Lesser Antilles. 
Amshoff (Flora Surin. 3, pt. 2: 97-99. 1951) has accepted Urban's 
views and described the genus with special reference to continental 
South American species. 

One species described below, Plinia clausa, has well-developed 
pedicels and the flowers are borne in short but evident racemes 
which nearly or wholly lack the sterile basal bracts which are a con- 
spicuous feature of the other Peruvian species. This species is referred 
to Plinia because of the completely closed (and presumably irregu- 
larly opening) calyx, and the biovulate condition of the locules. 

Pedicels 4-5 mm. long; flowers 2-4 pairs in short racemes; buds 
completely closed, apiculate, 7-8 mm. long; plants appressed- 
hispidulous, with no long silky hairs P. clausa 



776 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Flowers sessile or subsessile, in sessile clusters subtended by sterile 
bracts; buds, if closed, 12 mm. long; plants variously hirsutulous 
or silky-pilose in the inflorescence. 

Buds completely closed, whitened and felted with long appressed 
hairs, 12 mm. long; stamens about 500; leaves 4-6.5 cm. wide. 

P. inflata 

Buds 6-7 mm. long or less, the calyx-lobes silky-pilose or hirsutu- 
lous, free at tips; stamens 125-150 (number not known in 
P. pinnata) ; leaves various. 

Leaves hirsutulous beneath with hairs about 0.5 mm. long, the 
veins with some longer hairs up to 2 mm. long; hypan- 
thium 2-2.5 mm. across; style 4.5-6 mm. long. .P. pinnata 
Leaves with minute hairs 0.2 mm. long on the lower surface, 
the young branchlets and leaves also with hairs up to 4 mm. 
long; hypanthium 3.5-4.5 mm. wide; style 9-11 mm. long. 

P. duplipilosa 

Plinia clausa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 224. 1956. 

A tree or shrub, the inflorescence, branchlets and young petioles 
and leaves antrorsely appressed-hispidulous with stiff ochraceous 
hairs up to 0.3 mm. long, the mature leaves glabrous or nearly so, 
the hairs on the hypanthium very numerous at least at base, inter- 
mixed at least in the young bud with a somewhat persistent waxlike 
covering; leaves elliptic, 3-4 cm. wide, 7-10 cm. long, 2-2.3 times as 
long as wide, narrowly acuminate, acute at base, the margins pass- 
ing abruptly into the terete petiole 1-1.3 mm. thick, 6-10 mm. long; 
mid vein plane or slightly convex above, more prominent beneath; 
lateral veins about 10 pairs, very slender and with intermediate veins 
about the same size, more conspicuous beneath; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals, scarcely arched between them, about 1 mm. 
from the margin and parallel to it; blades dull and featureless above, 
the lower surface minutely roughened, with tiny glistening cells; 
glandular dots not apparent in mature leaves; inflorescence a short 
axillary raceme, its axis up to 3 mm. long, with 2-4 approximate 
decussate pairs of flowers on nearly terete pedicels 0.7 mm. thick, 
4-5 mm. long; bracts conspicuous, persistent, membranaceous, scari- 
ous, glabrous distally but ciliate, ovate, bluntly pointed, about 3 mm. 
long, enfolding the pedicels (when expanded 2.5-3 mm. wide); brac- 
teoles similar, persistent, elliptic, acute with recurved tips, appressed 
to the hypanthium in bud, 2.5-4 mm. long; buds completely closed, 
7-8 mm. long, apiculate 0.5-0.7 mm.; hypanthium narrowed to base, 



FLORA OF PERU 777 

about 2.5 mm. long and wide, sulcate and ridged in drying, abruptly 
expanded into the globose calyx 5-6 mm. in diameter; style glabrous, 
erect in bud, 4.5 mm. long, the dilated and subpeltate stigma 0.8 mm. 
wide; disk glabrous, the glabrous inner surface of the hypanthium 
prolonged 4 mm. above the summit of the ovary; stamens 200-250, 
incurved in bud, attached in a hairy zone which occupies most of the 
distal half of the bud; anthers 0.6-0.9 mm. long; petals none; ovary 
bilocular, the ovules 2 and collateral in each locule. 

Loreto: Soledad (lower Rio Itaya, near Iquitos), July, 1925, 
G. Tessmann 5287 (NY, type). 

Plinia duplipilosa McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 224. 1956. 

A tree, the branchlets, petioles, and veins of the lower leaf-surface 
with tiny erect hairs 0.2 mm. long, the young branchlets and leaves 
also pilose with slender straight white hairs up to 4 mm. long, the 
inflorescence densely silky-pilose; leaves elliptic-ovate, 4-5 cm. wide, 
10-13 cm. long, about 2.5 times as long as wide, narrowly acuminate 
and sharp-pointed, the margins meeting at base nearly at right an- 
gles, and passing abruptly to the flat summit of the petiole 1.5 mm. 
thick, 5-6 mm. long; mid vein flat or with a narrow elevated median 
ridge above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, narrowly 
impressed above, evident beneath; marginal vein about equaling the 
laterals and formed from their obliquely arched tips, 3-7 mm. from 
the margin; blades smooth and green above, dull and somewhat 
yellow green beneath; glands not apparent in mature leaves; inflo- 
rescences in leafless axils on old wood, the flowers in 4's, in sessile 
bracteate clusters, the sterile bracts 4-ranked, the lowest smallest, 
all broadly rounded, deciduous at anthesis, scarious; fertile bracts 
elliptic, blunt-tipped, up to 7 mm. long, glabrous within, ciliate- 
fringed with very slender flaccid hairs 0.5 mm. long, pilose on the 
back with longer straight hairs; bracteoles like the fertile bracts, 
elliptic or lanceolate, 2.5-3 mm. wide, 5-6 mm. long; buds obovate, 
6.5 mm. long, delicate in texture, completely concealed by straight 
hairs 2.5 mm. long, the hypanthium broadly obconic, 1.5 mm. long, 
the calyx glabrous inside, closed except for free deltoid tips 2 mm. 
wide, 1.5 mm. long; calyx at maturity with flat, nearly square limb 
5-6 mm. on a side, the limb formed of the staminal ring 1 mm. wide 
and the free calyx- tips at the corners; receptacular cup hemispheric, 
3.5-4.5 mm. wide, 2.5-3 mm. deep, glabrous; style 9-11 mm. long; 
stamens 125-150, about as long as the style, strongly incurved in 
bud, the anthers linear, 1 mm. long; petals 4, obovate, 3 mm. wide, 
2.5-3.3 mm. long, finely appressed-pubescent inside, tomentose out- 



778 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

side; ovary bilocular, the ovules 2 in each locule, collateral, pendu- 
lous. Klug's collection differs in having the veins more prominent 
beneath and up to 15 pairs on each side, and in the longer and nar- 
rower leaves. The flowers and inflorescence of his specimen, however, 
are very like those of the type. Apparently also conspecific is Cua- 
trecasas' no. 7092, from the lowlands of eastern Colombia; the flowers 
in this collection have more elongate bracts and free calyx-tips but 
are otherwise much like Peruvian specimens. 

Loreto: Yurimaguas, alt. about 135 meters, dense forest, Killip & 
Smith 28007 (US, type) ; Mishuyacu, near Iquitos, alt. 100 meters, 
forest, Klug 1155. 

Plinia inflata McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 225. 1956. 

Tree to 9 meters high, the branchlets, petioles and younger leaves 
hispidulous with numerous pale short erect hairs, and also pilose with 
very slender straight yellowish- white hairs 1-1.5 mm. long, the leaves 
glabrate above, and below except on veins and margins; inflorescence, 
including the whole bud, whitened and felted with densely appressed 
long hairs; leaves elliptic-oblong, 4-6.5 cm. wide, 9-15 cm. long, 
about 2.5 times as long as wide, abruptly and narrowly acuminate, 
the base acute, the margins passing abruptly into the summit of the 
terete petiole 1.5-2 mm. thick, 7-8 mm. long; mid vein flat above or 
sulcate near the base, hirsute in young leaves, prominent beneath; 
lateral veins very slender, 15 or more pairs in addition to some inter- 
mediates, very narrowly impressed above, elevated beneath but not 
very conspicuous; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and 
slightly arched between them, 1.5 mm. or usually much less from 
the margin, sometimes obscured by the inrolled margin; blades lus- 
trous, smooth and minutely impressed-puncticulate above, paler, 
dull, often appressed -pilose and with small dark dots beneath; flow- 
ers borne in sessile bracteate clusters (4-12 flowers together) on old 
wood, the axis up to 2 mm. thick and about as long, bearing several 
very short stout racemes; sterile bracts 4-ranked, 3-4 pairs, glabrous, 
ovate, scarious, 1.5-2 mm. long; innermost bracts brown, glabrous, 
scarious, ovate, 3 mm. wide, 4 mm. long; bracteoles hairy outside, 
connate and forming a loose collar about the base of the hypanthium, 
elliptic-obovate, obtuse, 4-5 mm. wide and 6-8 mm. long; buds com- 
pletely closed, apiculate, turbinate, 12 mm. long and almost as wide, 
the top hemispheric, the calyx splitting longitudinally from the apex 
into 4 nearly equal, irregularly ovate acute lobes 6-8 mm. wide, 10- 
12 mm. long, the splits extending somewhat deeper than the inner 



FLORA OF PERU 779 

margin of the broad hairy staminal ring, which is 6-7 mm. wide and 
has its apical margin 1.5-2 mm. from the apex of the bud; calyx- 
lobes after anthesis spreading cruciform from the cuplike center of 
the disk, which is 2-3 mm. wide, 2 mm. deep, the entire calyx below 
the staminal ring glabrous and prominently gland-dotted; style not 
seen, glabrous at base, probably 1.5 cm. long or more; stamens about 
500, probably 1.5 cm. long or more at maturity, all strongly incurved 
in the bud, the anthers linear, 1.2-1.8 mm. long; petals crumpled, 
pilose, 1 mm. wide, 3 mm. long; ovary bilocular, the ovules 2 in each 
locule, collateral. Known only from two collections (Krukoff 6365, 
type; Krukoff 6525) from the basin of the Rio Madeira, near Tres 
Casas, Amazonas, Brazil. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil. 

Plinia pinnata L. Sp. PL 516. 1753. Myrciaria involucrata 
Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 375. 1857. 

A shrub or tree to 5 meters high, the leaves more or less densely 
hirsutulous beneath with yellowish soft erect hairs mostly about 0.5 
mm. long, the bases of these hairs slightly enlarged; longer, and often 
appressed, nearly white hairs up to 2 mm. long usually intermixed, 
especially on the veins; petioles, branchlets, and mid vein on the 
upper leaf-surface villous-tomentose, the hairs longer, often 1 mm. 
or more, often appressed or matted; hairs of the bracts long and 
appressed, or almost none; leaves sometimes glabrate in age; leaves 
elliptic, 1.5^4 cm. wide, 5-10 cm. long, mostly 2.5-3.5 times as long 
as wide, gradually or somewhat abruptly rounded to the flat summit 
of the petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 3-5 mm. long; mid vein flat or ridged 
above, the whole sometimes impressed, raised about its own thick- 
ness below; lateral veins 10-15 pairs, obscure above, weakly elevated 
beneath; marginal vein about equaling the laterals and slightly 
arched between them, 1-2 mm. from the margin; blades dark and 
lustrous above, yellowish-green beneath; no glands apparent at ma- 
turity; inflorescence 1 axillary, sessile, the flowers subsessile, glom- 
erate, inclosed by 4-5 pairs of ovate, ciliate, 4-ranked bracts, the 
outer shorter, the inner 2-3 mm. long; calyx in the bud very shortly 
4-lobed, valvate, splitting irregularly; receptacle deeply sunken, 2- 
2.5 mm. across, glabrous within; style 4.5-6 mm. long; petals sub- 
orbicular, about 2 mm. long; fruit oblate, 1.5-2.5 cm. across, hairy. 
A species well known in the Guianas and ranging to the Lesser 

1 Description of the inflorescence mostly from Amshoff's treatment (Flora of 
Suriname, 3, pt. 2: 98. 1951). 



780 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Antilles and Amazonian Brazil. The type of Myrciaria involucrata, 
Poeppig 2882, came from Ega, Brazil. F.M. Neg. 36964. 
Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil to the Antilles. 

7. MYRCIARIA Berg 

Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 320-338. 1856; and in Mart. Fl. 
Bras. 14, pt. 1: 358-376. 1857. 

Calyx-lobes 4, distinct and imbricated. Hypanthium markedly 
prolonged above the summit of the ovary, circumscissile at base, 
and cleanly deciduous, with the perianth and androecium, about the 
time of anthesis. Flowers subsessile, in racemosely arranged clusters 
of (usually) 4 each. Ovules 2. Embryo (according to Amshoff) 
undivided. 

A well-marked genus, probably of about 40 species, in tropical 
America from Panama and the West Indies southward in the low- 
lands east of the Andes. 

Leaves small, 4 cm. long or less; branchlets densely short-hispidu- 
lous; style 4-5 mm. long M. tenella 

Leaves 6-10 cm. long; branchlets glabrous or essentially so; style 
about 10 mm. long M. paraensis 

Myrciaria paraensis Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 364. 
1857. M. spruceana Berg, I.e. 365. 

A shrub or small tree up to 8 (-13) meters high, glabrous or nearly 
so at maturity, minutely and sometimes very sparingly hispidulous 
on the branchlets and the ventral surface of the petioles, with pale 
sharp hairs up to 0.2 mm. long; calyx-lobes bright rufous-pubescent 
on the inner surface and the margins; bracts and bracteoles similarly 
ciliate; leaves broadly or narrowly ovate, or elliptic, often somewhat 
inequilateral, (1.5-) 2.5-4.5 cm. wide, (4.5-) 6-10 (-12) cm. long, 
2-3 (-4 on shoots) times as long as wide, the tip acute or gradually 
acuminate, the base rounded or subcuneate but the margins at very 
base abruptly incurved into the petiole, forming a pair of slightly 
raised and usually subopposite auriculate appendages; petiole up to 
about 1 mm. thick, 3-6 (-9) mm. long; leaves dull and browning in 
drying, the two surfaces similar but the lower paler; mid vein broad 
and flat or convex on the upper surface, somewhat elevated on the 
lower; lateral veins about 20 pairs, very slender, obscure in mature 
leaves, without evident differentiation in size, the actual number 



FLORA OF PERU 781 

often difficult to determine because adjacent veins join, separate or 
even cross; marginal vein about equaling the laterals, 1-1.8 mm. 
from the margin in the larger leaves; glands apparent on both sur- 
faces at least in young leaves, more elevated and conspicuous on the 
upper surface; inflorescence axillary, or supra-axillary, up to 1 mm. 
above the base of the petiole; axis 1-1.5 mm. long, bearing usually 
4 nearly sessile flowers in 2 decussate pairs; bracts rounded, ciliate, 
about 1.5 mm. long and broad; pedicels very stout for their length, 
up to 1.5 mm. long and nearly 1 mm. thick; bracteoles persistent, 
broadly ovate and rounded at apex, united by their basal margins 
into a cuplike involucre 0.5 mm. high at the center line, 2-3.5 mm. 
long and 1.5-2 mm. wide; hypanthium sessile, broadly obconic, 2.5- 
3 mm. long, circumscissile and deciduous from the summit of the 
ovary after anthesis, glabrous within and without; bracteoles, hypan- 
thium, calyx-lobes and corolla with prominent dark raised glands; 
calyx-lobes broadly rounded, about 2 mm. wide and almost as long; 
style 10-11 mm. long; petals white, ovate, ciliate, 3^4 mm. long; sta- 
mens about 125, up to 7-10 mm. long; anthers 0.5-0.7 mm. long; 
fruit globose (?), 10-12 mm. in diameter, soft, red-brown (Schunke) 
or black-purple (Spruce), about 2-seeded, naked at apex, the circular 
scar there about 2 mm. across. This plant closely resembles certain 
species from the Guianas, notably Myrciaria divaricata (Benth.) Berg 
and M. vismeaefolia (Benth.) Berg, and it is possible that all three of 
these are conspecific. A species from the lower Amazon Valley, 
M. amazonica Berg, is very closely related also. F.M. Negs. 20027, 
20029. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Spruce 4431 (herb. Paris). In sylvis 
mentis Guayrapurina, Spruce 4431 (herb. Benth.); montibus secus 
flumen Mayo, prope Tarapoto, Spruce 4431 (herb. Hook.). Loreto: 
Mishuyacu, Killip & Smith 29962. Gamitanacocha, Schunke 334. 
Iquitos, Williams 3672. Rio Mazan near Iquitos, Williams 8149. 
Amazonian Brazil and Venezuela. "Camocamo" (Schunke, Wil- 
liams), "Camu-camu" (Williams). 

Myrciaria tenella (DC.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 328. 1856. Eugenia 
tenella DC. Prodr. 3: 272. 1828. 

A tree to 5 meters high, minutely hispidulous on the branchlets, 
inflorescence, petioles, leaf-margins and midveins, with erect sharp 
pale hairs 0.1-0.2 mm. long; branchlets compressed; leaves elliptic, 
0.8-1.9 cm. wide, 2-4 cm. long, about 2-2.5 times as long as wide, 
the tip obtusely or acutely pointed or obscurely broad-acuminate, 
the base cuneate, the margins decurrent on the stout petiole 2 mm. 



782 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

long; leaves green and the two surfaces similar, the mid vein nearly 
plane, or somewhat elevated beneath; lateral veins very slender, 15- 
20 principal closely parallel pairs with fine intermediates; marginal 
vein about equaling the laterals, little arched between them, 1 mm. 
from the margin in the larger leaves; glands apparent on both sur- 
faces in young leaves, obscure in older leaves; inflorescence axillary 
or appearing somewhat supra-axillary, or the subtending leaf reduced 
to a linear bract 1 mm. wide, 5 mm. long; axis of inflorescence usually 
about 1 mm. long, bearing 4 nearly sessile flowers in two decussate 
pairs; bracts rounded, ciliate, about 0.5 mm. long and wide; pedicels 
very stout for their length, up to 1 mm. long and 0.4 mm. thick; 
bracteoles persistent and forming a cuplike involucre at the summit 
of the pedicel, ovate, broad-based, rounded at apex, 1 mm. long and 
about as wide; hypanthium sessile in the bracteoles, nearly cylin- 
drical or distally widened, lustrous and glabrous without, about 1.5 
mm. long, the inner cavity about 1 mm. deep, hairy at bottom, the 
whole circumscissile, dehiscent from the summit of the ovary after 
an thesis; calyx-lobes rounded, gland-dotted, hairy especially near 
tips, about 1 mm. long and more than 1 mm. wide; style 4-5 mm. 
long, hairy near base; petals white, obovate, ciliate, 3 mm. long, 
gland-dotted; stamens about 60, up to 4 mm. long, the anthers 0.3 
mm. long; fruit probably globose and 5-6 mm. in diameter, but not 
seen fully mature. The above description is drawn from the few 
Peruvian specimens available for study, but these differ in no way 
except leaf-size from plants of eastern Brazil, including the original 
collections made by Martius. The leaves in our specimens are about 
twice as large as those of most Brazilian specimens seen. F.M. 
Neg. 20030. 

San Martin: Juanjui, Klug 4172. Locality uncertain, Ruiz & 
Pavdn (herb. Brit. Mus.). 



Myrciaria? Guapurium (DC.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 470. 1856. 
Guapurium peruvianum Poir. Diet. Sci. Nat. 20: 11. 1821. Eugenia 
Guapurium DC. Prodr. 3: 273. 1828. 

This species is probably not a member of the Peruvian flora. 
The type specimen is sterile, so it is impossible to determine the 
genus to which it belongs; it is probably correctly assigned to 
Myrciaria but may equally well represent a species of Eugenia. 
In either case a new nomenclatural combination is required. The 
original material was sent by Joseph de Jussieu from "Peru" to 



FLORA OF PERU 783 

Paris, where it is still preserved, together with a water-color sketch 
made by de Jussieu on December 6, 1749, and titled by him "Gua- 
puru de Sta. Crux." In the late summer and autumn of 1749, 
as shown by his letters and other manuscripts preserved in the 
library of the Muse'um National d'Histoire Naturelle (Mss. Ill, 
179, 1625-1627), de Jussieu was in Bolivia, where he spent some 
time about the mines of Potosi. He made a large collection of plants 
in the vicinity of Santa Cruz, Bolivia, and it seems reasonable to 
suppose that his "Guapuru de Sta. Crux" came from this locality 
in south-central Bolivia, rather than from Peru. The specimens 
preserved in the Jussieu Herbarium, and a fragment of what is 
evidently the same specimen, in the DeCandolle Herbarium (F.M. 
Neg. 7942), are sterile, but the small characteristically pointed 
leaves and the finely yellowish-hirsute branchlets and leaves are 
quite unlike any other species known at present from Peru. De 
Jussieu's drawing shows the flowers sessile and 4-parted, as in 
Myrciaria, and fruit oblate, about 2.5 cm. high and 3 cm. broad, 
purple or violet in color. 

Subtribe PIMENTINAE Berg 

Trees or shrubs, or in some species of Myrteola prostrate and 
subherbaceous; flowers solitary, or in dichotomously branched 
inflorescences, or in one genus (Acca) racemose. Flowers 4- or 
5-merous, the calyx with distinct lobes or partially or completely 
closed in bud, then circumscissile or opening by irregular longi- 
tudinal fractures. Embryo spiral, subspiral or uncinate-curved, the 
radicle elongate and the cotyledons very short and inconspicuous. 
Ovary 2- to many-locular, the ovules usually numerous in each 
locule, longitudinally biseriate on the axis, or the placentae produced 
into the locule from the center and so bilamellate. Stigma often 
peltate. 

8. ACCA Berg 

Shrubs or small trees, villous or tomentose, with coriaceous 
leaves. Filaments flattened, much elongate, red, erect in bud. 
Calyx-lobes 4. Flowers racemose or in 3-flowered dichasia (or by 
reduction solitary). Ovary bilocular, the placentae bilamellate. 
Embryo uncinate. 

Perhaps includes only the following Peruvian species, although 
Burret (Repert. Sp. Nov. 50: 59. 1941) has proposed to merge with 
Acca the monotypic south-Brazilian genus Feijoa Berg. 



784 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Leaves 4-7.5 cm. long; petiole 5-9 mm. long; flowers solitary and 
axillary, or in 3-flowered dichasia A. lanuginosa 

Leaves 1.7-3.5 cm. long; petiole 2-2.5 mm. long; flowers solitary 
from the basal nodes of leafy branches, or in short racemes. 

A. macrostema 

Acca lanuginosa (R. & P. ex G. Don) McVaugh, Taxon 5: 136. 
1956. Psidium lanuginosum R. & P. Fl. Peruv. & Chil. 4: t. 421b, 
ined. [71802]; G. Don, Gen. Hist. 2: 832. 1832. A. peruviana Berg, 
Linnaea 27: 138. 1856. A. velutina Burret, Rep. Sp. Nov. 50: 
58. 1941. 

Small tree, densely ochraceous-velutinous or -tomentose on the 
branchlets, inflorescence and the lower surface of the leaves; leaves 
coriaceous, ovate or elliptic, 2.5-4 cm. wide, 4-7.5 cm. long, 1.5-2.3 
times as long as wide, often about equally narrowed to both ends, 
the tip usually blunt or rounded, sometimes acute or emarginate; 
base rounded or subcuneate, the margins irregularly and closely 
sinuate near the tips and appearing crenate, decurrent on the stout, 
rather long petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 5-9 mm. long; blades rugose- 
reticulate, the large and small veins impressed above, at least the 
larger prominent beneath; lateral veins 8-12 pairs, the number 
variable and obscure because of forking and intermediate veins; 
marginal vein about equaling the laterals, and consisting of a series 
of arches connecting them, 1-4 mm. from the margin; upper surface 
glabrous and lustrous, or somewhat pubescent, sparingly glandular; 
lower surface hidden by the dense tomentum; peduncles axillary, 
1- or 3-flowered, 1.5-2.5 cm. long and up to 1.5 mm. thick; bracts 
and bracteoles narrowly elliptic, persistent, foliaceous, obtuse, the 
larger subpetiolate; bracts in 3-flowered dichasia 4-6 mm. wide, 
12-18 mm. long; bracteoles 2-3 mm. wide, 6-9 mm. long, the larger 
sometimes with abortive axillary buds; immature buds 1.5-1.8 cm. 
long, the hypanthium narrowly obconic, more than half this length, 
the calyx-lobes in 2 unequal pairs, appressed in bud, oblong or 
ovate, blunt-pointed, tomentose both sides, the larger pair 4-5 mm. 
wide, 6-9 mm. long; disk hairy, 3-4 mm. wide; style glabrous, 16-22 
mm. long; stamens 25-50, the filaments flattened, 15-22 mm. long, 
deep red (Macbride), the anthers about 1 mm. long; petals waxy 
whitish-pink (Macbride), obovate, glabrous, ciliate, 5-7 mm. wide, 
10-12 mm. long; fruit ellipsoid, 8-10 mm. thick, about 1.5 cm. long, 
crowned with the prominent erect calyx-lobes; seeds about 15-20, 
about 3 mm. long, psidioid, the embryo C-shaped. Acca velutina 



FLORA OF PERU 785 

was based on a collection in which the hairs are longer and more 
nearly erect than in other specimens of this plant, and the upper 
surface of the leaf is less markedly rugose. These differences are no 
greater than those which are known in regional races in different 
parts of the Andes, in numerous families and genera of flowering 
plants, and the many similarities between typical Acca lanuginosa 
and A. velutina indicate that they are conspecific. F.M. Neg. 36411. 

Huanuco: Mufia, about 7000 feet elevation, dry steep eastern 
slope, in groves, 3965; Muna [Muna], Ruiz (according to Berg), 
type in herb. Berlin. Abajo de Muna, 1800-1900 meters, Weber- 
bauer 6712, Apurimac: Rio Pinko, 2700 meters, Weberbauer 5866, 
type of A. velutina. Locality uncertain: Ruiz & Pavdn 28/82; Ruiz, 
ex herb. Berol., isotype of P. lanuginosum; "N[ueva] E[spana]," 
collector not stated (Herb. Barbey-Boissier). 

Acca macrostema (R. & P. ex G. Don) McVaugh, Taxon 5: 136. 
1956. Psidium macrostemum R. & P. Fl. Peruv. & Chil. 4: t. 420a, 
ined. [71802]; G. Don, Gen. Hist. 2: 833. 1832. Eugenia? Acka DC. 
Prodr. 3: 277. 1828. Myrtus Acka Juss. herb, ex DC. I.e., in synon. 
A. domingensis Berg, Linnaea 27: 138. 1856, a latifolia Berg, I.e., 
and (3 angustifolia Berg, I.e. 139. 

Low shrub 2-5 feet (Macbride), heavily villose or tomentose on 
the branchlets, inflorescence and lower surface of the leaves, with soft 
white or finally nigrescent hairs; leaves often crowded, the internodes 
0.5-1 cm. long; blades coriaceous, dark green and lustrous above, 
0.7-1.5 (-2.5) cm. wide, 1.7-3.5 cm. long, (1.2-) 2-3 times as long 
as wide, often appearing narrower because of the strongly involute 
margins, bluntly or acutely pointed, or very shortly acuminate, the 
base rounded, the margins decurrent on the compressed channeled 
petiole 1 mm. thick, 2-2.5 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prom- 
inent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, flat or very finely impressed 
above, raised beneath but concealed by the tomentum; marginal vein 
arched between the laterals, 1-2 mm. from the margin, inconspicu- 
ous; leaves drying dark green above, often dark bluish-green and lus- 
trous, glabrous or pubescent when young, minutely gland-dotted; 
flowers solitary from the basal nodes of leafy branches, or usually 
clustered near the tips of the branches, in congested few-flowered 
axillary racemes with abortive terminal buds; axis of raceme often 
1-1.7 mm. thick, 1-3 mm. long, with 1-2 decussate pairs of flowers; 
lowest pair often the only one developed in crowded inflorescences; 
bracts, if not leafy, elliptic, blunt-pointed, glabrous on the inner sur- 



786 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

face, 2 mm. wide, 4 mm. long; pedicels in fruit up to 1.5 mm. thick, 
2-4 mm. long, occasionally 3-flowered and then compressed, and up 
to 5 mm. long; bracteoles broadly ovate, acute, glabrous, somewhat 
keeled, strongly ciliate-fringed, 2.5-4 mm. long and wide, distinct, 
but the rounded basal margins of opposite bracteoles overlapping; 
hypanthium cylindric, 2 mm. thick, 2.5-3.5 mm. long, glabrous to 
tomentose, the calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 3-3.5 mm. wide, 2.5- 
3 mm. long (in fruit up to 6 mm. long and 4.5 mm. wide), glabrous 
without, ciliate-fringed, tomentose within; disk 3-4 mm. wide, hairy; 
style 18-23 mm. long, the flat peltate stigma about 1 mm. wide; 
stamens 25-30, the color of port wine (Macbride), about 15-18 mm. 
long, the anthers 1.3 mm. long; petals suborbicular, 6-7 mm. long, 
gland-dotted, cucullate, ciliate; fruit dark red, ellipsoid, about 6-10 
mm. thick, 8-12 mm. long, pubescent, gland-dotted; seeds 6-8, 
psidioid, 3-5 mm. long, the embryo C-shaped. As pointed out by 
Bentham many years ago (in Benth. & Hook. f. Gen. PI. 1: 713. 
1865), Berg was in error in assuming that the original material of 
this species came from Santo Domingo, and the specific name domin- 
gensis is of course meaningless when applied to this species. F.M. 
Neg. 7929. 

Huanuco: Mito, 3417. Chinchapalca, 5 miles above Mito, about 
9,500 feet, wet sunny rock cliffs, Macbride & Feather stone 1600. 
Junin: Huasa-huasi, Ruiz, type of P. macrostemum (fragm. in F, ex 
herb. Madrid). Locality uncertain: Cuerta (ex Berg) or Cuesta, 
(ex Benth.), Ruiz. Without locality, Dombey, type. Collector un- 
known (fruiting specimen, Herb. Barbey-Boissier). 

9. PSIDIUM L. 

Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 352-378. 1856; and in Mart. Fl. 
Bras. 14, pt. 1: 381^11. 1857. 

Calyx various, usually splitting irregularly down to the ovary in 
anthesis, its tube (hypanthium) prolonged above the summit of the 
ovary. Calyx-limb of 4-5 distinct teeth or lobes, or completely 
closed in the bud, or with an apical pore. Ovary 2- to 7-locular, 
the sporophores parietal, directed toward the center and there re- 
flexed and somewhat produced into the locules, connate in pairs and 
simulating axile bilamellate placentae. Petals often showy. Seed 
hippocrepiform or reniform, with bony testa and uncinate or curved 
embryo. Inflorescence (in Peruvian species) a 3-flowered (rarely 4- 
to 7-flowered) dichasium, or the flowers solitary. 



FLORA OF PERU 787 

An American genus which according to Berg includes about 100 
species. The type species, P. guajava L., the guava (Spanish, guay- 
aba), has been extensively cultivated for its fruit, for ornament and 
for shade; it spreads rapidly from seed and is now widely naturalized 
in the tropics. 

The genus Calycolpus Berg, a group of 5-10 species closely allied 
to Psidium and resembling glabrous and lustrous-leaved members of 
that genus, ranges rather widely in northern and northeastern South 
America but apparently does not occur in Peru or even in immedi- 
ately adjacent Brazil. The known species are relatively large-flow- 
ered and conspicuous, so it is probable that if any of them actually 
occurred in Peru, at least a few collections in herbaria would indicate 
this. One species, C. calophyllus (HBK.) Berg, is known as near to 
the Peruvian border as the Rio Vaupe"s, and ranges thence north- 
ward into Venezuela; the genotype, C. goetheanus (DC.) Berg, is 
known from near the mouth of the Rio Negro but apparently not 
from farther west. Calycolpus is distinguished technically from 
Psidium by the presence of well-defined calyx-lobes which are spread- 
ing or even reflexed in the bud as well as in flower and which do not 
split below the base at anthesis. Actually the differences are slight 
between such species as P. densicomum, which has an open undulately 
lobed calyx, and C. calophyllus, in which the calyx-lobes are very 
short and broad, but distinct; no very convincing generic separation 
between these species can be effected on the basis of spreading or 
non-spreading calyx-lobes in the bud. After anthesis, and the ac- 
companying rupture of the calyx in P. densicomum, a mechanical 
generic segregation may be made. The genus Calycolpus was re- 
viewed by Riley (Kew Bull. 1926: 145-154. 1926). 

Calyx-lobes 7-9 mm. long and distinct, or the lobes prolonged into 

narrow appendages 6-14 mm. long. 
Calyx-lobes 4, ovate, 7-9 mm. long, tomentose without, appressed 

to the bud and covering it, apparently valvate P. sp. 

Calyx-lobes 5, separating irregularly as segments 4.5-5 mm. long 
and wide, each tipped by an erect or spreading narrow folia- 
ceous, nearly glabrous appendage 1.5-3 mm. wide, 6-14 mm. 

long P. caudatum 

Calyx-lobes 3 mm. long or less, short, broad and rounded, or the 

buds completely closed before anthesis and dehiscing irregularly. 

Leaves crenate, obtuse and cuspidate, narrow (1-2 cm. wide, 2- 

7 cm. long); plants finely pubescent; flowers solitary; buds 

glabrous, about 12 mm. long P. maribense 



788 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Leaves entire, or sometimes irregularly undulate, rarely less than 
2.5 cm. wide and if so acute or acuminate; pubescence and 
flowers various. 

Plants completely glabrous, even to the young vegetative buds; 
branchlets compressed, not angled; leaves 3-5 cm. wide, 
7-14 cm. long, narrowed from below or near the middle to 
the acute and mucronate tip; calyx open, slightly flaring 
in bud, the broadly rounded lobes 2 mm. high. 

P. densicomum 

Plants with evident and usually abundant pubescence (some- 
times on young growing parts only); branchlets often an- 
gled; leaves and calyx various. 

Lateral veins 12-20 pairs, usually impressed above, promi- 
nent beneath and well differentiated from the smaller 
intermediate veins; young growth heavily pubescent; 
branchlets 4-angled or sometimes terete; buds closed, 
10-16 mm. long, pointed, not cuspidate; peduncles 1- 
(very rarely 3-) flowered. 

Leaves lanceolate or narrowly ovate, 1.5-3 cm. wide, 3-4 
times as long as wide, gradually narrowed to the acute 
or acuminate tip; fruit with 8-15 irregular longitudinal 

ridges P. rutidocarpum 

Leaves elliptic or oblong, 3-6 cm. wide, 2-3 times as long 
as wide, more abruptly narrowed to the obtusely 
pointed or rounded tip; fruit globose or pyriform, 
smooth P. guajava 

Lateral veins 6-15 pairs (mostly 10 pairs or fewer), if more 
numerous then slender and scarcely differentiated from 
the intermediate veins, or the plants very sparsely pubes- 
cent only; branchlets and flowers various. 
Lower leaf-surface hirsutulous, the numerous hairs erect or 

nearly so, 0.5-1 mm. long. 

Pubescence of branchlets reddish; buds 10-12 mm. long, 
almost completely closed; peduncle 1.5-3 cm. long, 

3-flowered P. guineense 

Pubescence tawny yellow; buds 3.5-6 mm. long, with 5 
broad low calyx-lobes 1-1.5 mm. long; peduncle 1- 

1.5 cm. long or less, 3- to 7-flowered P. fulvum 

Lower leaf-surface glabrous or sparingly pubescent or 
strigose. 



FLORA OF PERU 789 

Leaves small for the genus, mostly 5.5 cm. long or less, 
often acute at both ends; buds 5-7 mm. long, open, 
the 5 broad low calyx-lobes much shorter than the 
corolla; branchlets terete or sometimes longitudi- 
nally channeled. 

Dichasia 3-flowered, with very slender divaricate 
branches; calyx-lobes 1 mm. long or less; marginal 
vein of leaf strongly arcuate, 1.5-4 mm. from the 
margin at the points where the arches join the 
lateral veins; glands not apparent even in young 
leaves P. pedicellatum 

Flowers solitary; calyx-lobes more than 2.5 mm. long; 
marginal vein about 1 mm. from the margin, not 
strongly arcuate; leaves gland-dotted on both sides 
at least when young P. arayan 

Leaves larger, 5-10 cm. long or even longer; buds 10-16 
mm. long, closed at apex; branchlets various. 

Branchlets quadrangular, wing-angled; buds shortly 
apiculate; lateral veins 10 pairs or fewer; leaves 
usually with very numerous dark raised glands 
beneath; Amazonian lowlands, widely distributed. 

P. acutangulum 

Branchlets compressed, sometimes with low rounded 
ridges, not wing-angled ; buds with linear or subu- 
late apiculum 2-5 mm. long; lateral veins 10-15 
pairs; leaves with numerous small open glandular 
depressions of varying sizes, on both surfaces; 
Pacific slopes, Tumbez P. rostratum 

Psidium acutangulum DC. Prodr. 3: 233. 1828. P. grandi- 
florum R. & P. Fl. Peruv. & Chil. 4: t. 421 a, ined. [71802]; G. Don, 
Gen. Hist. 2: 831. 1832. 

A small tree, glabrous except for the reddish-strigose vegetative 
buds, or usually also the young branchlets and leaves and sometimes 
the peduncles sparingly and finely appressed-pubescent; branchlets 
quadrangular, wing-angled below the leaf -bases, or the wings up to 
1 mm. wide and with stipule-like tips extending beyond the petiole- 
base on each side; leaves elliptic, (1.7-) 2.5-4 (-6) cm. wide, (3-) 
6-10 (-14) cm. long, 2-2.5 times as long as wide, about equally nar- 
rowed to the gradually acuminate tip and the rounded or subcuneate 



790 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

base, the margins decurrent on the short petiole, this 2-4 (-6) mm. 
long; mid vein and in mature leaves usually the lateral veins im- 
pressed above, more prominent beneath; lateral veins 10 pairs or 
fewer, not forming a continuous marginal vein but diminishing dis- 
tally, each reaching a point 1.5-3 mm. from the margin, then recurv- 
ing and joining the next succeeding vein; leaves green in drying, the 
upper surface smooth and sparingly gland-dotted, the lower surface 
dull and often very thickly gland-dotted; inflorescence axillary, 
1-flowered (rarely 3-flowered), the peduncle mostly 2-4 cm. long, 
1 mm. thick (in fruit 1.5 mm.); bracteoles subulate, 3 mm. long; 
buds at maturity 10-12 mm. long, closed at the tip, the narrowly 
obovoid hypanthium 3-4 mm. long, little or not at all constricted 
at summit, thence expanded abruptly into the nearly globose, apic- 
ulate calyx; calyx splitting irregularly into 4-5 lobes; style 11-14 
mm. long, the peltate biconvex stigma about 0.5 mm. across; petals 
white, broadly obovate, 15-18 mm. long; stamens very numerous, 
more than 300, up to 10 mm. long, the anthers 1-1.7 mm. long; fruit 
globose or somewhat pyriform, smooth or glandular- verrucose, 1.5- 
2.5 cm. in diameter, the seeds obtusely triangular, about 7 mm. on 
a side; embryo C-shaped. F.M. Neg. 19748. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 6029, 6553Loreto: On the 
Amazon River, Williams 1989. Pebas, Williams 1849, 1995. Ca- 
ballo-Cocha, Williams 2276. Amazonian Brazil to the Guianas. 
"Ampi yacu/' "Puca yacu," "Guayava del agua" (Williams). 

Psidium arayan (HBK.) Burret, Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berl. 15: 
484. 1941. Myrtus arayan HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 133 (folio ed. 
p. 106). 1823. 

A shrub about 2 meters high, with terete branchlets, finely hirtel- 
lous-pubescent on the branchlets, peduncles, bases and veins of leaves, 
with yellowish hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; leaves elliptic, thin, pointed 
at both ends, 1-1.6 (-2) cm. wide, 3.5-4.5 cm. long, 2.5-3 times as 
long as wide, the tip acute, the base narrowed and slightly rounded 
to the flat summit of the channeled petiole 4 mm. long; mid vein flat 
above or impressed near the base, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
very slender and obscure, about 15 pairs; marginal vein about equal- 
ing the laterals, about 1 mm. from the margin; leaves lustrous above, 
gland-dotted on both sides at least when young; peduncles solitary, 
axillary, pubescent, 1-flowered, 2-3 cm. long and about 1 mm. thick; 
bracts (according to Kunth) linear, glabrous, spreading, longer than 
the calyx; calyx 5-parted, the lobes broadly rounded or somewhat 
pointed, ciliate-margined, about 2.8 mm. long, 3.3 mm. wide at base; 



FLORA OF PERU 791 

buds before anthesis 6-7 mm. long, nearly globose above the strigose, 
broadly obconic hypanthium, the globe of the petals much exceeding 
the calyx; petals (according to Kunth) white, orbicular, glabrous, 
about as long as the glabrous style and the very numerous stamens 
with subrotund-ovate anthers; ovary trilocular with many ovules 
(according to Kunth); fruit (according to Bonpland), globose, red, 
tasty, bilocular, crowned with the persistent calyx, the locules 1- 
seeded. A species which seems to be related to Psidium salutare 
(HBK.) Berg, of northern South America. Apparently P. arayan 
has not been collected except by Bonpland. The type locality, 
"prope Gonzanamam Peruvianorum, ad ripam fluminis Catamayo, 
alt. 1080 hex.," is actually in Ecuador, about 30 km. southwest of 
Loja. The vernacular name "Arrayan," from which the specific 
epithet was derived, is applied loosely throughout Spanish America 
to various small-leaved Myrtaceae and sometimes to plants of other 
families. F.M. Neg. 36874. 
Peru (probably). Ecuador. 

Psidium caudatum McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 226. 1956. 
Psidiopsis moritziana Berg, Linnaea 27: 351. 1856. Calycolpus 
moritzianus (Berg) Burret, in Fedde Repert. Sp. Nov. 50: 57. 1941. 
Not Psidium moritzianum Berg, 1856. 

Tree to 20 meters high, the branchlets compressed, not angled, 
like the inflorescence and young leaves appressed-pubescent with 
pale yellowish-white, partly sessile, fusiform and dibrachiate hairs 
up to 0.5 mm. long, or the hairs on the vegetative buds to 1 mm. 
long, a few fusiform hairs persisting on the leaves especially below; 
leaves elliptic to lance-ovate, 1.5-3.5 cm. wide, 5-9 cm. long, 2-3.5 
times as long as wide, with slender, attenuate and often oblique 
acumen 1-1.5 cm. long, the base rounded or acute, the margins 
cuneately decurrent on the rather slender petiole up to 1 mm. thick, 
4-6 mm. long; mid vein impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral 
veins impressed as faint lines above, slightly raised beneath, very 
slender and closely parallel, 15-30 pairs, but the exact number often 
uncertain because of branching and weak intermediate veins; margi- 
nal vein about equaling the laterals, nearly straight, less than 1 mm. 
from the margin (often 0.5 mm. and covered by the inrolled margin) ; 
blades dark and smooth above, without apparent glands at maturity, 
or with some small dark or impressed dots; lower surface paler, with 
numerous dark raised lustrous glands; peduncles axillary, 1-flowered, 
(1.5-) 3-4 cm. long, slightly compressed distally and 1.5 mm. wide 
below the bracts, which are delicate, lanceolate, 5 mm. long, falling 



792 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

before an thesis; buds 8-10 mm. long exclusive of the appendages, 
pyriform; calyx- tube longer than the hypanthium, narrowed at the 
mouth, surmounted by 5 free erect or spreading foliaceous narrow 
appendages, these 1.5-3 mm. wide, 6-14 mm. long, with narrow base 
and lanceolate to linear body, nearly glabrous or strongly pubescent 
near base within; tube at anthesis breaking longitudinally down to 
the summit of the ovary into 5 ovate segments 4.5-5 mm. long and 
wide, these pubescent without, matted-tomentose within, tipped by 
the persistent appendages; disk nearly flat, 7-8 mm. wide with gla- 
brous verrucose center 2.5 mm. wide, the hairy staminal ring 1-1.5 
mm. wide; style up to 8 mm. long, glabrous, the peltate stigma 0.6- 
1 mm. wide; stamens about 300?, shorter than the style, the anthers 
linear, 1-1.6 mm. long; petals concave, hairy outside, up to 15 mm. 
long; fruit not seen. A species of uncertain generic position, prob- 
ably not especially closely related to Calycolpus and not very differ- 
ent from Psidium, but well marked by the unique appendages of the 
calyx. The plant has been collected as near the borders of Peru as 
the lowlands of eastern Ecuador, on the Rio Pastaza (Rimbach 268} . 
F.M. Neg. 23489. 

Peru (probably) . Amazonian Brazil, and Ecuador, to Venezuela 
and northern Colombia. 

Psidium densicomum DC. Prodr. 3: 235. 1828. 

A small tree, completely glabrous; branchlets somewhat com- 
pressed, not angled; leaves ovate, 3-5 cm. wide, 7-14 cm. long, 
mostly 2.3-3.3 times as long as wide, narrowed uniformly from be- 
low or near the middle to the sharply acute and mucronate tip, 
broadly rounded and finally shortly cuneate at the base, the margins 
decurrent on the rather slender petiole about 1 mm. thick, 5-9 mm. 
long; midvein flat above or concave near the base of the blade; lat- 
eral veins 5-10 pairs, not forming a marginal vein but strongly 
diminishing distally, each reaching a point 2 mm. or less from the 
margin, then recurving and joining the next succeeding vein; leaves 
green in drying, sparingly and inconspicuously gland-dotted, some- 
what lustrous above, dull beneath; inflorescence axillary, 1-flowered, 
or in more vigorous individuals partly or all 3-flowered, the peduncle 
2-^4 cm. long, 0.7-1 mm. thick; bracts foliaceous, linear, sometimes 
petiolate, up to 5 mm. wide and 2.5 cm. long; pedicels in 3-flowered 
dichasia 10-18 mm. long; buds at maturity 12-15 mm. long, the 
hypanthium a little less than half this length, narrowly obconic, 
crowned by the flaring sinuately 5-lobed calyx 6-10 mm. across, the 
lobes broadly rounded, about 2 mm. high; calyx at maturity split- 



FLORA OF PERU 793 

ting irregularly between the lobes; style 9-12 mm. long, the biconvex 
stigma about 0.5 mm. across; petals white, 12-15 mm. long, elliptic 
or obovate; stamens 175-200, the longest about as long as the style, 
the anthers 1-1.5 (-2) mm. long; fruit globose, 1.5-2 cm. thick; seeds 
C-shaped, 8 mm. long, 5 mm. high, 2 mm. thick. A most distinctive 
species, readily recognized by the complete lack of pubescence, and 
the pointed and mucronate, rather than acuminate leaves. F.M. 
Neg. 19711. 

Loreto: Rio Itaya above Iquitos, Kittip & Smith 29283, 29386. 
Mishuyacu, King 1552, 1560. Rio Putumayo, Peru-Colombia 
boundary, Klug 1619. Pebas, Williams 1847, 1990. Amazonian 
Brazil to central Colombia (Rio Guaviare). "Ampi-yacu" (Wil- 
liams). "Guayava silvestre" (Klug). 

Psidium fulvum McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 226. 1956. 

A shrub or tree, the branchlets, vegetative buds, inflorescence, 
petioles and lower surfaces of the leaves densely tawny-hirsutulous 
with sharp, somewhat flexuous lustrous hairs up to about 0.5 mm. 
long, the upper surfaces of the leaves sparingly hairy with similar 
hairs, probably glabrescent in age; leaves broadly ovate, 3-5.5 cm. 
wide, 5-11 cm. long, 1.4-2 times as long as wide, rounded or obtusely 
pointed at tip, rounded at base, the margins shortly decurrent on the 
stout petiole 1.5 mm. thick, 4-11 mm. long; mid vein impressed and 
hairy above, prominent beneath ; lateral veins 8-10 pairs, somewhat 
impressed above, prominent beneath; marginal vein similar to lat- 
erals but weaker, strongly arched between them, 1-3.5 mm. from the 
margin; blades darkening in drying, dark brown and lustrous above, 
yellow-brown beneath; glands not apparent; inflorescences in the 
axils of old leaves or usually from the lower pairs of nodes of new 
leafy shoots, consisting of 3- to 7-flowered dichasia with the terminal 
flowers sessile, the peduncle 8-16 mm. long and more than 1 mm. 
thick, the pedicels of the second and third orders 3-7 mm. long; 
bracts and bracteoles probably linear, deciduous before anthesis; 
buds 3.5-6 mm. long, the hypanthium and calyx together broadly 
infundibuliform, truncate, 2.5-4 mm. long, surpassed by the globe of 
the petals; calyx-lobes 5, apically rounded but much elongated later- 
ally, 2-2.5 mm. wide, 1-1.5 mm. long, hirsute on both sides, sepa- 
rated at the sinuses by short splits at full anthesis; disk strongly 
5-angled and 5-lobed, 3-4.5 mm. wide, completely glabrous; style 
glabrous, 6 mm. long, with small capitate stigma; stamens about 200, 
crowded in the bud and at least the inner irregularly incurved, about 
6 mm. long, the anthers about 0.5 mm. long; petals concave, broadly 



794 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

obovate, 4-6 mm. long, hairy on the outer surface and prominently 
gland-dotted; ovary 3-locular, the ovules about 20 in each locule, 
attached about the margin of a stalked axile placenta and directed 
inward toward the center of the ovary. In the absence of mature 
fruit the generic position of this species is somewhat uncertain, but 
the internal structure of the ovary is like that of Psidium, and the 
general appearance of the plant suggests that genus. Univ. of Mich. 
Neg. 484. 

Amazonas: Chachapoyas, Mathews ["derniere collect."] (BM, 
type). 

The type, and a duplicate at Kew, are in young bud. Another 
collection, without definite locality except "Chachapoyas," repre- 
sented at Kew by two sheets, has the flowers and leaves fully 
expanded. 

Psidium guajava L. Sp. PI. 470. 1753. P. pyriferum L. Sp. PI. 
ed. 2. 672. 1762. P. pomiferum L. I.e. 

A shrub, or tree up to 10 meters high, pubescent on the young 
growth, and the inflorescence and at least the lower surface of the 
leaves sparingly or densely pubescent with mostly appressed, soft 
silvery-gray or pale reddish hairs up to about 0.5 mm. long; branch- 
lets terete, or quadrangular with pronounced angles or low wings 
below the nodes; leaves elliptic or oblong, 3-6 cm. wide, (4.7-) 8-14 
cm. long, mostly 2-3 times as long as wide, rather abruptly rounded 
or occasionally narrowed to the obtusely pointed or rounded tip, the 
base abruptly rounded or subcuneately narrowed, the margins de- 
current on the stout petiole 1-2 mm. thick, 4-7 (-10) mm. long; 
veins prominent beneath, usually markedly impressed above; lateral 
veins 12-20 pairs, often conspicuous and parallel, not forming a mar- 
ginal vein but diminishing distally, each approaching to within 1-2 
mm. from the margin, then incurving and joined to the next succeed- 
ing vein by a strong straight perpendicular vein; upper surface of 
blade inconspicuously gland-dotted, glabrous or thinly pubescent, 
the small veins little or not at all elevated and scarcely apparent; 
lower surface finely appressed-pubescent or glabrous, thickly gland- 
dotted; inflorescence axillary, 1-flowered (very rarely 3-flowered), the 
peduncle (7-) 10-20 (-25) mm. long, 1 mm. or more thick, up to 2.5 
mm. thick in fruit; bracteoles subulate, often glabrous, 3-4 mm. long; 
buds at maturity 13-16 mm. long, completely closed at tip, the hy- 
panthium 5-7.5 mm. long, constricted at summit and thence enlarged 
into the ovoid pointed calyx; calyx at maturity splitting irregularly 



FLORA OF PERU 795 

into 4-5 lobes which are appressed-pubescent distally; proximal third 
of the calyx, and the summit of the ovary, glabrous; style 10-12 mm. 
long, the flat peltate stigma 0.5 mm. wide; petals white, elliptic, 
cucullate, 10-12 mm. long; stamens 1507-275, the longest as long as 
the style; anthers 0.8-1.2 mm. long; fruit globose or pyriform, 2-6 
cm. long, yellow or pinkish. In addition to the characters of foliage, 
branchlets, and pubescence, which have been used by Berg and by 
more recent authors to separate this species from the similar Psidium 
guineense, it transpires that the two plants may be separated also 
by the number of flowers, the average length of the peduncle, the 
size and shape of the buds, the length of the style and anthers. 
The two thus appear amply distinct. They are sufficiently similar, 
however, to make possible hybridization between them seem likely. 
Since both are cultivated throughout the tropics, opportunities for 
hybridization should not be wanting. Both P. guajava and P. gui- 
neense are highly variable with respect to unit characters, and this 
fact strengthens the case for postulating hybridization. I have seen 
few specimens from Peru that were not clearly referable to one spe- 
cies or the other, but from Ecuador northward along the eastern 
slopes of the Andes there are numerous collections which seem to 
represent a variable intermediate population. These plants often 
have the aspect and pubescence of P. guineense, but the leaves are 
relatively narrow, the peduncles often 1-flowered, the veins some- 
times impressed. This is Psidium lehmannii Diels (Engl. Bot. Jahrb. 
37: 594. 1906). A detailed analysis of this population in the field, 
combined with a revisionary study of the whole group of species 
which centers around P. guajava, would be a valuable contribution 
to the taxonomy of tropical cultivated plants. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 553 %. Loreto: Near mouth of 
Rio Chanuzi, Ferreyra 5049. Mishuyacu, King 1036. Above Pongo 
de Manseriche, border forest of Rio Santiago, Mexia 6267. Yuri- 
maguas, Williams 4002. Pebas, Williams 1587. Lower Rio Nanay, 
Williams 271, 552. San Antonio, Alto Rio Itaya, Williams 3502. 
Rio Masana, Williams 108, 187. Huanuco: Huanuco, Macbride & 
Feather stone 2444- Junin: Debajo de Huacapistana, Ferreyra 11197. 
La Merced, Killip & Smith 23428. Colonia Perene, near "Haci- 
enda 3," Killip & Smith 25121. Lima: Chosica, Macbride & Feath- 
er stone 522. Cuzco?: Hda. Panayoc, Valle Lares, Diehl 2514. 
Locality uncertain: Dombey 788; Ruiz & Pavon 23/84 (Herb. Ma- 
drid), Ruiz & Pavon s.n. (Herb. Barbey-Boissier) ; ex Reliquiae 
Bourgaeanae, March, 1870. Cultivated throughout the tropics and 



796 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

often spreading and becoming established and weedy. Known 
throughout Spanish America as "guayabo" (the tree), and "guayaba" 
(the fruit), (English, guava). 

A plant resembling this species but the veins 10-12 only, and 
the peduncles 3-flowered, may represent a hybrid between P. gua- 
java and P. guineense (Williams 3226, from Paraiso, upper Rio 
Itaya, Loreto). 

Psidium guineense Sw. Prodr. 77. 1788. P. araca Raddi, 
Mem. 5. pL 1. 1821. P. ooideum var. longipedunculatum Rusby, 
Mem. Torr. Bot. Club 3, no. 3: 27. 1893. 

A shrub or small tree, up to 7 meters high, usually heavily pubes- 
cent on the young growth, the inflorescence and at least the lower 
surface of the leaves with erect, soft, flexuous, pale- or coppery-red 
hairs up to 1 mm. long; branchlets nearly terete to moderately com- 
pressed, rarely with definite angles below the leaf -bases; leaves 
broadly elliptic or sometimes obovate, (2.7-) 4-6 (-8) cm. wide, 
(3.5-) 6-10 (-14) cm. long, (1-) 1.6-2 times as long as wide, abruptly 
narrowed about equally to the rounded base and to the rounded or 
obtusely pointed apex, or narrowed gradually from above the middle 
toward the rounded or rarely subcuneate base; margins decurrent 
on the stout petiole 1-2 mm. thick, 5-10 mm. long; midvein slightly 
impressed above, prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, plane 
or nearly so above, prominent beneath, strongly ascending, not form- 
ing a marginal vein but each lateral decreasing distally, curving 
toward the tip of the leaf, and inward, from a point 1-2 mm. from 
the margin, sometimes connected to the next lateral by a strong 
straight perpendicular vein near the tip; upper surface of leaf incon- 
spicuously gland-dotted, usually somewhat pubescent (at least with 
a line of reddish hairs along the midvein), often with numerous evi- 
dent small veins which are slightly elevated when dry and form a 
prominent pattern at right angles to the midrib and at an acute 
angle to the lateral veins; lower surface persistently pubescent, 
thickly and conspicuously gland-dotted; inflorescence an axillary 
dichasium, usually 3-flowered but 1-flowered in some axils, or in 
occasional plants (about 1 in 10 as far as known), all 1-flowered; 
peduncle (12-) 17-32 mm. long, 1-2 mm. wide near summit and 
there somewhat compressed; central flower sessile or nearly so, the 
two lateral ones on pedicels 8-12 mm. long; bracts and bracteoles 
linear or subulate, about 3 mm. long, or the bracts leafy and up to 
1.5 cm. long; bracteoles often with abortive axillary buds; buds at 
maturity 10-12 mm. long, incompletely closed at tip, the hypan- 



FLORA OF PERU 797 

thium 4-5 mm. long, constricted at summit and thence enlarged 
into the obtusely pointed or nearly globose calyx; calyx at maturity 
splitting irregularly into 4-5 lobes which are appressed-pubescent 
distally; proximal third of the calyx, and the summit of the ovary, 
glabrous; style glabrous, 7-11 mm. long, the flat peltate stigma 
0.5 mm. wide; petals white, elliptic, cucullate, 10-14 mm. long; sta- 
mens about 150-200, as long as the style or shorter; anthers 1.2-2.2 
mm. long; fruit globose or pyriform, 1-2 cm. in diameter, yellowish- 
green (Steinbach), edible, with a delicate acid taste (Steinbach). 

Amazonas: Chachapoyas, Mathews. San Martin: Tarapoto, 
Williams 5602. Loreto: Caballo-Cocha, Williams 2157. Hudnuco: 
Hda. Villcabamba on Rio Chinchao, 5003. Cuchero, Poeppig 1235. 
Cuzco: Rio Chaupimayo, Prov. Convention, Soukup 795. Through- 
out tropical America, often cultivated, from northern Argentina to 
the West Indies and Mexico. "Guayabillo," "Guayaba brava" 
(Williams), "Sacha guayaba" (Williams), "Huayava" (Quechua, 
Williams) . 

Psidium maribense Mart, ex DC. Prodr. 3: 233. 1828. P. cre- 
natum Berg, Linnaea 27: 373. 1856. 

A shrub, or treelike, up to 2 meters high, with terete or com- 
pressed branchlets, finely pubescent with soft crisped sordid hairs 
up to 0.3-0.4 mm. long, or a little longer on the petioles, the hairs 
abundant and mostly erect on the branchlets, peduncles, petioles and 
veins of the lower leaf-surface, scattered and appressed elsewhere 
on the lower leaf-surface, and mostly wanting from the upper leaf- 
surface except along the midvein; leaves elliptic, oblanceolate, cune- 
ate or obovate, crenate especially distally, with up to 25 or more 
shallow notches on each side, at least the larger notches with a gland 
at base; blades 1-2 (-2.5) cm. wide, 2-7 cm. long, (1.3-) 2-2.5 (-3.3) 
times as long as wide, obtusely pointed to rounded or emarginate, 
cuspidate, the cusp often oblique or turned down and appearing 
subterminal and dorsal; base rounded to obtuse or, especially on 
shoots, cuneate, the margins decurrent on the petiole 0.5-0.8 mm. 
thick, 1.5-4 mm. long; midvein shallowly impressed or plane above, 
prominent beneath; lateral veins 6-10 pairs, obscure above, promin- 
ulous beneath, diminishing distally, not forming a marginal vein 
but recurving 0.5-1 mm. from the margin to join the next succeed- 
ing vein; blades nearly concolorous, or darker and more lustrous 
above, gland-dotted both sides or the glands obscure in age; flowers 
solitary, axillary, the peduncles 7-18 mm. long, nearly terete and 



798 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

up to 1 mm. thick (to 1.6 mm. in fruit); bracts borne at the sum- 
mit of the peduncle, deciduous, subulate, ciliate, 1.5 mm. long; buds 
glabrous, about 12 mm. long, with prominent dark elevated dots, 
the hypanthium obconic or narrowly obovate, 4 mm. long, expanded 
abruptly at the summit to the pale, ovoid, shortly apiculate calyx 
5-6 mm. in diameter, 8 mm. long; calyx at anthesis splitting longi- 
tudinally into 2 nearly equal divisions; disk about 5-6 mm. wide, 
the staminal ring hairy, the glabrous center about 2.5 mm. wide; 
style glabrous, 9-17 mm. long; stamens about 250, 10-12 mm. long, 
the anthers 0.7 mm. long; petals 8, concave, unequal, the outer ones 
broadly ovate, 8-12 mm. wide, 15 mm. long; fruit subglobose or a 
little prolonged at base, 1-1.7 cm. in diameter. This species is rather 
widely distributed in the lowlands of the upper Amazon drainage, 
from Brazil to Venezuela; the type came from Maripi on the Rio 
Japura, Brazil. Psidium crenatum was distinguished by Berg on the 
basis of its oblong leaves acute at base, as contrasted to obovate 
leaves cuneate at base as in the type of P. maribense. Examination 
of the type of P. maribense, and other specimens, indicates that 
cuneate leaves tend to occur on vigorous shoots, whereas shorter 
leaves with acute bases predominate on fruiting branches. F.M. 
Neg. 19715. 

Peru (probably). Amazonian Brazil to Venezuela. 

Psidium pedicellatum McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 227. 1956. 

Tree 12 meters high, the branchlets and young growth puberulent 
with erect or crisped sordid hairs to 0.2 mm. long, a few hairs per- 
sistent on the inflorescence and the veins of the lower leaf-surface; 
leaves (immature) broadly elliptic-ovate, 2-3.5 cm. wide, 3-5.5 cm. 
long, about 1.5 (-2) times as long as wide, the tip shortly acuminate, 
the base acute or somewhat rounded, the margins decurrent on the 
petiole 1 mm. thick, 3-5 mm. long; midvein above pubescent, im- 
pressed, prominent beneath; lateral veins 7-10 pairs, not prominent 
above, more so beneath, appearing to terminate in the marginal vein 
which is weaker than the laterals and strongly arched between them, 
1-4 mm. from the margin; glands not apparent even in young leaves; 
blades darker and lustrous-green (Steyermark) above, dull beneath; 
flowers in dichasia, these axillary on new shoots, up to 3 cm. long, 3- 
(to 4-) flowered, or the flowers solitary at the lowest node and sub- 
tended by ovate bracts 2 mm. long; peduncle in 3-flowered dichasium 
1-1.5 cm. long, slightly compressed and 1 mm. wide at summit, the 
filiform branches 5-6 mm. long, divaricate; bracts deciduous before 



FLORA OF PERU 799 



anthesis, lanceolate, up to 1.5 mm. long, the bracteoles similar, 
smaller; buds glabrous, about 5 mm. long, turbinate, broadly ex- 
panded above the obconic hypanthium; calyx much exceeded by the 
expanding corolla, its margin arcuate-undulate with 5 low ciliate 
bluntly pointed lobes, these 0.8-1 mm. high, the sinuses splitting 
down slightly after anthesis; disk glabrous, about 2.5 mm. wide; 
style 4-5 mm. long, the stigma subpeltate; stamens about 150, prob- 
ably as long as the style, the anthers about 0.4 mm. long; petals sub- 
orbicular, concave, 5 mm. long and wide; ovary bilocular, the ovules 
about 20 in each locule, in a double incurved row about the margin 
of an apparently peltate placenta; fruit unknown. Known only 
from the type, Steyermark 54571, from Quebrada Honda, Santiago- 
Zamora, Ecuador. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 472. 

Peru (probably). Southern Ecuador. 

Psidium rostratum McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 29: 227. 1956. 

Shrub or tree to 10 meters high, sparingly pubescent or strigose 
in the inflorescence (very densely so on the inner surface of the calyx) , 
and on leaves, petioles and young shoots, with yellowish hairs up to 
0.5 mm. long; leaves somewhat irregularly ovate to oblong or even 
obovate, 5-7 cm. wide, 10-14 cm. long, about twice as long as wide, 
acute or blunt-tipped, the base rounded to acute, the margins more 
or less cuneately decurrent on the petiole 1-1.5 mm. thick, 5-7 mm. 
long; mid vein impressed above, but at least distally flattened and 
then depressed below the surface, prominent beneath; lateral veins 
10-15 pairs, probably impressed above on the mature leaves, prom- 
inent beneath, not forming a marginal vein but diminishing distally, 
recurving from a point 1-2 mm. from the margin to join the next 
adjacent vein; leaves smooth and essentially glabrous, dark and 
probably somewhat lustrous above, paler and more yellow, dull and 
somewhat hairy beneath, both surfaces with numerous small open 
glandular depressions of varying sizes; peduncles axillary, 1-flowered, 
1.5-4 cm. long, flattened, 1-1.3 mm. wide near summit, on new leafy 
shoots or the lowest 1-3 pairs at leafless nodes, or the axis abortive 
beyond them and appearing racemose; bracts deciduous before an- 
thesis, but the broad-based subulate stipuloid processes persistent, 
0.6 mm. long; flowers sessile, the bud closed, glabrous except at very 
tip, 12-16 mm. long including the narrowly obconic hypanthium 3- 
4 mm. long, the broadly obovoid or subglobose body 7-9 mm. long, 
and the narrowly linear or subulate tip 2-5 mm. long; calyx ruptur- 
ing irregularly at anthesis, not into definite lobes but the tip often 



800 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

breaking away as an ill-defined operculum; disk 12-14 mm. wide, 
the glabrous center 4-4.5 mm. wide, the short-hairy staminal ring 
3-4 mm. wide; style 10-13 mm. long, the stigma narrowly peltate; 
stamens very numerous, probably about 300, as long as the style, 
the anthers linear, 0.8-1 mm. long; petals white, obovate, short- 
ciliate, about 10 mm. wide, 16 mm. long. Univ. of Mich. Negs. 
471, 494. 

Tumbez : Mountains east of Hacienda Chicama, 900-1000 meters, 
deciduous bushwood, Feb. 19-24, 1927, A. Weberbauer 7648 (F, type). 
"Guayavo." 

Psidium rutidocarpum R. & P. ex G. Don, Gen. Hist. 2: 833. 
1832. P. rypdocarpum R. & P. Fl. Peruv. & Chil. 4: t. 420b, ined. 
[71802]. P. ruizianum Berg, Linnaea 27: 365. 1856. P. xidocarpum 
Ruiz herb, ex Berg, I.e., nomen. P. pratense Poepp. herb, ex Berg, 
I.e., nomen. 

A shrub 5 meters high, or according to Poeppig a tree 16-20 feet 
high, with thin straw-colored spotted bark; twigs, inflorescence and 
lower leaf-surface (especially on the veins) pubescent with erect soft, 
pale brownish, flexuous hairs up to 0.5 mm. long; branchlets some- 
what four-angled; leaves lanceolate or narrowly ovate, 1.5-3 cm. 
wide, 4.5-11 cm. long, mostly 3-4 times as long as wide, gradually 
narrowed to a slender blunt tip or slenderly acuminate, rounded at 
base, the margins decurrent on a stout petiole 1 mm. or more thick, 
2-6 mm. long; midvein and lateral veins impressed above, promi- 
nent beneath; lateral veins 12-20 pairs, not forming a marginal vein 
but strongly diminishing distally, each reaching a point 1 mm. or 
less from the margin, then turning abruptly to join the next succeed- 
ing vein; leaves browning in drying, the upper surface dark, smooth 
and glabrous, the glands and small veins not readily apparent; lower 
surface reddish-brown, dull, hairy on the principal veins, with numer- 
ous small dark glandular dots and numerous delicate reticulate vein- 
lets, the latter glabrous or nearly so; peduncles axillary, 1-flowered, 
1-1.5 mm. thick, 12-20 mm. long; complete bud and flower not seen; 
bud (according to Berg) 10 mm. long, oblong, closed, somewhat 
acute, not cuspidate; calyx at maturity splitting irregularly into 
about 4 lobes, these nearly glabrous without, thickly appressed 
rufous-pubescent within except at base; disk glabrous; style (ex 
Berg) strigose, 6 mm. long; petals (ex Berg) 4, subrotund, 8 mm. 
long; stamens about 175; fruit ovoid, according to Poeppig hard, 
bitter and scarcely edible, about 1-2 cm. long, up to 1.5 cm. thick, 



FLORA OF PERU 801 

the surface roughened with 8-15 irregular longitudinal ridges. 
F.M. Neg. 36420. 

Huanuco: Cerro San Cristobal ad Cuchero, Poeppigl716 (or 142}, 
paratype of P. ruizianum; type of P. pratense. Abajo de Mufia, 
valle del Rio Huallaga, 1800-1900 meters, Weberbauer 6793. Pozuzo, 
Ruiz, type of P. ruizianum and P. rypdocarpum. 

Sterile shoots of a plant resembling this species, but having the 
leaves pubescent above, loosely ochraceous-woolly beneath, and 
prominently dotted with reddish glands on both surfaces, were col- 
lected by 0. F. Cook and G. B. Gilbert (no. 1575, Herb. US) at Santa 
Ana, alt. ca. 900 meters, June 29, 1915. 

Psidium sp. 

A shrub or tree with foliage and pubescence superficially resem- 
bling those of Eugenia ulei. Williams' specimen cited below was 
originally thought to represent a fruiting specimen of E. ulei (Psid- 
ium ulei Diels), which is known only from a flowering specimen. 
Williams' plant, however, appears to be a true Psidium; the inflores- 
cence is an axillary dichasium, 1- to 3-flowered, with peduncle 2.5- 
3 cm. long; the fruit is pyriform or subglobose, 1.5-2 cm. in diam- 
eter, 1.5-2.5 cm. long; the seeds are numerous, reniform, pale tan in 
color, 4-5 mm. long, with hippocrepiform embryo. The plant appears 
to differ from other Peruvian species of Psidium in its large calyx- 
lobes, 7-9 mm. long; these apparently separate lobes may have re- 
sulted from longitudinal slits in a partially closed calyx, for in the 
fruiting specimens collected by Williams the persistent lobes are 
somewhat irregularly shaped and the edges are broken. 

San Martin: Tarapoto, Williams 6173. 

DOUBTFUL SPECIES 

Psidium raimondii Burret, Repert. Sp. Nov. 50: 56. 1941. The 
type of this species is Raimondi 4752, formerly in Herb. Berlin. 
Paratypes are Raimondi's numbers 3920, 3473, 6589. I have not 
been able to see any of these specimens, and the identity of the spe- 
cies remains wholly in doubt. It was described as glabrous, with 
small leaves (2.5-4.3 cm. long, 2 cm. wide) densely and minutely 
tuberculate-glandular on both surfaces; the flowers solitary or in 
slender 2- or 3-flowered dichasia; calyx almost truncate, with ob- 
scurely repand-undulate margin. The type specimens were collected 
at a locality called Montana de Nancho, Prov. Hualgayoc, Caja- 
marca, Peru. 



802 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

10. UGNI Turcz. 
Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 384-393. 1856. 

Shrubs with numerous small coriaceous leaves mostly 2 cm. long 
or less. Calyx-lobes distinct, 5, rarely 4. Flowers solitary, with 
persistent foliaceous bracteoles. Stamens numerous (25 or more), 
the filaments somewhat flattened and dilated, the outer longer and 
broader, the anthers sagittate, introrse, basifixed and sometimes 
winged by the margins of the dilated connective. Ovary 3- or 4- 
locular (according to Berg), the numerous, ovules horizontal, affixed 
to the central bilamellate placentae. Seeds reniform or hippocrepi- 
form, with bony testa, the embryo arcuate. 

A genus of about 10 species or fewer, in montane forests from 
southern Mexico to Chile. It is distinguished technically from Myr- 
tus by the characteristic stamens, and from Myrteola by the stamens, 
by the somewhat larger leaves and by the usually 5-merous flowers. 

Ugni myricoides (HBK.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 391. 1856. Myrtus 
myricoides HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 131 (folio ed. p. 104). t. 539. 
1823. 

A shrub up to 2 meters high, the branchlets, inflorescence and 
young foliage strigose-canescent with sordid hairs; leaves elliptic, 
rigidly coriaceous, 3-8 mm. wide, 8-16 mm. long, about twice as long 
as wide, acute at both ends, the apex often glandular-pointed, the 
petiole about 2 mm. long; midvein narrowly sulcate above, broad 
and prominent beneath, the other veins not apparent; blades lus- 
trous, convex, dark green and impressed-punctate above, paler and 
dull beneath, with a few small glandular dots; flowers spreading or 
in age recurved, the pedicels 9-12 mm. long, 0.5 mm. thick; brac- 
teoles in texture like the leaves, elliptic or lanceolate, spreading or 
at last recurved, 1-1.5 mm. wide, 4-7 mm. long; hypanthium sessile 
in the bracteoles, hemispheric, 2-3 mm. high; calyx-lobes 5 (some- 
times 4 in a few flowers on the same plant), foliaceous, narrowly tri- 
angular or oblong with an acute tip, ascending or in fruit radiately 
spreading, 1.3-1.7 mm. wide at base, 2.5-3.5 mm. long; disk 2-2.5 
mm. wide, finely and sparingly pilose; style glabrous, 4 mm. long, 
with capitate stigma; stamens 25-30, rose-purple, the outer 2.5 mm. 
long; anthers 0.8 mm. long, merely sagittate, not winged; petals 
white, 4-5 mm. long; fruit globose, white, about 7 mm. in diameter; 
seeds 15-20, broadly reniform, 1.5-2 mm. long, straw color, lustrous. 
The above description is based on Colombian specimens. In the 
original description of Myrtus myricoides the type locality was given 



FLORA OF PERU 803 

as Peru, and the type specimen, in the Paris Herbarium, is labeled 
"Peruvia" with no further data. Comparison of specimens (see also 
a photograph of the type, F.M. Neg. 36895) leaves no doubt of the 
identity of M. myricoides, which is a common and well-known spe- 
cies of the region near Bogota, Colombia, where Humboldt and Bon- 
pland made extensive collections. There are no other Peruvian 
records for this species, or indeed for any other species of Ugni, and 
it is probable that Kunth was in error in ascribing the Bonpland 
specimens to Peru. The present plant, however, superficially resem- 
bles Myrteola vaccinioides (HBK.) Berg, for which the type locality 
is exactly the same (i.e. "Peru," without definite locality, both ac- 
cording to the type specimen, and to Kunth's published account, 
HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 130. 1823). It may be that the Colom- 
bian and Peruvian species were confused by Bonpland in the field 
and separated later, after the records of their respective origins had 
been lost. 

A recent collection of Ugni myricoides from southern Ecuador 
(Prov. Azuay, F. Prieto no. P-298) suggests that the species may ulti- 
mately be found in Peru. This Ecuadorian plant, however, is not 
identical with that described above, which has long pedicels and long 
acute calyx-lobes (both well shown by Kunth in HBK. Nov. Gen. & 
Sp. 6: t. 539. 1823). Prieto's plant, which is in fruit, has the pedicels 
5 mm. long and mostly hidden by the leaves; the calyx-lobes are ob- 
tuse or bluntly pointed, 2-2.5 mm. long and almost 2 mm. wide 
at base. 

In the Moricand herbarium, now at Geneva, is a specimen of 
Ugni molinae Turcz., a Chilean species, which is labeled "Myrtus 
lanceolata Peru Pa von." It was received by Moricand from Pavon 
in 1827, doubtless at the same time as some other specimens which 
are discussed above, under Eugenia. The presumption is that the 
present specimen originated in Chile and was erroneously supposed 
by Moricand to have come from Peru. 

Peru (probably). Venezuela and Colombia to southern Ecuador. 

11. MYRTEOLA Berg 
Reference: Berg, Linnaea 27: 393-397. 1856. 

Low shrubs, upright, or prostrate and subherbaceous, with per- 
sistent coriaceous vaccinioid leaves 1 cm. long or less. Calyx-lobes 
distinct, 4, rarely 5. Flowers solitary, with persistent foliaceous 
bracteoles. Stamens few (8-20) or numerous (30-65), the filaments 



804 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

filiform, the anthers elliptic-oblong. Ovary 3- (rarely 2-) locular, the 
placentae bilamellate, the ovules often 6-8 in a series. Seeds reni- 
form or hippocrepiform, with bony testa, the embryo arcuate. 

This is a small and easily recognized Andean group, ranging from 
Venezuela to southern Chile. Fewer than 15 species have been de- 
scribed and of these hardly more than 5 or 6 are valid, but general 
agreement as to specific limits will not easily be reached. As Kausel 
has pointed out with special reference to the Chilean species, con- 
stant characters are few and intermediate forms are abundant. 
Apparently the genus comprises two principal genetic lines, one 
occupying the whole range of the genus and the second in the cen- 
tral Andes from Bolivia to Ecuador. Plants of the one series are 
often prostrate or subherbaceous, or with extensive rhizomes and 
short upright flowering branches; the stamens are relatively few (20 
or fewer), the leaves are relatively broad and glabrous and tend to 
become bullate in drying, i.e. the epidermis of the lower surface 
separates from the parenchyma and the surface becomes puckered 
and more or less featureless. Two species of this series, Myrteola 
oxycoccoides of Colombia and Ecuador and the Chilean M. nummu- 
laria (Poir.) Berg, are closely similar and perhaps actually conspe- 
cific; this is one of the few cases in which a definite relationship can 
be pointed out between the near-endemic myrtaceous flora of Chile 
and that of the rest of South America. The second series in Myrteola 
includes several upright shrubs which are usually 1-2 meters high; 
the stamens are more numerous (30-65), and the leaves are rela- 
tively narrow and more generally pubescent, with less tendency to 
become bullate. 

As in so many other Andean genera of high altitudes, isolated 
populations in Myrteola often show individual differences. Variation 
in some characters (e.g. pubescence, leaf-shape, and stamen-number) 
seems extreme, suggesting the possibility of past or present gene in- 
terchange between the two series. The following arrangement of the 
Peruvian species is a somewhat formalized one which might be modi- 
fied after field studies. 

Berg seems to have been unaware of the polyandrous condition 
in this genus (although the type species, M. microphylla, has numer- 
ous stamens), and he indeed based Myrteola chiefly upon the 4-merous 
flowers and the oligandrous condition, neither of which is constant 
in the group. 

Whole plant glabrous or essentially so, subherbaceous, the stems 
prostrate and forming small mounds; leaves 6 mm. long or less, 



FLORA OF PERU 805 

often blunt-tipped and broadly ovate, the length/width ratio 
1.25-1.7; stamens 12 or fewer; northern Peru to Venezuela. 

M. oxycoccoides 

At least the young branches densely pubescent (in exceptional indi- 
vidual plants glabrous, but the leaves narrow and the plant an 
erect shrub with numerous stamens). 

Leaves with strongly revolute margins, appearing oblong-linear, 
narrowly lanceolate, or sagittate; lower leaf-surface densely 
strigose or setose like the branchlets and hypanthium with 
upwardly appressed white or blackish hairs 1 mm. long; brac- 
teoles 2.5-3 mm. long; stamens more than 30; Ecuador and 
northern Peru. 

Calyx-lobes 5; branchlets sparingly setose, the hairs coarse and 
rigid; leaves setose on the midrib beneath and sometimes 
somewhat hispid M. acerosa 

Calyx-lobes 4; branchlets strigose with abundant, somewhat 
silky hairs; leaves similarly strigose and often tomentose 
as well M. microphylla var. microphylla 

Leaf-margins not or scarcely revolute, the blades ovate, elliptic or 
lanceolate; lower leaf-surface glabrous or sparingly strigose 
especially on the mid vein and near the margins; hairs and 
stamens various. 

Stamens 20 or fewer; leaves mostly broadest below the middle, 
with a tendency to become bullate at least in age; plants 
with extensive rhizomes, the flowering branches prostrate 
or erect, often less than 20 cm. high (up to 1 meter) ; brac- 
teoles 1.5-3 mm. long; calyx-lobes 1.5-2 mm. long. 

Leaves narrowly lanceolate, 1.5-2 mm. wide, 6-7 mm. long, 
bullate from the first, the midvein not apparent beneath. 

M. vaccinioides var. carabaya 

Leaves ovate, 2.5-5 mm. wide, 4-8 mm. long, bullate in age 
or not at all, the midvein apparent at least in young 

leaves M. vaccinioides var. vaccinioides 

Stamens 30-65; leaves broadest near the middle or but slightly 
below it, not bullate or only exceptionally so, the midvein 
apparent beneath; erect shrubs mostly 1-2 meters high; 
bracteoles 3.5-6 mm. long; calyx-lobes 2.5-3.5 mm. long. 
Leaves bluntly acute, elliptic to ovate-elliptic, 6-8.5 mm. long, 
mostly 2-2.5 times as long as wide. 

M. microphylla var. glabrata 



806 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Leaves narrowly acute, elliptic to lance-elliptic, 7-10 mm. 
long, mostly 2.5-3 times as long as wide . . M. weberbaueri 

Myrteola acerosa (Berg) Barret, Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin 15: 
495. 1941. Myrtus acerosa Berg, Linnaea 29: 253. 1858. 

Probably a small erect shrub, the branchlets, petioles and inflo- 
rescence sparingly or closely setose with antrorsely appressed or 
spreading coarse rigid pale or blackish hairs about 1 mm. long; 
blades 4-7 mm. long, coriaceous, narrowly sagittate when dry, with 
margins strongly inrolled especially near the tips, 1.5 mm. wide in 
the rolled condition, rugulose, impressed-puncticulate and glabrous 
above or sparingly strigulose, sparingly setose beneath at least on 
the midvein; petiole 1 mm. long; peduncles 4-5 mm. long; bracteoles 
narrowly ovate, blunt-tipped, flat, 1.5 mm. wide, 3 mm. long, exceed- 
ing the hypanthium; flowers 5-merous; calyx-lobes obtusely triangu- 
lar, up to 1.5 mm. wide, 2.5 mm. long; stamens "48 or more" (Berg) 
to 75, the filaments up to 4.5 mm. long, the anthers 0.5 mm. long; 
style 4.5 mm. long; petals suborbicular, 3-4 mm. long, ciliolate; fruit 
not seen; ovary 2- (Berg) or 3-locular, each locule with 2 ascending 
ovules. A little known species, originally referred by Berg to Myrtus 
because of the numerous stamens and the 5-merous flowers. In spite 
of these features its similarity in all details to the other species of 
Myrteola is so great that I have no hesitation in following Burret in 
this disposal of it. The Weberbauer specimen agrees precisely with 
Berg's detailed description and is doubtless a topotype. 

Amazonas: Entre los Tambos Bagazan y Almirante, camino de 
Chachapoyas a Moyobamba, 2200-2300 meters, Weberbauer 4453 
(herb. USM); Bajasan, Fielding 1448 (herb. Petrop., not seen, 
type). 

Myrteola microphylla (Humb. & Bonpl.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 
393. 1856. Myrtus microphylla Humb. & Bonpl. PI. Aequin. 1: 19. 
pi 4. 1808. 

A shrub up to 1 meter high (to 2 meters according to Humboldt 
& Bonpland) with densely hirsute to abundantly hispid branchlets; 
leaf -blades glabrous to densely canescent-tomentose beneath; pedun- 
cles 3-9 (-15) mm. long; bracteoles 3-5.5 mm. long, often linear and 
1 mm. wide, sometimes spatulate and 2.5 mm. wide, usually much 
exceeding the hypanthium; flowers mostly 4-merous; calyx-lobes 
(1.5-) 2-3.5 mm. long, triangular, blunt-pointed and gland-tipped; 
stamens about 30-65 in two or three series, the filaments white, and 



FLORA OF PERU 807 

up to about 4 mm. long; anthers 0.4 mm. long; style about 4 mm. 
long; petals white; fruit red or pale pink, oblate, about 4-5 mm. 
across; seeds about 1.4 mm. wide, 1.6-1.8 mm. long. The following 
varieties, although apparently distinct taxa of subspecific rank, are 
not connected by any known intermediates and perhaps should be 
regarded as separate species; on the other hand it seems not improb- 
able that all these and M. weberbaueri together may comprise a 
single species. 

Myrteola microphylla [var.] 7 glabrata Berg, Linnaea 30: 709. 
1861. M. microphylla var. australis Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 593. 
1906. 

Leaves somewhat variable, but usually appearing elliptic rather 
than definitely ovate; branchlets occasionally glabrous (e.g. Stork & 
Horton 10356, p.p.). Distinguished from M. weberbaueri by the more 
broadly pointed leaves and, at least in dried material, by the some- 
what more fleshy and resinous calyx and bracteoles and the harder 
and more highly polished leaves. 

Cajamarca: Cutervo, Raimondi 4499. Junin: Entre Carhua- 
mayo y Paucartambo, Tovar 418. Huancavelica: Surcubamba, 
2,600 meters, Stork & Horton 10356. Ayacucho: Huanta, 13,000 
feet, Pearce (herb. BM). Cuzco: Cordillera Veronica, Rauh & 
Hirsch Pi 960. Machu Picchu, Rauh & Hirsch P846. Paso de Tres 
Cruces, Cerro de Cusilluyoc, 3,800-3,900 meters, Pennell 13822b, 
13822d; 3,400-3,700 meters, Pennell 13907. Laderas de Acanaca, 
3,600 meters, Vargas 310. Huayna Picchu, Tutin 1248. Puno: 
San Govan, Lechler 2209. Prov. Carabaya, Weddell 4649. Near 
Limbani, Metcalf 30509. Bolivia. "Macha-macha." 

Myrteola microphylla var. microphylla. Myrtus microphylla 
Humb. & Bonpl., as to type. Myrtus phylicoides Benth. PL Hartw. 
131. 1844. Myrteola microphylla a angustifolia Berg, Linnaea 30: 
709. 1861. M. microphylla ft latifolia Berg, I.e. 

Distinctive because of the strongly inrolled leaf-margins and the 
resulting linear or very narrowly lanceolate leaves; also characterized 
by the strongly canescent-hirsute branchlets, flowers and lower leaf- 
surfaces. F.M. Negs. 7926, 23479. 

Amazonas: Tambo Ventanillas, al oriente de Chachapoyas, 2,400- 
2,600 meters, Weberbauer 4402. Province of Chachapoyas, Mathews. 
Huanuco: Chinchao, Raimondi 9152. Vicinity of Loja, Ecuador. 



808 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Myrteola oxycoccoides (Benth.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 396. 1856. 
Myrtus oxycoccoides Benth. PI. Hartw. 174. 1845. 

Prostrate or creeping, the stems coppery-red (Penland), subher- 
baceous, up to 10 cm. long, forming small mounds, the whole plant 
glabrous or with a few hairs on the young growth and in lines along 
the branchlets; peduncles 2-6 mm. long; bracteoles ovate or elliptic, 
rounded at tip, 2-3 mm. long; flowers 4-merous; calyx-lobes 1.5-2 
mm. long, elliptic-oblong, round-tipped; stamens 8-12; filaments 
about 3 mm. long; anthers about 0.4 mm. long; style about 3 mm. 
long, slightly exceeding the stamens; petals white to pinkish-red, 
about equaling the stamens; fruit yellow ("flavida") according to 
Bentham, but usually pink or red. Readily identified by the gla- 
brous herbage, the small, very broad blunt leaves and the small, 
often pink, flowers; the habit is also distinctive. Apparently rare in 
Peru, but relatively common northward. 

Junin: Cerros al oeste de Huacapistana, 3,300-3,500 meters, 
Weberbauer 2219 (Herb. USM). Southern Ecuador to central Co- 
lombia and Venezuela. 

Myrteola vaccinioides (HBK.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 395. 1856. 
Myrtus vaccinioides HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 130 (folio ed. p. 104). 
1823. 

A shrub with often extensively creeping rhizomes, the flowering 
branches prostrate or erect; leaves ovate or lanceolate, often bullate, 
mostly glabrous beneath; flowers usually 4-merous; bracteoles and 
calyx-lobes relatively short; stamens 20 or fewer, the anthers 0.4 
mm. long. Possibly hybridizes, or has done so in the past, with 
M . oxycoccoides, from which it is not widely separated geographically. 

Myrteola vaccinioides var. carabaya McVaugh, Fieldiana Bot. 
29: 228. 1956. 

Erect flowering branches 6-15 cm. high, strigose-hispidulous with 
antrorsely curved hairs; leaves, bracteoles and calyx-lobes ciliate; 
blades acute at tip, cuneately narrowed to the petiolar base 1-1.5 
mm. long; upper surface polished, thickly impressed-punctate; pe- 
duncles about 2 mm. long; bracteoles linear, 2-2.5 mm. long; calyx- 
lobes 2 mm. long, narrowly triangular; style 2 mm. long, the stigma 
peltate; stamens about 15, as long as the style; fruit 3 mm. in diam- 
eter. Univ. of Mich. Neg. 428. Further research and examination 
of additional material may well show that this is an independent 



FLORA OF PERU 809 

species, but the stamen-number, habit, and all vegetative characters 
except the leaf-shape seem to link it to M. vaccinioides. 

Puno: Prov. Carabaya, June- July, 1847, Weddell 4667 (herb. 
Paris, type). Bolivia. 

Myrteola vaccinioides var. vaccinioides. Myrtus vaccinioides 
HBK., as to type. Myrteola nannophylla Burret, Notizbl. Bot. Gart. 
Berlin 15: 494. 1941. 

Erect flowering branches 30 cm. high or less, hirsute (often rufes- 
cent or nigrescent); peduncles 1-3 (-6) mm. long; bracteoles linear 
to elliptic, 1.2-2.5 mm. long, blunt-pointed or rounded at tip, often 
shorter than the hypanthium; calyx-lobes 1-2 mm. long; stamens 
8-15 (-20), the filaments and style about 2.5^4 mm. long; petals pale 
pink; fruit pink or white, globose, about 5 mm. across. Usually 
easily recognizable even in fruit by the combination of ovate leaves 
and the short bracteoles and calyx-lobes. F.M. Neg. 36909. 

Huanuco: Between Huanuco and Pampayacu, 10,000 feet, Kane- 
hira 2. Playapampa, sphagnum montana, 9,000 feet, 4527. Valley 
of Rio Pozuzo, below Saria, 2,900-3,000 meters, Weberbauer 6785. 
Sariapampa, 3,600 meters, Woytkowski 313 (Univ. of Calif. 4th 
Exped. to Andes no. 34313). Junin: Altos de Palca, Isern 582. 
Cerros al oeste de Huacapistana, 3,000-3,100 meters, Weberbauer 
2064; al este de Huacapistana, 3,200-3,300 meters, Weberbauer 2259. 
Ecuador to Bolivia. 

Myrteola weberbaueri Diels, Bot. Jahrb. 37: 593. 1906. 

A shrub 1 meter high; leaves 3-4 mm. wide, 8-10 mm. long, gla- 
brous beneath or with a few hairs on the midvein, the midvein evident 
beneath; margins often ciliate; branchlets hirsute, the hairs rufescent; 
peduncles 4-6 (-10) mm. long; bracteoles linear, acute, 1 mm. wide, 
4-5 mm. long; flowers 4-merous; sepals long- triangular, attenuate to 
a blunt tip, 3-3.5 mm. long; stamens 35-45, the filaments up to 3 mm. 
long, the anthers 0.5 mm. long; style 3.5-4 mm. long; petals white, 
about as long as the stamens; fruit globose, 4-5 mm. across. 

Huanuco: Monzon, 2,000-2,500 meters, Weberbauer 3533 (cited 
by Diels, Herb. Berlin, not seen). Ayacucho: Cordillera of Huanta, 
12,000-13,000 feet, Pearce, Feb., 1867 (herb. BM). Tambo to Rio 
Apurimac, 3,400 meters, Weberbauer 5566. Putis, Choimacota Val- 
ley, 3,400-3,500 meters, Weberbauer 7522. Cuzco: Cuzco to Santa 
Ana, below Yanamanche, Weberbauer 4977 (cited by Diels, Herb. 
Berlin, not seen). 



810 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

12. BLEPHAROCALYX Berg 

Reference: Berg, in Linnaea 27: 412-415. 1856; and in Mart. Fl. 
Bras. 14, pt. 1: 420-429. 1857. 

Calyx 4-lobed, the lobes in two unequal pairs (the inner larger), 
all thin-margined and fimbriate-ciliate toward the apex, deciduous 
after anthesis. Ovary bilocular, multiovulate. Seed with membra- 
naceous testa. Embryo spiral or subspiral. Inflorescence an axil- 
lary dichasium (in Peruvian species 3- to 7-flowered) with the central 
flowers sessile. 

A genus of more than 20 described species, of which all but the 
following are natives of the south-Brazilian-Uruguayan region. The 
generic position of B. salicifolius is not well established because the 
species has not been collected in fruit; it is known, indeed, from three 
collections only; the type, collected by Bonpland near Loja, Ecuador, 
is in young flower; modern specimens, collected by Steyermark (no. 
53718) and by Camp (no. E540) in the Province of Azuay, Ecuador, 
are in very young bud, and in flower, respectively, but confirm the 
distribution of the species in southern Ecuador and add to the prob- 
ability of its occurrence in Peru. 

Blepharocalyx salicifolius (HBK.) Berg, Linnaea 27: 413. 1856. 
Myrtus salicifolia HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 136 (folio ed. p. 108). 
1823. 

A shrub 3 meters tall, entirely glabrous except the petals and 
calyx-lobes and the sparingly pale-strigose bracts and vegetative 
buds; leaves small, lanceolate, 0.6-1.2 cm. wide, 1.5-4 cm. long, 
2.5-3.5 times as long as wide, the tip acute, attenuate or indistinctly 
acuminate, sometimes subfalcate and often mucronate, the base 
acute to somewhat rounded, the margins cuneately decurrent on the 
slender channeled petiole 0.5 mm. thick, 2-4 mm. long; midvein 
slightly impressed above, raised beneath; lateral veins indistinct be- 
cause of slightly smaller intermediate veins and because of irregular 
branching, 6-10 (-12) pairs, slightly elevated on both surfaces; mar- 
ginal vein about equaling the laterals and slightly arched between 
them, about 0.5 mm. from the margin; leaves nearly concolorous, 
the upper surface lustrous with glandular dots scarcely or not at all 
visible at maturity, the lower slightly paler and duller, gland-dotted; 
inflorescence a slender axillary 3- to 7-flowered dichasium 2 cm. long, 
the terminal flower sessile, the lateral branches divaricate, 3-5 mm. 
long; bracts deciduous before anthesis; flowers small, the buds up 
to 3 mm. long, the hypanthium narrowly obconic; calyx-lobes in 2 



FLORA OF PERU 811 

nearly equal pairs, suborbicular, imbricated, about 1.5 mm. long and 
wide, ciliate-fimbriate, appressed-silky within, prominently convex 
on the back and the centers evident as separate projections even in 
the young buds, articulate at the base and deciduous after anthesis; 
petals ciliate-fringed, a little longer than the calyx-lobes (Kunth); 
style probably 3-4 mm. long; stamens about 140 (Kunth), about 
3 mm. long; ovary 2- to 3-locular, the ovules 9-12 in each locule, 
attached to the central axis; fruit unknown. F.M. Neg. 36906. 
Peru (probably). Ecuador. 

13. GAMPOMANESIA Ruiz & Pavon 

Reference: Berg, in Linnaea 27: 427-435. 1856; and in Mart. Fl. 
Bras. 14, pt. 1: 438-459. 1857. 

Calyx-lobes 5, distinct, membranaceous, broadly rounded. Hy- 
panthium scarcely produced above the ovary. Ovary 4- to 11-locular, 
the ovules biseriate in the inner angles of each locule. Seed reniform, 
with membranaceous, 1 glandular-verrucose testa. Embryo spirally 
involute. Flowers (in the Peruvian species) 4, in 2 decussate pairs 
appearing with the new leaves at the lowest nodes of short axillary 
branches, the fertile nodes usually leafless (or with linear bracts up 
to 3 mm. long), the axis sometimes abortive above the higher fertile 
node, or (usually) elongate and leafy. Leaves (in the Peruvian spe- 
cies) having the 3-4 lowest pairs of lateral veins closely grouped and 
the succeeding ones increasingly distant. 

A genus according to Berg of more than 50 species, mostly natives 
of southern and eastern Brazil; a few species range south to Uruguay, 
and a few occur in the Guianas. Only the following species are surely 
known to occur in western South America. Campomanesia crenata 
Berg, in Mart. Fl. Bras. 14, pt. 1: 456. 1857, was stated by Berg to 
have come from Ega, Brazil, on the upper Amazon. The type, and 
only known specimen, in the Vienna herbarium, is from Poeppig's 
herbarium and bears Poeppig's notation: "Ubi legerim nescio; certe 
nee chilensis nee cubensis planta. Verosimiliter ad floram Egensem 
pertinet." The plant is nearly glabrous, with ovate, acuminate, 
crenate leaves 3-5 cm. long, and the flowers solitary, in several pairs 
at the lower, bracteate or leafy nodes of new branchlets, on slender 
peduncles to 3 cm. long. The buds are 6-8 mm. long. F.M. Neg. 
31439. 

1 This tissue is described by Berg as membranaceous, but it is actually (in the 
Peruvian species) a rather tough leathery integument, much thicker and less deli- 
cate than the membranaceous testa in the American eugenioid Myrtaceae. 



812 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

Calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 3.5-5 mm. wide, 3-6 mm. long, often 
longer than wide and somewhat narrowed at base, in late an- 
thesis widely spreading from the summit of the globose hypan- 
thium and separated by narrow sinuses; style 5-8 mm. long; 
petals 9-11 mm. long C. lineatifolia 

Calyx-lobes rounded-triangular, 5-8 mm. wide at base, 4-5 mm. long, 
wider than long, in late anthesis spreading disk-like from the 
margins of the explanate hypanthium, with hardly any sinuses 
between them; style 8.5-12 mm. long; petals 2 cm. long. 

C. speciosa 

Campomanesia lineatifolia R. & P. Syst. 128. 1798. C. corni- 
folia HBK. Nov. Gen. & Sp. 6: 150 (folio ed. p. 119). pi 547. 1823. 
Psidium rivulare DC. Prodr. 3: 233. 1828. 

A small tree, up to about 10 meters high, finely pubescent on the 
branchlets, inflorescence and young foliage with very slender crisp 
grayish-brown or brown hairs up to 0.5 mm. long, some hairs per- 
sisting on the lower surface of the leaves at maturity; hypanthium 
and calyx very densely felted with similar hairs; leaves broadly ovate 
or elliptic, varying to ovate, at flowering time often 4-6.5 cm. wide, 
7-11 cm. long, at maturity up to 8 cm. wide and 9-16 cm. long, usu- 
ally 1.5-2 times as long as wide, rather abruptly narrowed at tip to 
a short, broad, often triangular and pointed or cuspidate acumen; 
base broadly rounded, subtruncate or subcordate, the margins shortly 
decurrent on the relatively slender petiole about 1 mm. thick, 10-15 
mm. long; blades subentire, the margins undulate and appearing 
crenate; mid vein and main lateral veins impressed above, promi- 
nently elevated beneath; lateral veins 5-7 (usually 6) pairs, leaving 
the midvein at an angle less than 45; at least the lowest laterals 
nearly straight at base, diminishing distally, each lateral incurving 
as it approaches the margin, and connected to the next succeeding 
vein by small transverse veins; leaves mostly browning in drying, 
the upper surface smooth and obscurely veiny, sometimes impressed- 
puncticulate, the lower paler, dull and minutely dark-glandular; 
pedicels slender, about 1 mm. thick, 1.5-3 cm. long; bracteoles linear- 
filiform, deciduous at anthesis, 2-4 mm. long; hypanthium obconic, 
becoming globose after anthesis, the calyx-lobes broadly rounded, 
3.5-5 mm. wide, 3-6 mm. long, appressed to the bud but widely 
flaring after anthesis; disk 5-8 mm. wide, hairy; style subulate, 
notably thickened and hairy at base, glabrous above, 5-8 mm. long, 
the stigma peltate, flat, 0.7 mm. wide; petals white, rotund or obo- 



FLORA OF PERU 813 

vate, 9-11 mm. long, gland-dotted, ciliate, pubescent outside; sta- 
mens very numerous, 200-300, up to 10 mm. long, the anthers 1.5 
mm. long; fruit edible, oblate, yellow, 3 cm. long and 4-5 cm. wide; 
seed reniform or oval in outline, rather flat, about 10-12 mm. long 
by 8-9 mm. wide, verrucose, the entire surface obscured by the 
closely approximate yellowish glands up to 0.5 mm. wide. F.M. 
Negs. 19735, 29481. 

San Martin: Pongo de Cainarachi, Klug 2618. Tarapoto, Wil- 
liams 6053. Loreto: Rio Ucayali, Tessmann 3088. La Victoria, 
Williams 2777. Yurimaguas, Poeppig; Williams 4030, 4289, 5001. 
Santa Rosa, Williams 4829. Locality uncertain: Pampayacu, half 
cultivated, Kanehira 346. Dombey 789 (herb. Paris). Ruiz & Pavdn, 
type (no. 24/93 ex herb. Madrid). "Palillo." In Ecuador reported 
as "Guayava de Palo" (Little) and in Colombia as "Guayavo de 
Anselmo" (Bonpland, Triana). Bolivia and Amazonian Brazil to 
Colombia. 

Campomanesia speciosa (Diels) McVaugh, comb. nov. Psid- 
ium speciosum Diels, Verh. Bot. Ver. Brandenb. 48: 186. 1907. 

Small tree to 8 meters high with grayish white bark (Sandeman), 
the young branchlets and peduncles roughened with many convex 
glands; plants nearly glabrous, the vegetative buds pale-hairy and a 
few hairs persistent on the lower surface of the midvein; hypanthium 
and calyx densely and finely short-velutinous with yellowish-gray or 
pale hairs 0.2-0.3 mm. long; leaves elliptic to ovate or obovate, (1.5-) 
3-6 cm. wide, (3-) 6-14 cm. long, acuminate, (1.5-) 2 times as long 
as wide, obtuse or rounded and often unequal-sided at base, the mar- 
gins decurrent on the deeply sulcate and ridge-margined petiole 0.5- 
1 mm. thick, 5-10 mm. long; midvein impressed above, prominent 
beneath; lateral veins 5-8 pairs with no intermediates, impressed 
above, strongly arcuate-ascending, diminishing distally and not form- 
ing a marginal vein except sometimes in the apical third of the blade; 
basal pairs of veins 3-7 mm. apart, those in the distal half of the 
blade often 1.5-2 cm. apart; veinlets on both surfaces somewhat 
raised in drying and forming a very fine but evident network, the 
areoles unequal-sided and irregular, up to 0.5 mm. across; blades 
"slightly glossy" (Sandeman), paler beneath, scarcely glandular 
above, evenly and conspicuously so beneath; peduncles strictly axil- 
lary, glabrous, 1-flowered, 1 mm. thick and 10-15 mm. long (or on 
the same plant some short axillary leafy branches terminated by a 
sessile flower which is subtended by a pair of pedicellate lateral 



814 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

flowers); bracteoles of solitary flowers linear, nearly glabrous, 1 mm. 
wide, 7 mm. long, deciduous at anthesis; bud about 1 cm. long, obo- 
void, not closed, the calyx irregularly 5- (rarely 4-) lobate; hypan- 
thium in anthesis explanate, forming a flat irregularly pentagonal 
disk which is 1.3-1.5 cm. wide across the extremities formed by the 
tips of the deltoid and nearly straight-sided calyx-lobes; calyx-lobes 
finely and densely appressed-pubescent on both sides, in bud rounded- 
triangular, 4-5 mm. long, 5-6 mm. wide (or one of them larger, 
longer, irregularly erose at tip and partially covering the bud) ; calyx 
in opening splitting slightly at the base of each sinus, the lobes in 
age deltoid, 4.5-5 mm. long, 6-8 mm. wide, spreading; disk 5-angled, 
6-8 mm. wide, short-hairy, the inner circular portion at the summit 
of the ovary appressed-hairy, 4.5-5 mm. wide; style 8.5-12 mm. 
long, the flat peltate stigma 1-1.5 mm. wide; stamens about 500, 
about 12 mm. long, the anthers 1 mm. long, "bright yellow" (Sande- 
man); petals "pale apple pink" (Sandeman), obovate, about 1.5 cm. 
wide, 2 cm. long, thickly beset with coarse convex glands 0.25-0.3 
mm. in diameter; ovary 8-locular, the ovules biseriate on the inner 
angles, about 12 in each locule; fruit unknown. F.M. Neg. 23498; 
Univ. of Mich. Negs. 1095, 1101. 

?Huanuco: Ganzo Azul, Rio Pachitea, 1500 feet elevation, Octo- 
ber, 1942, Sandeman 3408 (herb. Kew). Type from Amazonian 
Brazil. 

The above description is based wholly upon Sandeman's collec- 
tion. The foliage, as nearly as can be seen by comparison with the 
photograph of the type collection (Ule 5483, in herb. Delessert), is 
precisely like that of the type. The inflorescence of the type is said 
to consist of "cymae dichasiales pluriflorae axillares"; the photo- 
graph shows these to be leafless, in contrast to the (perhaps abnor- 
mal) condition in Sandeman's collection. The petals in the type are 
described by Diels as tomentellous without, and the style is said to 
be 4 mm. long. In other respects Ule's collection and that of Sande- 
man seem to agree well, and I regard them as conspecific. 

14. MYRRHINIUM Schott 

Reference: Berg, in Linnaea 27: 437-439. 1856; and in Mart. Fl. 
Bras. 14, pt. 1: 465-468. 1857. 

Calyx-lobes 4, distinct. Ovary bilocular, the ovules numerous, 
biseriate on the central axis. Petals red, each with a short broad claw 
which sometimes bears near its base 1-3 erect filiform appendages 



FLORA OF PERU 815 

0.6-1 mm. long. Stamens red, 4-8, twice folded in the bud. Seed 
pale, lustrous, reniform to cochleate, with bony testa. Embryo 
arcuate. Flowers in thrice dichotomous cymes with a sessile flower 
in each fork. 

A small and distinctive South American genus in which 7 species 
have been described. The distinguishing characters used by Berg 
and more lately by Burret, however, appear to be neither constant 
nor significant; the pubescence of branchlets and cymes varies quite 
independently of stamen-number, and neither of these appears to 
be correlated with leaf-shape. Schott's original material, from south- 
eastern Brazil, had relatively broad and obtuse leaves unlike any- 
thing I have seen from other localities, but otherwise does not seem 
to differ significantly from Peruvian material. The usual number of 
stamens seems to be 6, but this number varies even from flower to 
flower on the same plant, and the presence of the tiny petal-append- 
ages, sometimes supposed to represent staminodia, is not correlated 
with stamen-number. In view of these facts I have thought it best 
to accept the dictum of Bentham, as expressed in Plantae Hartwegi- 
anae and in the Genera Plantarum, that the genus comprises but a 
single species. 

Myrrhinium atropurpureum Schott, in Spreng. Syst. Veg. 4, 
pt. 2: 405. 1827. Felicianea rubriflora Camb. in St. Hil. Fl. Bras. 
Merid. 2: 376 (folio ed. p. 271). pi. 157. 1829. Tetrastemon loran- 
thoides Hook. & Arn. Bot. Misc. 3: 318. 1833. Myrrhinium atropur- 
pureum var. octandrum Benth. PI. Hartw. 131. 1844 (type from near 
Loja, Ecuador, Hartweg no. 738}. M. peruvianum Berg, Linnaea 27: 
438. 1856 (type from near Loja, Ecuador, Hartweg 738} . M. lanceo- 
latum Burret, Notizbl. Bot. Gart. Berlin 15: 508. 1941. 

A shrub up to 5 meters high, cauliflorous, the flowers in small 
leafless cymes on old wood; branchlets and often petioles and cymes 
pubescent, the leaves sometimes sparingly strigose on the midvein 
beneath or on the upper surface as well; leaves nearly sessile, coria- 
ceous, and with somewhat revolute margins, elliptic, mostly rather 
narrowly so, 1-2 cm. wide, 3-9 cm. long, (2-) 3-5 times as long as 
wide, sometimes obtuse at both ends, but more often acute at apex, 
sometimes mucronate, the base attenuate to the petiole 1-2 (rarely 
-4) mm. long; midvein sulcate or impressed above, prominent be- 
neath, the lateral veins slender, ascending, nearly straight, incon- 
spicuous above and scarcely evident beneath; marginal vein about 
equaling the laterals, usually not apparent; leaves concolorous and 



816 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

yellow-green in drying, somewhat lustrous, both surfaces with in- 
conspicuous glandular dots; cymes 2-3 cm. long, in clusters directly 
from the naked twigs or in 2-5 pairs on an axis 0.2-1 cm. long; 
bracts persistent, becoming scarious, ovate, acute, decurrent in cup- 
like pairs, convex on the back, 1 mm. long or less, or occasionally 
larger and foliaceous; flowers tetramerous; hypanthium cylindric or 
campanulate, 1.5-2 mm. long; calyx-lobes like the bracts, 1-1.5 mm. 
long, persistent in fruit; stamens usually 6 (6-8) in Peruvian speci- 
mens, straight and much exserted in anthesis, the filaments filiform, 
12-18 mm. long, the anthers oblong or broader near the base, 
attached dorsally near the base, 1.4-2 mm. long; style red, filiform, 
22-27 mm. long, the stigma capitate, obscurely 2-lobed; petals dull 
red, purplish-red or reddish-brown, obovate, thickly and prominently 
gland-dotted without, 3.5-5 mm. long; fruit a few-seeded berry, 
whitish and edible (according to St. Hilaire) ; slightly immature fruit 
broadly ellipsoid to obovoid, 4-5 mm. in diameter, 5-6 mm. long. 

Junin: Valley of the Rio Mantaro near Huachicna, 2,300-2,400 
meters, Weberbauer 6544. Cuzco: Rio Apurimac, 1,900-2,000 meters, 
Weberbauer 5880 (type of M. lanceolatum) . Central Ecuador to 
northern Argentina and southern Brazil. 

EXCLUDED SPECIES 

Myrtus acuminata [Sesse" & Mocino]. A specimen from the Mori- 
cand herbarium, now at Geneva (G), is labeled "Myrtus acuminata 
Peru," and in another hand "Pavon." These data were doubtless 
added erroneously, as in the case of other species in Moricand's col- 
lection, to a Sesse" & Mocino collection from Mexico or the West 
Indies. Myrtus acuminata Sesse" & Mocino was described from 
Tumacao, Puerto Rico, and is represented in the duplicate collec- 
tion at Chicago by two specimens, nos. 2036 and 2094. The "Pavon" 
specimen referred to above agrees in every respect with the Sess & 
Mocino collections and most probably was given by these collectors to 
Pavon and subsequently by Pavon to Moricand. The plant in ques- 
tion is a species of Calyptranthes, allied to C. pollens or C. zuzygium. 

Myrtus emarginata [Sesse 1 & Mocino]. A specimen from the Mori- 
cand herbarium (G) is labeled, apparently by Moricand, "Myrtus 
emarginata Pavon in litt. non Kunth," and the locality is given as 
Peru. A second specimen, also stated to be from Peru, is labeled 
"Myrtus fulgens Pavon in litt." Both specimens, according to the 
labels, were received by Moricand from Pavon in 1827. The plant 
of "Myrtus fulgens" agrees precisely with the Sess & Mocino speci- 



FLORA OF PERU 817 

men under the same name (no. 2135, duplicate at F) ; it is likewise 
surely conspecific with the plant of "Myrtus emarginata" in Mori- 
cand's herbarium, but it has ovate or elliptic and bluntly acuminate 
leaves, whereas in the specimen of "emarginata" the leaves are rela- 
tively broader and mostly (perhaps because of injuries to the tips) 
emarginate. The plant is evidently a species of Amomis; the embryo 
is uncinate, the leaves are markedly reticulate, and the calyx-lobes 
are 5 in number. The Myrtus emarginata of Sesse* & Mocino came 
originally from the mountains near Fajardo, Puerto Rico; it is not 
represented among the duplicates at Chicago. Their "Myrtus ful- 
gens" was apparently never published. It seems clear that Pavon, 
in sending some Sesse" & Mocino duplicates to Moricand, reported 
them by name only, without stating either the name of the collector 
or the locality of collection, and that Moricand mistakenly assumed 
that all the specimens were collected in Peru by Pavon himself. 

Myrtus parviflora [Sess & Mocino]. A specimen from the Mori- 
cand herbarium (G), is labeled "Myrtus parviflora Peru," and in 
another hand "Pavon." These data were evidently added, as in the 
case of Myrtus emarginata, to a Sesse" & Mocino collection from Mex- 
ico or the West Indies. Myrtus parviflora Sesse" & Mocino is from 
the seashore of "Palo seco et Cangrejos, Insulae de Puerto Rico"; 
the plant is described as having 4 petals and "Pedunculi axillares, 
terni, raro plures, vel pauciores, filiformes, erecti, petiolis longiores." 
Among the Sesse" & Mocino duplicates now at Chicago, there are 
two numbers which bear the name Myrtus parviflora. One of these 
(no. 2028) is a Myrcia, identified by Standley as Myrcia citrifolia 
(Aubl.) Urb. The second, which fits the above description admi- 
rably, and doubtless is to be considered the type of the species, is, 
according to Standley, Eugenia capuli (Schlecht. & Cham.) Berg. 
The plant in the Moricand herbarium, however, is a third species, a 
glabrous Eugenia with small green lanceolate leaves and short race- 
mose inflorescence, which bears some superficial resemblance to the 
two species named above. It has not been identified, but matches 
precisely no. 2089 of the Sesse" & Mocino collection, which was identi- 
fied by the collectors simply as "Myrtus." Nothing like it has been 
found subsequently in Peru, and presumably it is not a member of 
that flora. 

A number of Chilean species collected by Dombey in the eight- 
eenth century were mistakenly supposed by A. L. de Jussieu to have 
originated in Peru. De Jussieu distributed some of the specimens, 
labeled as from Peru, to DeCandolle and others, and he himself 



818 FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY BOTANY, VOL. XIII 

named and described a few species supposedly from the same region. 
Additional species were described by DeCandolle in the third vol- 
ume of the Prodromus on the basis of "Peruvian" specimens fur- 
nished by De Jussieu. The error was perpetuated by Berg in his 
revision of the American Myrtaceae in volume 27 of Linnaea, and 
it is only recently that Kausel has pointed out the probability that 
the "Peruvian" specimens in question belong to Chilean species 
(Rev. Argent. Agron. 9: 221-222. 1942). Of the seven species listed 
by DeCandolle as having been collected by Dombey in Peru, only 
Eugenia? Acka seems to have been Peruvian in origin. The others 
are Chilean and are listed below with their modern nomenclatural 
equivalents: 

Eugenia dombeyana DC. Prodr. 3: 276. 1828 [Myrceugenia lanceo- 
lata (Juss. ex Duham.) Kausel]. 

Eugenia exsucca DC. I.e. 278 [Myrceugenia exsucca (DC.) Berg]. 
Eugenia? leptospermoides DC. I.e. 266 [Myrceugenia leptosper- 
moides (DC.) Kausel]. 

Eugenia parvifolia DC. I.e. [Myrceugenia parvifolia (DC.) Kausel]. 
Eugenia obtusa DC. I.e. [Myrceugenia obtusa (DC.) Berg]. 

Myrtus multiflora Juss. ex Duham. Trait des Arbres ed. 2, 
1: 208. 1800; DC. I.e. 240 [Amomyrtus luma (Mol.) Legr. & Kausel]. 



INDEX 

Synonyms in italic type 



Acca, 783 
Anamomis, 746 
Aulomyrcia, 616 

Blepharocalyx, 810 

Calyptranthes, 591 
Campomanesia, 811 

Eucalyptus, 570 
Eugenia, 666 

Feijoa, 783 
Marlierea, 580 



Myrcia, 616 
Myrcianthes, 745 
Myrciaria, 780 
Myrrhinium, 814 
Myrtaceae, 569 
Myrteola, 803 

Phyllocalyx, 666 
Plinia, 775 
Psidium, 786 

Siphoneugenia, 666 
Stenocalyx, 666 

Ugni, 802 



HECKMAN l| 
BINDERY INC. || 

OCT96 

und -To- Pleas,? N. MANCHESTER 

INDIANA 46962 ' 



UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS-URBANA 




